# SLICE: collagen_gelatin_sponge  (254 records)

### PMID 42203440 (2026) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Experimental and Clinical Evaluation of Spongostan as a Substitute for Spongel in Sellar Floor Reconstruction during Endoscopic Transsphenoidal Surgery.
DOI: 10.2176/jns-nmc.2025-0388 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Absorbable gelatin sponges are widely used as hemostatic and reconstructive materials in neurosurgery. Global discontinuation of Gelfoam and withdrawal of Spongel from the Japanese market have created an urgent need for alternatives. This study was performed to evaluate the utility of Spongostan as a substitute for Spongel and Gelfoam in sellar floor reconstruction using the fibrin glue-soaked gelatin sponge method.Two gelatin sponges (Spongel and Spongostan) and 2 fibrin sealants (Beriplast and Bolheal) were combined to prepare 4 fibrin glue-soaked gelatin sponge combinations. Adhesive strength was measured using a tensile strength test according to ASTM F2458-05 and analyzed using 2-way analysis of variance. A retrospective review was also conducted for patients who underwent endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery for pituitary adenoma between May 2024 and October 2025, in which fibrin glue-soaked gelatin sponge prepared with Spongostan was used for sellar floor reconstruction.Spongostan showed significantly higher adhesive strength than Spongel (F (1,20) = 13.72, p = 0.0014), whereas neither the fibrin sealant type nor the sponge-fibrin sealant interaction was significant (both p = 0.73). In 11 clinical cases (mean age 66 &#xb1; 16 years), intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage occurred in 5 cases and postoperative leakage in one case, in a patient who had undergone prior radiotherapy. No hemorrhage, meningitis, or material-related complications occurred. These findings suggest that Spongostan may serve as a feasible alternative to Spongel for fibrin glue-soaked gelatin sponge-based sellar floor reconstruction during endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery.

### PMID 42229983 (2026) — Zhongguo gu shang = China journal of orthopaedics and traumatology
TITLE: [Hemostatic efficacy of tranexamic acid combined with absorbable fluid hemostat in single-level transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion during the perioperative period].
DOI: 10.12200/j.issn.1003-0034.20250035 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To compare the effect of intravenous tranexamic acid (TXA) combined with local application of gelatin sponge versus intravenous TXA combined with absorbable fluid hemostat(SurgifloTM) on perioperative blood loss in patients undergoing single-level transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF).
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted on the clinical data of 64 patients undergoing single-segment TLIF between September 2023 and September 2024. The control group comprised 32 patients who received intravenous TXA infusion combined with local gelatin sponge hemostasis during the perioperative period, including 14 males and 18 females, aged 49 to 70 years with a mean of (60.47&#xb1;5.93) years. The affected segments were as follows:L2,3 in 1 case, L3,4 in 6 cases, L4,5 in 13 cases, and L5S1 in 12 cases. The observation group consisted of 32 patients receiving intravenous TXA infusion combined with local SurgifloTM hemostasis, including 15 males and 17 females, aged 49 to 69 years with a mean of (59.59&#xb1;5.35) years. The affected segments were:L2,3 in 1 case, L3,4 in 7 cases, L4,5 in 12 cases, and L5S1 in 12 cases. Compare and observe the preoperative and postoperative changes in hematocrit (HCT) and hemoglobin (HGB) levels between the two groups;the total blood volume, intraoperative blood loss, total postoperative drainage volume, perioperative total blood loss, extubation time, and operative duration were compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: All patients were followed up, and the duration ranged from 2 to 3 months, with a mean of (2.10&#xb1;0.57) months. The observation group showed significantly higher HCT levels at postoperative days 1 and 3, and higher HGB levels at postoperative day 3 compared to the control group (all P&lt;0.05). The intraoperative blood loss in the observation group was (230.16&#xb1;22.98) mL, significantly lower than that in the control group (250.63&#xb1;22.09) mL, with a statistically significant difference (P&lt;0.05). The observation group exhibited significantly lower perioperative total blood loss (907.29&#xb1;270.13) mL and postoperative drainage volume (199.06&#xb1;19.49) mL compared to the control group (1 166.73&#xb1;269.13) mL and (211.19&#xb1;20.75) mL, respectively, with statistically significant differences (P&lt;0.05). The extubation time (2.56&#xb1;0.50) days and operative duration (161.25&#xb1;14.87) minutes in the observation group were significantly shorter than those in the control group (3.03&#xb1;0.65) days and (172.50&#xb1;15.24) minutes, respectively, with a statistically significant difference (P&lt;0.05). Multiple linear regression analysis identified the use of SurgifloTM as the most significant predictor of reduced total perioperative blood loss (&#x3b2;=-0.550, P&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSION: Compared with the combination of intravenous TXA and gelatin sponge, the use of intravenous TXA combined with local SurgifloTM in single-level TLIF significantly reduces postoperative drainage and perioperative blood loss, shortens both operation time and extubation time, without increasing the risk of wound complications or deep vein thrombosis.

### PMID 42068162 (2026) — The Annals of otology, rhinology, and laryngology
TITLE: Intraoperative and Postoperative Advantages of two Absorbable Materials for Supporting Graft in Endoscopic Tympanoplasty: Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose (Surgicel&#xae;) Over Gelatin Sponge (Spongostan&#xae;).
DOI: 10.1177/00034894261437476 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To compare the intraoperative and postoperative outcomes of using oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel&#xae;) versus absorbable gelatin sponge (Spongostan&#xae;) for supporting graft material in endoscopic tympanoplasty.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed 92 patients who underwent endoscopic type 1 tympanoplasty between 2020 and 2024. Patients were divided into 2 groups based on the supporting graft material used: 47 received Surgicel&#xae; and 45 received Spongostan&#xae;. Primary outcome measures included intraoperative hemostasis quality, duration of graft placement, postoperative graft success, graft lateralization, and hearing outcomes at 6 and 12&#x2009;months.
RESULTS: Hemostasis during graft placement was better in the Surgicel&#xae; group (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.017), and shorter graft placement duration was observed (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.047). At&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;6&#x2009;months, graft success rates were comparable between the groups (89.4% for Surgicel&#xae; vs 82.2% for Spongostan&#xae;; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.380). However, graft lateralization was significantly less frequent in the Surgicel&#xae; group (2.1%) compared to the Spongostan&#xae; group (15.6%; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.029). While the Spongostan&#xae; group showed significantly better hearing results at 6&#x2009;months (mean ABG 16.9&#x2009;dB vs 28.6&#x2009;dB; P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.001), hearing outcomes were similar by 12&#x2009;months.
CONCLUSION: Both Spongostan&#xae; and Surgicel&#xae; are effective supporting graft materials in endoscopic tympanoplasty. However, Surgicel&#xae; was associated with certain intraoperative advantages, including superior hemostasis and shorter operative time, along with a significantly lower risk of postoperative graft lateralization. These benefits suggest Surgicel&#xae; may be a preferable option for enhancing surgical efficiency and optimizing outcomes in endoscopic ear surgery.

### PMID 42021747 (2026) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: Ultrasound-Guided Injectable Adhesive Hydrogel Enabling Targeted Hemostasis in Deep and Incompressible Wounds.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.71187 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Conventional hemostatic materials struggle to rapidly control bleeding in deep, incompressible visceral wounds, especially when surgical access is unavailable. In response, we designed an injectable, bio-based hydrogel for ultrasound-guided hemostasis. By chemically modifying natural polymers: hyaluronic acid, chitosan, and polylysine, and inducing a Schiff base reaction between aldehyde and amino groups at room temperature, the hydrogel forms instantly using a dual-syringe system without requiring additional stimuli such as heat or light. After optimizing the formulation, the hydrogel (OPH) achieves a wet adhesion strength of approximately 45&#xa0;kPa and can withstand a bursting pressure of 123&#xa0;mmHg in intestinal wounds. The cationic components confer antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli. In comparison with commercial hemostats (e.g., Surgicel, gelatin sponges), OPH matches coagulation performance while offering better suitability for deep wounds. In rabbit models of closed and lethal liver injuries, ultrasound-guided in situ injection of OPH hydrogel effectively seals wounds and controls bleeding, reducing surgical pain and complications. The work introduces a high-performance hemostatic platform enabled by a synergistic design: rapid covalent cross-linking, intrinsic cationic activity, and ultrasound-guided precise delivery. Together, these features provide a versatile reference for next-generation trauma-care materials.

### PMID 41514482 (2026) — World journal of surgery
TITLE: Safety of Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose and Gelatin Sponge Application in Thyroidectomy.
DOI: 10.1002/wjs.70225 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cohort study of 777 patients (1238 sides at risk) shows that both oxidized regenerated cellulose and gelatin sponge (topical hemostatic agents) are safe to use in thyroidectomy. Adverse events are nil and the incidence of RLN palsy and permanent hypoparathyroidism are low.

### PMID 41411494 (2026) — Dermatologic surgery : official publication for American Society for Dermatologic Surgery [et al.]
TITLE: Pharmacologic Methods to Reduce Postoperative Bleeding During the First Stage of the Interpolated Forehead Flap Repair: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000004969 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The most common complication after interpolated forehead flap repair is postoperative bleeding from the pedicle. Reconstructive surgeons should focus on minimizing postoperative bleeding while ensuring the blood supply and integrity of the flap are preserved.
OBJECTIVE: To provide a comprehensive review of the various methods to reduce the risk of bleeding after interpolated forehead flap repair.
METHODS: A comprehensive literature review of PubMed articles discussing strategies to reduce postoperative bleeding specifically in interpolated forehead flap repair was performed.
RESULTS: A total of 9 unique techniques were apparent from the literature, including use of hydrophilic polymer and potassium ferrate, ferric subsulfate 20% solution, oxidized regenerated cellulose gauze, gelatin sponges, thrombin-based hemostatic agents, aluminum chloride, cyanoacrylate, skin graft, and tranexamic acid.
CONCLUSION: Reconstructive surgeons should be knowledgeable of the various techniques to reduce bleeding after interpolated forehead flap repair, as bleeding can result in patient dissatisfaction and often requires intervention. Each technique identified in the literature offers its own advantages and drawbacks; its choice should be tailored to the needs of each patient.

### PMID 40899565 (2026) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: Absorbable Adhesive Composite Hemostatic Sponge Based on Decellularized Extracellular Matrix and Mussel Adhesive Protein for Internal Bleeding Control.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202502994 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemostatic biomaterials for internal applications require strong wet adhesion, reasonable degradability, and supportive biocompatibility for wound healing. However, clinically used topical hemostats such as Surgicel and Avitene may induce hemolysis, inflammation, or leave behind residual debris that impairs healing. Bioinspired materials, including decellularized extracellular matrix (dECM) and mussel adhesive protein (MAP), have emerged as promising alternatives for their hemostatic potential and biocompatibility. Based on the biomimetic properties of dECM and the adhesive functionality of MAP, composite sponges combining both components are developed and evaluated through in vitro and in vivo tests. Among the formulations tested, E50M50 (9.1% w/w dECM and 90.9% w/w MAP) demonstrates the strongest hemostatic performance. This synergy is identified to be primarily associated with the secondary hemostasis phase. E50M50 also exhibits excellent hemocompatibility, cytocompatibility, and a reasonable biodegradability aligned with early wound healing phases. In a warfarin-treated rat liver injury model, E50M50 significantly reduces bleeding time and blood loss compared to clinical controls. Histological analysis further confirms that E50M50 provided superior early healing outcomes than Avitene, with significantly reduced necrosis, fibrosis, and residual debris. These results highlight the potential of ECM-MAP sponges as absorbable, adhesive hemostats for internal bleeding control and early-stage wound stabilization.

### PMID 42344574 (2026) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: Safety and efficacy of flowable microfibrillar collagen hemostat in an ovine model of lumbar laminectomy and open durotomy compared with the gelatin-thrombin hemostatic matrix and control.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2026.1760993 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Effective hemostasis in spinal surgery is critical, especially near sensitive structures such as the spinal cord and dorsal root ganglia. Flowable hemostatic agents offer targeted control in irregular, hard-to-reach areas. This study evaluates the safety and efficacy of flowable collagen hemostat (FC) in an ovine lumbar laminectomy model with open durotomy by making a direct comparison with the gelatin hemostatic matrix with thrombin (GM) and a no-treatment control (Sham).
METHODS: Fifty-four Polypay sheep (27 F, 27 M) underwent lumbar laminectomy and open durotomy and then received FC, GM, or no treatment (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;18/group). Hemostasis was assessed at 3&#x2005;min postapplication without tamponade. Neurological examinations were performed at periodic intervals, and tissues were collected on days 7, 45, and 120 for a histological analysis.
RESULTS: Hemostasis was achieved in 100% of FC-treated sites, 94.4% of GM, and 72.2% of Sham. Sham-treated animals exhibited more severe and prolonged neurological deficits compared with those treated with FC or GM. Inflammation decreased significantly across all groups, from mild/moderate on day 7 to minimal on day 45, and was barely detectable by day 120. FC was associated with favorable histological responses in both intradural and extradural spinal tissues, comparable to GM and Sham.
CONCLUSION: Flowable collagen hemostat was safe and effective when applied directly to the spinal cord and surrounding neurological tissues during laminectomy with open durotomy. Its performance was comparable to that of the gelatin hemostatic matrix with thrombin in terms of hemostatic efficacy and histological outcomes, with both agents demonstrating superior neurological recovery compared with the untreated Sham group.

### PMID 41957762 (2026) — BMC musculoskeletal disorders
TITLE: Delayed myelopathy caused by cerebrospinal fluid pseudocyst following decompression for thoracic ossification of the ligamentum flavum: a case report and literature review.
DOI: 10.1186/s12891-026-09786-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Delayed neurological deterioration caused by a postoperative high-pressure cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection is an uncommon but clinically recognized complication after thoracic decompression complicated by incidental durotomy. We report a case of delayed thoracic myelopathy due to a tension subfascial CSF collection and summarize relevant literature.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 55-year-old woman with thoracic myelopathy due to ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament at T2-4 and ossification of the ligamentum flavum at T5-6 underwent posterior decompression and instrumented fusion (T2-6 laminectomy with T1-6 instrumentation). An incidental dural tear occurred at T5-6 and was managed with an onlay artificial dural patch reinforced with fibrin glue and gelatin sponge. The wound drain was removed on postoperative day 7. On postoperative day 9, she developed acute left lower-extremity weakness. MRI demonstrated a large subfascial CSF collection causing significant spinal cord compression, consistent with a tension pseudomeningocele. Bedside subfascial incision and continuous closed low-level drainage (with the drainage bag kept at bed level) resulted in rapid neurological improvement. After recurrence following drain removal, ultrasound-guided drainage was performed, leading to sustained symptom relief. At 3-month follow-up, she had full motor recovery and follow-up MRI confirmed resolution of the collection with adequate decompression.
CONCLUSIONS: A tension subfascial CSF collection after incidental durotomy can mimic recurrent stenosis and cause delayed thoracic myelopathy. When imaging confirms a compressive CSF collection, continuous closed low-level subfascial drainage may be considered before revision surgery.

### PMID 41878192 (2026) — Annals of vascular diseases
TITLE: A Case of Chronic Expanding Hematoma in the Thoracic Cavity Treated with Transcatheter Arterial Embolization.
DOI: 10.3400/avd.cr.25-00148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chronic expanding hematoma (CEH) is a rare late complication of thoracic trauma or surgery, and favorable outcomes with transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) have rarely been reported. An 80-year-old male presented with recurrent hemoptysis and was diagnosed with intrathoracic CEH. Owing to advanced age and high surgical risk, TAE was performed via bronchial, intercostal, and inferior phrenic arteries using tris-acryl microspheres (700-900 &#x3bc;m) and gelatin sponge. Hemoptysis resolved, and follow-up imaging showed hematoma shrinkage without recurrence for 2 years. This case demonstrates TAE with 700-900 &#x3bc;m microspheres as a safe, minimally invasive alternative to surgery for CEH.

### PMID 41861617 (2026) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: A novel cosmetic vascularized bone flap craniotomy for postauricular transmastoid approach for jugular foramen tumors.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2026.111989 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Postauricular transmastoid approach is widely used for jugular foramen tumor resection. However, because of bone drilling and muscle detachment, postoperative complication such as suboccipital muscle atrophy, postauricular deformity, and subcutaneous CSF collection occurs occasionally. We propose a novel vascularized bone flap craniotomy for postauricular transmastoid approach, which can minimize the postoperative complications mentioned above and provide wide corridor for jugular foramen tumor.
METHODS: Adult cadaveric heads were dissected to simulate the vascularized bone flap craniotomy. Key anatomical landmarks were identified, and stepwise surgical technique was developed. Bone flap dimensions, exposure of the sigmoid sinus and jugular foramen, and preservation of the occipital artery supply to the SCM were evaluated. Protective strategies for the sigmoid sinus were emphasized.
RESULTS: The vascularized bone flap (mean dimensions: 4.5&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;3.6&#xa0;cm) provided wide exposure of the transverse sinus, entire sigmoid sinus, and jugular foramen. The occipital artery branch to the SCM was consistently preserved, confirming vascularization of the bone flap. The technique allowed anatomical reposition of bone and muscle, potentially preventing postoperative deformity and muscle atrophy. Sigmoid sinus injury was avoided by using gelatin sponge protection and precise bone cuts under microscopic guidance.
CONCLUSIONS: This vascularized bone flap craniotomy is a safe, reproducible technique that maintains vascular supply and muscular attachments, offering a promising option to improve cosmetic and functional outcomes in jugular foramen tumor surgery.

### PMID 41673833 (2026) — BMC surgery
TITLE: Life-threatening spinal cord injury and occult intercostal artery rupture following low-energy trauma in a patient with ankylosing spondylitis: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-026-03594-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) significantly increases vulnerability to severe spinal injuries from minor trauma due to rigid "bamboo spine" morphology and secondary osteoporosis. Isolated intercostal artery rupture without rib fractures is extremely rare in general trauma populations. The concurrent occurrence of multilevel spinal fractures with complete spinal cord injury and occult intercostal artery hemorrhage following low-energy blunt trauma in AS patients has rarely been documented, and the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms remain unclear.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 43-year-old male with previously undiagnosed AS sustained a low-velocity bicycle collision, resulting in cervical and thoracic fracture-dislocation (C6-C7 and T11 bilateral laminae fractures) with complete spinal cord injury (ASIA Grade A, complete paraplegia), massive hemothorax, and active intercostal artery bleeding without significant rib fractures. Due to the patient's hemodynamic instability and altered consciousness on admission (hemorrhagic shock with SBP 63/40 mmHg), formal assessment of the bulbocavernosus reflex was not performed initially. The ASIA Grade A classification was based on complete absence of motor function (lower limbs 0/5) and sensory function below the T3 level, including absence of sacral sparing. Computed tomography angiography revealed active contrast extravasation from the right T10-level intercostal artery. Emergency transcatheter arterial angiography and embolization using coils and gelatin sponge particles successfully controlled the hemorrhage and stabilized the patient's hemodynamics. Following stabilization, staged posterior cervical (C5-C7) and thoracolumbar (T9-T12, L3-S1) pedicle screw-rod internal fixation with anterior cervical discectomy and fusion were performed. Despite postoperative complications including hospital-acquired pneumonia, pulmonary fungal infection (Candida albicans isolated from bronchoalveolar lavage, treated with intravenous fluconazole), and deep vein thrombosis, the patient demonstrated partial neurological recovery, with ASIA grade improving from Grade A (complete paraplegia) on admission to Grade C (incomplete paraplegia) at discharge on day 59. Serial neurological examinations documented the evolution from complete to incomplete injury (Table&#xa0;1). The patient was subsequently transferred to a specialized rehabilitation center for long-term functional training.
CONCLUSIONS: This case illustrates the heightened and often unrecognized risk of complex, multisystem injuries in AS patients following seemingly minor trauma. Early recognition of hemothorax without rib fractures should raise high suspicion for intercostal artery injury, necessitating a lowered diagnostic threshold for computed tomography angiography. Transcatheter arterial embolization should be considered the first-line treatment for confirmed intercostal artery bleeding rather than a last resort. Prompt diagnosis, individualized multidisciplinary management, and early referral to specialized centers with interventional and spine surgical capabilities are essential for optimizing outcomes in these high-risk patients.

### PMID 41740735 (2026) — Journal of minimally invasive gynecology
TITLE: Topical Hemostatic Agents and the Risk of Pelvic Infection in Gynecologic Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2026.02.023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY OBJECTIVE: As hemostatic agent use becomes routine, adverse effects must be assessed, including infection. This study compared pelvic infection after the use of different hemostatic agents.
DESIGN: Pelvic infection within 6 weeks of surgery was assessed in a retrospective cohort study, with a subanalysis for hysterectomies. Fisher's exact test was used to compare cases.
SETTING: This study was conducted at a large midwestern hospital.
PATIENTS: Patients who underwent benign gynecologic surgeries where a hemostatic agent was used from 2009 to 2019, excluding those who were younger than 18 years, were pregnant, had coagulopathies, had malignancies, or had plasma allergies.
INTERVENTIONS: This study evaluates benign gynecologic surgeries with hemostatic agent use.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Among 3206 surgeries, biologic agents were used most frequently (54.7%), followed by mechanical (41.7%) and combined agents (3.6%). Biologic agents had the lowest infection rate (0.3%) compared with mechanical (1.0%) and combined agents (1.8%; p = .023). Absorbable gelatin sponge use was associated with the highest infection rate overall (7.8% vs 0.5%; p &lt;.001) and in hysterectomy cases (4.3% vs 0.3%; p = .003). Thrombin-fibrinogen agents were associated with lower infection rates overall (0.4% vs 1.1%; p = .018), although this was not significant in the hysterectomy subanalysis (p = .22). After adjusting for patient and surgical factors, laparoscopic, robotic, and hysterectomy procedures were associated with lower infection odds than open and nonhysterectomy approaches. Operative time was independently associated with infection.
CONCLUSION: Careful use of hemostatic agents may lower infection risk. Risk appears higher with mechanical and combined agents than with biologic agents. The absorbable gelatin sponge may carry a higher risk of infection.

### PMID 40919191 (2025) — Annals of vascular diseases
TITLE: The Efficacy of Hydrofit and Spongel in the Management of Venous Injury.
DOI: 10.3400/avd.nmt.25-00073 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative venous bleeding, particularly from deep pelvic veins, can be difficult to control with suturing or standard compression. We introduce the "French toast method," a hemostatic technique that combines Hydrofit (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) with a gelatin sponge (Spongel; LTL Pharma, Tokyo, Japan). A small amount of Hydrofit is spread onto the sponge, which is then applied to the bleeding site. Immediately afterward, saline is poured over the area to activate Hydrofit, followed by fingertip compression. This method enables rapid and secure hemostasis without the need to remove a silicone sheet, thereby reducing the risk of rebleeding and simplifying management of difficult venous hemorrhage.

### PMID 40623330 (2025) — Journal of neurosurgery. Case lessons
TITLE: Placement of cesium-131 permanent brachytherapy seeds in periventricular high-grade gliomas: case report highlighting a novel technique to prevent seed migration. Illustrative cases.
DOI: 10.3171/CASE25176 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Reirradiation of recurrent high-grade gliomas (HGGs) with external beam radiation therapy is limited by the risk of radiation necrosis (RN). Intraoperative brachytherapy offers a localized radiation approach that minimizes RN risk while maintaining tumor control. However, seed migration has historically limited its use in periventricular regions. The authors present 3 cases of recurrent periventricular HGG (2 IDH-wildtype, MGMT promoter-methylated, EGFR-amplified WHO grade 4 glioblastoma and 1 WHO grade 3 astrocytoma) in which a three-layered barrier was created between the ventricular lining and tumor cavity to prevent seed migration, enabling successful brachytherapy.
OBSERVATIONS: Following maximal safe resection, a three-layered patch separated the resection cavity from the ventricle prior to cesium-131 (131Cs) brachytherapy. Patient 1 received suture-stranded 131Cs (20 seeds), while patients 2 and 3 received 131Cs GammaTile (6 tiles, 4 seeds per tile). A three-layered barrier was formed using Gelfoam, Surgicel, and Adherus. At a median 22-month (range 11-24 months) follow-up, MRI confirmed no seed migration and seeds remained in the cavity. There were no complications associated with the barrier placement.
LESSONS: This study highlights the novel use of this technique in preventing 131Cs seed migration in intraoperative brachytherapy, serving as a proof-of-concept study. https://thejns.org/doi/10.3171/CASE25176.

### PMID 40223830 (2025) — Spine surgery and related research
TITLE: Development and Evaluation of Thrombin-Loaded Gelatin Hemostatic Sheets for Spinal Surgery Applications.
DOI: 10.22603/ssrr.2024-0147 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: During spinal surgery, management of intraoperative bleeding and effective hemostasis are required to clearly visualize the surgical field and to safely perform procedures and positive postoperative outcomes. However, it is challenging to stop bleeding from the venous plexus around the dural sac due to the potential risk of neural tissue damage. We aimed to develop hemostatic sheets with appropriate characteristics for spinal surgery, such as softness, appropriate thickness, biodegradability, thrombin bioactivity, and minimal water-induced expansion.
METHODS: Hemostatic sheets were made by dissolving bovine bone-derived gelatin in water and aerating it to form foam, followed by freeze-drying, crosslinking, and thrombin-soaking. Sheets A to H were produced with different gelatin concentrations, foam densities, and crosslinking times by additional heat treatment. The sheets were then soaked in thrombin solution for enhanced hemostasis. Material properties, such as density, tensile strength, biodegradability, and hemostatic capacity, were evaluated. Sheet efficacy was further assessed with liver bleeding and spinal venous plexus bleeding models in a miniature pig.
RESULTS: High-density gelatin sheets showed stable shape retention in wet conditions and robust tensile strength. Sheets with higher density and more crosslinking had prolonged persistence in the pepsin test and lower biodegradability in vivo. Sheet B, produced from a 4% gelatin solution with heating at 155&#xb0;C for 4 h, showed the best balance of properties, such as no deformation cracks, rapid water absorption, minimal expansion, and faster degradation within 10 weeks, compared with TachoSil and other sheets. In hemostasis models, Sheet B outperformed Avitene and TachoSil, achieving higher success rates in spinal (four out of six sites) and liver bleeding (five out of five sites) models.
CONCLUSIONS: A thrombin-loaded hemostatic sheet produced from 4% gelatin solution with a short heating time for crosslinking demonstrated well-balanced material properties, such as shape retention, biodegradability, and wet expansion rate, which resulted in effective hemostasis in in vivo models. These advances may contribute to surgical hemostatic applications.

### PMID 40943772 (2025) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: The Application of a Flowable Composite as a Method for Donor Site Protection After Free Gingival Graft: A Comparative Analysis of Four Techniques.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm14176009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background/Objectives: Soft tissues are essential for maintaining the function and long-term success of dental implants. In many cases, implant placement necessitates soft tissue augmentation procedures such as free gingival grafts (FGGs) or connective tissue grafts (CTGs) to restore lost gingival architecture. Nevertheless, a significant challenge associated with FGG and CTG is postoperative pain, largely due to morbidity at the palatal donor site. To address this issue, various approaches have been proposed to reduce patient discomfort and promote improved wound healing at the donor site. This study aimed to compare the effectiveness of four different methods for protecting the palatal donor site following free gingival graft harvesting. Methods: A total of 76 patients undergoing implant therapy with an indication for free gingival grafting were selected and divided into four groups based on the method used to protect the palatal donor site: an absorbable gelatin sponge secured with sutures (GS); an absorbable gelatin sponge with sutures and cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive (GS+CTA); oxidized regenerated cellulose combined with cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive (ORC+CTA); and an absorbable gelatin sponge covered with a flowable resin composite and stabilized with sutures (GS+FRC). The effectiveness of each method was evaluated in terms of postoperative pain, bleeding, and wound healing. Results: Although the differences in pain intensity among the groups were not statistically significant throughout the observation period (p &gt; 0.05), the GS+FRC group consistently exhibited the lowest mean pain scores. No statistically significant differences were observed between the groups regarding the incidence of secondary bleeding. The highest mean wound healing rate was recorded in the GS+FRC group (75.95 &#xb1; 18.75%), whereas the ORC+CTA group demonstrated the lowest rate (43.66 &#xb1; 25.74%). Conclusions: The use of an absorbable gelatin sponge covered with a flowable resin composite and secured with sutures, despite the presented limitations, appears to be a promising approach for palatal wound protection. While this group consistently demonstrated the lowest mean pain scores, differences in pain intensity among the groups were not statistically significant. Nonetheless, it achieved the most favorable outcomes in terms of wound epithelialization.

### PMID 40890693 (2025) — BMC oral health
TITLE: Comparative evaluation of surgicel and gelfoam in controlling post-extraction bleeding in patients on anticoagulant therapy: a clinical study.
DOI: 10.1186/s12903-025-06777-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Bleeding after tooth extraction is a significant challenge, particularly in patients taking anticoagulants such as aspirin and warfarin, as the use of these medications increases the risk of prolonged bleeding. This study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of the hemostatic agents, Surgicel and Gelfoam, in controlling bleeding and improving healing after extraction in this patient group.
METHODS: A clinical study was conducted on 40 patients, divided into two groups based on the type of anticoagulant used (aspirin or warfarin). Each patient received treatment with different hemostatic dressings: Gelfoam was applied to one side and Surgicel to the other. Bleeding was assessed using the VIBe scale, and the rate of gingival healing was measured using the Gingival Healing Index (GHI) on days three (D3) and seven (D7). Pain was also assessed using the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), and late bleeding rates were analyzed 24&#xa0;h after extraction.
RESULTS: The results showed that Surgicel was more effective than Gelfoam in achieving hemostasis and reducing delayed bleeding (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Patients using Surgicel also reported faster improvement in tissue healing compared to patients using Gelfoam, particularly on day 7 after extraction. Additionally, pain scores were significantly lower in patients treated with Surgicel compared to Gelfoam, reflecting its role in improving patient comfort and accelerating healing.
CONCLUSIONS: This study supports the use of Surgicel as a more effective option for controlling bleeding and promoting tissue healing in patients taking anticoagulants, reducing the need for treatment adjustments that may increase the risk of thrombosis. The study recommends further studies to evaluate the long-term benefits of using different hemostatic agents in this patient population.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The trial was retrospectively registered at the ISRCTN registry (ISRCTN19155058) on 29 May 2025.

### PMID 40037446 (2025) — International journal of biological macromolecules
TITLE: Shape adaptive bacterial cellulose-based sponge for hemostasis applications.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2025.141694 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemostasis stands as a crucial medical procedure aiming to prevent a risk of severe complications and death. Despite the availability of various commercial hemostats, i.e. oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) and gelatin sponge, limitations still persist. ORC-based products are highly acidic that often inhibit healing process whereas the gelatin sponge suffers from insufficient mechanical stability upon blood contacting. Hence, there is certainly need to desire a new hemostatic material that can overcome those constraints through an uncomplicated and cost-effective process. Herein, we developed a polysaccharide-based sponge comprising oxidized bacterial cellulose (OBC), low-acyl gellan gum (LG), and hyaluronic acid (HA). This OBC/LG/HA sponge is flexible and shape-adaptive, while maintaining its structural integrity. Additionally, the acidity of the sponge can be manipulated by a controlled grafting of poly(acrylic acid) (PAA). The PAA-grafted OBC/LG/HA sponge having low acidity was found to promote effective blood coagulation and the formation of stable blood clots. Notably, the blood clots formed on the PAA-grafted OBC/LG/HA sponge displayed fibrin networks without destroying red blood cells, in contrast to the ORC-based products. Furthermore, biocompatibility and degradability tests indicated that the developed biocellulose-based sponge is non-toxic and has the potential to degrade naturally over time.

### PMID 39849438 (2025) — BMC urology
TITLE: The impact of absorbable hemostatic agents on wound healing in an experimental penile fracture rat model.
DOI: 10.1186/s12894-025-01697-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the effects of two absorbable hemostatic agents, oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) and gelatin sponge, on wound healing in a rat model of penile fracture.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 32 Wistar albino rats were divided into four groups: Control (C), Primary Suturing (PS), ORC, and Gelatin Sponge (GS). A penile fracture model was created in all rats, and wound healing was assessed histopathologically after two weeks. Key parameters assessed included primary healing, fibrosis, inflammation, and cavernous tissue healing.
RESULTS: The ORC group showed significantly higher primary healing rates (100%) compared to the other groups (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). Fibrosis was more common in the GS group (87.5%), whereas no fibrosis was observed in the ORC group (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). In terms of cavernous tissue healing, the group treated with the ORC absorbable hemostatic agent demonstrated significantly higher healing rates compared to the control group (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.000). No significant differences were observed between groups regarding inflammation.
CONCLUSION: ORC absorbable hemostatic agents significantly promote primary wound healing and reduce fibrosis in an experimental penile fracture model, whereas the gelatin sponge was associated with increased fibrosis and did not improve healing. These findings suggest that ORC may have potential clinical applications in penile fracture repair. Further clinical studies are necessary to validate these results.

### PMID 39570354 (2025) — Acta neurochirurgica. Supplement
TITLE: Avoidance and Management of Complications in Retrosigmoid Approach to Vestibular Schwannomas.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-61601-3_16 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An experience with two rare complications during surgery of vestibular schwannomas (VSs) is presented, and measures to avoid and manage the complications are discussed.Case A: Spinal cord ischemia in semi-sitting position: A 47-year-old with a giant vestibular schwannoma (VS) underwent surgery through a retrosigmoid approach in the semi-sitting position. The intraoperative phase was uneventful, except for an episode of moderate hypotension. Postoperatively, the patient woke up with quadriparesis. MRI on the cervical spine revealed restricted diffusion from C4 to C7 suggestive of cord ischemia. Complete neurological recovery occurred over the following 3&#xa0;months. Awareness of this potential complication, preoperative screening for degenerative spine disease, avoiding excessive intraoperative cervical flexion, using sensory &amp; motor evoked potentials, and diligently avoiding intraoperative hypotension can prevent such occurrences.Case B: High-riding jugular bulb (HRJB) injury: A 42-year-old male patient underwent a retrosigmoid approach for a right-sided VS in the lateral position. During internal auditory canal (IAC) drilling, there was an injury to the HRJB, resulting in torrential bleeding. It was managed successfully with the sequential application of Gelfoam, fibrin glue, and Surgicel. The drilling was carefully continued by using a diamond drill, and the complete excision of VS was achieved with no injury to cranial nerve 7 (CN7) while maintaining normal facial symmetry. Awareness of an HRJB reduces the risk, and in case of injury, sequential hemostatic measures ensure adequate IAC drilling and the total excision of the tumor.

### PMID 39760512 (2025) — Journal of materials chemistry. B
TITLE: Bottom-up reconstitution design of a biomimetic atelocollagen microfibril for enhancing hemostatic, antibacterial, and biodegradable benefits.
DOI: 10.1039/d4tb02430c | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Powdered collagen is emerging as a promising topical hemostat owing to its adaptability to various wounds, active hemostatic abilities, and biosafety. The reproduction of a bionic structure similar to natural collagen is crucial for effective hemostasis and bioactivity. Additional factors relevant to clinical application include antimicrobial properties, minimal immune response, and straightforward preparation. However, current developments in collagen hemostatic powders often lack comprehensive integration of these multidimensional attributes. In this study, atelocollagen molecules and antimicrobial peptide (&#x3b5;-polylysine) were successfully employed to achieve the simultaneous expression of biomimetic structures and antimicrobial functions through a bottom-up reconstruction design. The synergistic effects of low temperature and mechanical processing facilitated the dispersion of collagen fibrils without leading to a stiffened network. The resultant atelocollagen microfibril (BCF-10) exhibited biomimetic D-periodicity and a fluffy morphology. BCF-10 demonstrated excellent antimicrobial properties and biocompatibility. Notably, BCF-10 could absorb blood up to 12 times its own weight within 15 s and significantly activate platelets to promote coagulation. In both a rat tail amputation model and a liver multi-point puncture model, BCF-10 exhibited significantly improved hemostatic capability compared to commercially available gauze (****P &lt; 0.0001) and was found to be comparable to the well-established microfibrillar collagen hemostat, Avitene. Immune response assessments indicated that BCF-10 could be biodegraded within 30 days without eliciting a severe inflammatory response, and could serve as a scaffold for cellular infiltration to promote tissue regeneration. This research presents a straightforward and effective strategy for preparing a biomimetic atelocollagen microfibril that is efficient in hemostasis, infection prevention, and rapid biodegradability, positioning BCF-10 as a promising candidate for clinical translation and application.

### PMID 41625106 (2025) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Acute myelopathy caused by granuloma formation secondary to gelatin sponge: A case report of a rare complication.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_1054_2025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Gelatin-based hemostatic agents are widely used in neurosurgery due to their effectiveness and general biocompatibility. However, rare adverse events such as foreign body granuloma (FBG) formation can occur.
CASE DESCRIPTION: Here, we report the case of a 52-year-old male who developed progressive neurological symptoms compatible with myelopathy following cervical decompression surgery in which Gelfoam&#xae; was applied. A FBG was found on imaging and confirmed following surgical excision.
CONCLUSION: This case highlights the importance of including FBG in the differential diagnosis of postoperative neurological deterioration whenever gelatin-based hemostatic agents are used.

### PMID 41394171 (2025) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: A new method for repairing internal carotid artery rupture in skull base surgery: a case report and review of the literature.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2025.1673961 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Internal carotid artery rupture during skull base surgery represents a rare yet catastrophic complication, with limited reports documented in the literature. In this article, we describe a case of ICA rupture encountered during supratentorial craniotomy for recurrent pituitary adenoma resection. The rupture was successfully managed through a novel microsurgical repair technique, achieving complete tumor resection. A 48-year-old female presented with a history of progressive visual impairment in both eyes for the past two years, 14 years after the initial pituitary adenoma resection. Reoperation was performed through the original pterional incision. During tumor dissection, sudden rupture of the right ICA occurred. Immediate cervical common carotid artery compression was applied, followed by microsurgical hemostasis using absorbable gelatin sponge and cottonoids. Temporary aneurysm clips were placed to achieve proximal flow control, allowing full exposure of the ICA rupture site. A small autologous muscle patch was used to cover the defect, and microsurgical repair was performed using a figure-of-eight suture technique. Complete hemostasis and total tumor resection were achieved. Postoperative digital subtraction angiography confirmed the patency of the ICA without stenosis, and the patient exhibited no neurological deficits postoperatively. This case combined the advantages of muscle tissue application and surgical suturing. The use of autologous muscle tissue promoted platelet aggregation, reducing tension at the rupture site and preventing further vascular tearing, while rapid suturing minimized blood loss. Additionally, the proficient collaboration and coordination with the anesthesiologist and surgical assistants were vital for controlling the intraoperative hemorrhage and ensuring prompt repair.

### PMID 40375369 (2025) — Annali italiani di chirurgia
TITLE: Therapeutic Efficacy of Percutaneous Vertebroplasty Combined With Gelatin Sponge Filling in Treating Thoracolumbar Fractures: A Retrospective Analysis.
DOI: 10.62713/aic.4020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: Percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP) effectively treats thoracolumbar fractures (TLF) but is plagued by post-operative bone cement leakage. Placing a gelatin sponge in the spinal canal can enhance bone cement viscosity and reduce its fluidity, potentially lowering leakage risks. This study explores the clinical efficacy of PVP combined with gelatin sponge implantation in treating TLF and assesses its role in reducing bone cement leakage and associated postoperative complications.
METHODS: This retrospective analysis included 120 TLF patients who underwent PVP treatment at the Anji Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital between January 2022 and September 2024. Based on the use of gelatin sponges during the procedure, patients were divided into a control group, which underwent conventional PVP (n = 67), and an observation group, which received PVP combined with gelatin sponge filling (n = 53). The Visual Analog Scale (VAS) score, Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), anterior edge height and Cobb angle of the injured vertebra, and Beck index were comparatively analyzed between the two groups at three-time points: before the operation, 1 day after surgery, and 3 months postoperatively. Furthermore, the rates of bone cement leakage, adjacent vertebral fractures, adverse reactions, and the Generic Quality of Life Inventory-74 (GQOLI-74) scores were compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: Compared to the preoperative values, the VAS scores and ODI were significantly improved in both groups at 1 day and 3 months after the procedure (p &lt; 0.001). The anterior edge height, Cobb angle, and Beck index were significantly recovered (p &lt; 0.001). However, these indicators showed no significant differences between the two groups before the operation, 1 day and 3 months after the procedure (p &gt; 0.05). Within one year postoperatively, the incidence rates of bone cement leakage and adverse reactions were substantially reduced in the observation group than in the control group (p &lt; 0.05). However, there was no statistically significant difference in the incidence rate of adjacent vertebral fractures between the two groups (p &gt; 0.05). Furthermore, no difference was observed in the scores of each dimension of GQOLI-74 between the two groups before operation (p &gt; 0.05). One year after the operation, the scores of each dimension of GQOLI-74 elevated in both groups (p &lt; 0.001), with higher scores observed in the observation group (p &lt; 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared to PVP alone, PVP combined with gelatin sponge implantation in treating TLF can effectively reduce the incidence of bone cement leakage and associated postoperative adverse reactions while improving overall quality of life one year after surgery.

### PMID 40297653 (2025) — Anaesthesia reports
TITLE: Pulmonary embolism of haemostatic material during paediatric neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.1002/anr3.70010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 7-year-old boy with juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma experienced sudden haemodynamic collapse after significant venous bleeding and the application of absorbable haemostatic gelatin sponge. Following successful resuscitation, intra-operative transthoracic echocardiography revealed acute right ventricular failure. Subsequent computed tomography angiography confirmed the diagnosis of a massive pulmonary embolism. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was initiated and catheter thrombectomy was performed. The patient had a rapid and complete recovery. This case underscores the importance of vigilance and multidisciplinary teamwork in the management of rare but life-threatening complications.

### PMID 39995245 (2025) — Clinical cardiology
TITLE: A Clinical Study of Precision Chemoablation for Hypertrophic Obstructive Cardiomyopathy Without Large Interventricular Septal Branches.
DOI: 10.1002/clc.70095 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study aims to evaluate the clinical efficacy and safety of ultrasound-guided percutaneous septal precision chemical ablation in the treatment of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM).
METHODS: From December 2020 to July 2024, 27 patients with HOCM without large target septal branches (diffuse multiple branches, all less than 1&#x2009;mm in diameter) were enrolled and underwent ultrasound-guided percutaneous septal chemical ablation. Intraoperative left ventricular outflow tract gradient (LVOTG), postoperative cardiac troponin I (cTnI), complications, and changes in the 36-Item Short Form Survey (SF-36) score, New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional classification and echocardiography parameters in 1 year post-PTSMA were monitored and analyzed.
RESULTS: Immediate postoperative LVOTG values monitored by catheter and echocardiography were both significantly decreased (both p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) in the 27 patients, whereas the cTnI level was increased after PTSMA treatment (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). One patient developed transient complete right bundle branch block during the procedure. At the 1-year follow-up, these patients showed significantly increased scores in all the eight domains of the SF-36 scale, and markedly improvement in echocardiography-based LVOTG value (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) and NYHA functional classification (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). However, no significant change were observed in the mean interventricular septal thickness (IVSTh) and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) before and after operation (p&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.05).
CONCLUSION: Ultrasound-guided precision PTSMA with gelatin sponge is a safe and effective treatment approach for HOCM patients, which can reduce the left ventricular outflow tract obstruction and greatly improve the life quality of the patients.

### PMID 39390956 (2025) — Nursing in critical care
TITLE: Nursing care during management of recurrent pheochromocytoma: A case study.
DOI: 10.1111/nicc.13165 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Pheochromocytoma can occur in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, placing them at increased risk of tumour recurrence after surgical resection. Therefore, management of pheochromocytoma in these patients is a clinical challenge. We aim to present and discuss the nursing management of patient with recurrent pheochromocytoma. Case studies. We reviewed and retrieved the necessary information from the medical records. A 34-year-old female with a history of medullary thyroid carcinoma and pheochromocytoma complicated by cardiomyopathy, who had undergone surgical resections 6&#x2009;years ago, presented with abdominal pain for 1&#x2009;day and was diagnosed with recurrent bilateral pheochromocytoma, hypertensive crisis, acute heart failure, and acute renal failure. Eight hours after hospital admission, she experienced sudden cardiac arrest and received cardiopulmonary resuscitations. She was then supported under extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). The adrenal tumour was successfully treated with absolute ethanol ablation followed by gelatin sponge particle embolization, a management approach which has not been reported previously. She had a satisfactory recovery. A comprehensive nursing management approach, including prone ventilation; safe transportation; close cardiopulmonary monitoring; pre-, intra- and post-procedure care; individualized early rehabilitation; and psychological supports, should be applied to improve the prognoses in patients with similar medical conditions. Bilateral adrenal pheochromocytoma can be managed by absolute ethanol ablation followed by gelatin sponge particle embolization. Comprehensive nursing management, including a team effort regarding patient positioning, transportation, close monitoring, early rehabilitation and psychological support, should be provided during the peri-procedure period.

### PMID 38888321 (2025) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Microvascular Decompression Using the Gelatin Sponge Insertion Technique for Trigeminal Neuralgia: A Retrospective Cohort Study.
DOI: 10.1227/ons.0000000000001229 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Microvascular decompression (MVD) is the primary surgical intervention for trigeminal neuralgia (TN), with Teflon being the most conventional decompressing material. However, Teflon has been associated with adhesion and granulomas after MVD, which closely correlated with the recurrence of TN. Therefore, we developed a new technique to prevent direct contact between Teflon and nerve. The purpose of this study is to compare the efficacy of MVD using the gelatin sponge (GS) insertion technique with that of Teflon inserted alone in treating primary TN.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the medical records and the follow-up data of 734 patients with unilateral primary TN who underwent MVD at our center from January 2014 to December 2019. After exclusions, we identified 313 cases of GS-inserted MVD and 347 cases of traditional MVD. The follow-up exceeded 3 years.
RESULTS: The operating time of the GS-inserted group was longer than that of the Teflon group (109.38 &#xb1; 14.77 vs 103.53 &#xb1; 16.02 minutes, P &lt; .001). There was no difference between 2 groups in immediate surgical outcomes and postoperative complications. The yearly recurrence rate for GS-inserted MVD was lower at first (1.0%), second (1.2%), and third (1.2%) years after surgery, compared with its counterpart of Teflon group (3.7%, 2.9%, and 1.7% respectively). The first-year recurrence rate ( P = .031) and total recurrence rate in 3 years ( P = .013) was significantly lower in the GS-inserted group than Teflon group. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis demonstrated better outcomes in GS-inserted MVD groups ( P = .020).
CONCLUSION: The application of the GS insertion technique in MVD reduced first-year postoperative recurrence of TN, with similar complications rates compared with traditional MVD.

### PMID 40422854 (2025) — Journal of functional biomaterials
TITLE: Biomaterial-Based and Surgical Approaches to Local Hemostasis in Contemporary Oral Surgery: A Narrative Review.
DOI: 10.3390/jfb16050190 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Effective local hemostasis is essential in oral surgery to prevent complications such as delayed healing, infection, and the need for re-intervention. Postoperative bleeding occurs in 4-6% of cases, increasing to 9-12% in patients receiving anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy. This review evaluates the efficacy, safety, and clinical utility of local hemostatic agents based on 51 studies published between 1990 and 2023. Traditional agents, such as oxidized cellulose and gelatin sponges, control bleeding in over 85% of standard cases but offer limited regenerative benefits. Autologous platelet concentrates (APCs), including platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and leukocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF), reduce bleeding time by 30-50% and enhance soft tissue healing. Studies show the PRP may reduce postoperative bleeding in dental surgery by 30-50%, and in orthopedic and cardiac surgery by 10-30%, particularly in patients on anticoagulants. Tranexamic Acid mouthwash can reduce postoperative bleeding by up to 50-60%. Fibrin sealants achieve a 70-90% reduction in bleeding among high-risk patients, while topical tranexamic acid decreases hemorrhagic events by up to 80% in anticoagulated individuals without increasing thromboembolic risk. However, comparative studies remain limited, particularly in medically compromised populations. Additional gaps persist regarding long-term outcomes, cost-effectiveness, and the standardized use of emerging agents such as nanomaterials. Future research should prioritize high-quality trials across diverse patient groups and develop clinical guidelines that integrate both safety and regenerative outcomes.

### PMID 39108388 (2024) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Perspective: Timely diagnosis and repair of intraoperative thoracic/lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_509_2024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Our review of 12 articles for this perspective showed the frequency of intraoperative thoracic and/or lumbar CSF fistulas/dural tears (DT) ranged from 2.6% - 8% for primary surgical procedures. Delayed postoperative CSF leak/DT were also diagnosed in 0.83% (17/2052 patients) to 14.3% (2/14 patients) of patients undergoing thoracic and/or lumbar procedures. Further, the rate of recurrent postoperative CSF leaks/DT varied from 13.3% (2/15 patients) to 33.3% (4/12 patients).
METHODS: Intraoperative, postoperative delayed, and recurrent postoperative traumatic postsurgical thorac CSF leaks/DT can be limited by performing initially sufficient operative decompressions and/or decompressions/fusions (i.e., utilizing adequate open exposures vs. inadequate minimally invasive (MI) approaches). The incidence of CSF leaks/DT can be further reduced by spine surgeons' utilization of operating microscopes, and their avoiding routine attempts at total synovial cyst excision and/or complete resection of hypertrophied/ossified yellow ligament in the presence of significant dural adhesions.
RESULTS: Multiple CSF leak/CT repair techniques included; using interrupted, non-resorbable sutures for direct dural repairs (i.e. 7-0 Gore-Tex sutures where the suture is larger than the needle thus plugging needle holes), and adding where needed muscle patch grafts, microfibrillar collagen, the rotation of Multifidus muscle pedicle flaps, fibrin sealants (FS)/fibrin glues (FG), lumbar drains (LD), and/or lumbo-peritoneal (LP) shunts.
CONCLUSION: Intraoperative, postopertive delayed, and/or recurrent postoperative thorac and/or lumbar traumatic surgical CSF leaks can be reduced by choosing to initially perform the appropriately extensive open operative decompressions and/or decompresssions/fusions. It is critical to use an operating microscope, non-resorbable interrupted sutures, and where necessary, muscle patch grafts, microfibrillar collagen, the rotation of Multifidus Muscle Pedicle Flaps, FS/FG, LD, and/or LP shunts.

### PMID 38992990 (2024) — Journal of surgical oncology
TITLE: The evolution of tumor enucleation partial nephrectomy: A comparison of perioperative outcomes for sutureless hemostatic bandage as an alternative to standard renorrhaphy.
DOI: 10.1002/jso.27775 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The standard approach to hemostasis during partial nephrectomy (PN) is to perform suture renorrhaphy (SR). Application of a hemostatic bandage (HB) is an alternative to minimize blood loss and devitalized renal parenchyma. We aim to evaluate perioperative outcomes of PN with tumor enucleation (TE) comparing SR to HB.
METHODS: We analyzed a retrospective cohort of 195 patients undergoing robot-assisted laparoscopic PN with TE performed at a tertiary referral center (2012-2022). Hemostasis was obtained with SR in 54 patients while 141 patients underwent application of HB consisting of Surgicel&#xae;, Gelfoam&#xae; soaked in thrombin, and Floseal&#xae;.
RESULTS: SR patients had tumors of greater complexity by RENAL nephrometry score compared to HB patients (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Operative time (141 vs. 183&#x2009;min, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001), warm ischemia time (11.6 vs. 24.2&#x2009;min, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001), estimated blood loss (37 vs. 214&#x2009;mL, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001), and length of stay (1.2 vs. 1.8 days, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) favored HB. There was no significant difference in Clavien-Dindo grade &#x2265;3 complications (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.22). Renal function was comparable with mean estimated glomerular filtration rate decrease of 0.66 and 0.54&#x2009;mL/min/1.73&#x2009;m2 at 3 months postoperatively for HB and SR, respectively (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.93).
CONCLUSIONS: Application of an HB is a safe alternative to SR for hemostasis following PN with TE in appropriately selected patients.

### PMID 39559590 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Effects of Intraoperative Epidural Steroid-Soaked Gelatin Sponge in Lumbar Spine Surgery: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.71855 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: This systematic review and meta-analysis evaluated the impact of intraoperative epidural steroid-soaked gelatin sponge in lumbar spine surgery for conditions like spinal stenosis and nerve root compression. Surgery often involves removing structures to decompress the nerves. Steroids are used to alleviate inflammation and pain, with gelatin sponges serving as carriers to extend their effect. While epidural steroid injections have been effective, the combined use of gelatin sponges remains controversial. The study systematically searched databases including PubMed, MEDLINE, and Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled Trials databases involving lumbar surgeries using steroid-soaked gelatin sponges. Seven studies with 620 patients were included, focusing on postoperative pain scores, analgesic use, hospital stay, and complications. The quality of the studies was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 tool. Results showed no significant difference in pain scores between the steroid and control groups on postoperative day 1 and at three months. However, there was a trend toward reduced pain in the steroid group. Notably, patients in the steroid group required fewer analgesics, indicating a significant reduction in postoperative pain medication use. Other factors, such as surgery time, blood loss, and hospital stay, showed no statistically significant differences between the groups. The findings suggest that while the use of steroid-soaked gelatin sponges does not significantly change immediate postoperative pain levels, it may contribute to improved pain management. This approach is safe, with minimal risk of complications, and may provide prolonged, localized effects due to the slow release of steroids. Future large-scale randomized trials are needed to further validate these findings. In conclusion, the use of steroid-soaked gelatin sponges in lumbar spine surgery is a feasible option to consider, with potential benefits in postoperative pain management and reduced analgesic consumption.

### PMID 39325203 (2024) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Optimized microvascular decompression surgery for improving the results of hemifacial spasm: an analysis of reoperations.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-024-02892-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microvascular decompression (MVD) surgery is an effective curative treatment for hemifacial spasm (HFS). This study aims to establish techniques that may lead to favorable outcomes by analyzing reoperations in patients with persistent or recurrent HFS.Patients who exhibited persistent or recurrent HFS symptoms after prior MVD surgery were identified as candidates for reoperation. Information regarding the reoperations was collected by tracing the entire surgical procedures and peri-operative management. Clinical manifestations and follow-up data were obtained from the hospital records and subsequent visits.Twenty-six patients underwent repeat MVD surgery. Among them, multi-culprit neurovascular compression (NVC) was identified as the primary cause of failure to response to the previous operation in 73.08% of cases. Pure tissue adhesion accounted for 38.46% of cases, while shredded Teflon pledget (STP) shifting was observed in 7.69% of cases. Postoperative outcomes were assessed through revisits and categorized into four groups: excellent (76.92%), good (15.38%), fair (7.69%), and poor (0%). The longest follow-up period exceeded 65 moths.The trans-lateral suboccipital infra-floccular approach provides a better visual field. Examination of entire length of the facial nerve is essential. STP with gelatin sponge implantation is a suitable material for facilitating nerve and vascular positioning and reducing adhesion.

### PMID 39165218 (2024) — Folia neuropathologica
TITLE: Comparison of the effectiveness of diclofenac sodium and tenoxicam in the prevention of epidural fibrosis by topical application with an absorbable gelatin sponge on the dura in an experimental laminectomy model.
DOI: 10.5114/fn.2024.141373 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: There has been an increasing trend in spinal surgery interventions in recent years. Low back pain is a disorder that is seen at least once in the lifetime of approximately 80% of the general population. Today, neurosurgeons perform operations including laminectomy for various reasons. Epidural fibrosis is a scar tissue that develops after posterior spinal surgery. Various synthetic and organic materials have been used in experimental studies to prevent epidural fibrosis in laminectomy defects. In this study we aimed to investigate and observe histopathologically the effectiveness of cyclooxygenase inhibitor drugs; tenoxicam and diclofenac sodium in the experimental rat laminectomy model in preventing the postoperative spinal epidural fibrosis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In this study, 32 Wistar-Albino female rats were used. 8 mg/kg tenoxicam and 1.5 mg/kg diclofenac sodium were applied on the dura with an absorbable gelatin sponge. After decapitation, L1-L4 laminectomy area was totally removed and histopathological examination was performed.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: It has been shown that the topical application of diclofenac sodium and tenoxicam, which are selective Cox inhibitor drugs, prevents fibroblast migration by forming a local barrier and Cox inhibitors are caused by the inhibition of prostanoids, which are inflammatory mediators.

### PMID 38687036 (2024) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Report on Pseudoaneurysm Caused by Injury of Internal Carotid Artery During Endoscopic Pituitary Surgery and Rebleeding After Treatment With Willis Covered Stent.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000010174 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Report on a case of pseudoaneurysm which was caused by injury of the internal carotid artery (ICA) during endoscopic endonasal surgery (EES), which was followed by rebleeding after treatment with a Willis covered stent.
METHODS: A woman, aged 68, underwent EES for the treatment of a pituitary adenoma. During the surgery, the right ICA was injured, and successfully hemostasis by packed with cottonoid and gelatin sponge. Besides, cerebral angiography was performed in the interventional operating room for the purpose of discovering the formation of a pseudoaneurysm in the cavernous sinus segment of ICA, which was treated with a covered stent. After successfully placing the covered stent, the patient was promptly transferred to the general operating room for the removal of the cottonoid and to address the bleeding once again. The authors employ crushed muscles and cottonoid to locally compress and stop bleeding. Owing to concerns about the risk of rebleeding in the patient, after stent implantation, the patient did not utilize antiplatelet drugs. After the surgery, the patient developed occlusion of the right ICA and massive cerebral infarction in the right hemisphere. Dehydration, anti-infection, rehabilitation, hyperbaric oxygen, as well as related treatments, were given. The cottonoid was removed in EES 2 months postsurgery, and no instances of bleeding were observed. Six months after surgery, the patient had clear consciousness and hemiplegia in the left limb, with a Glasgow Outcome Scale score of 4.
RESULTS: The ICA was injured during EES, which resulted in the formation of a pseudoaneurysm, the Willis stent was adopted for treatment, and there was a risk of rebleeding after the nasal packing (cottonoid, crushed muscles) was removed immediately.
CONCLUSIONS: The ICA was injured during EES after bleeding was controlled by packing with cottonoid, crushed muscles, etc, subsequently, the patient was given intravascular treatment, it is advised to make thorough preparations and, after a suitable period, remove nasal packing in the hybrid operating room to address unexpected situations and unforeseen circumstances.

### PMID 38453441 (2024) — Zhongguo fei ai za zhi = Chinese journal of lung cancer
TITLE: [Effect of Preserving the Pulmonary Branch of Vagus Nerve on Postoperative Cough &#x2029;in Patients with Stage I Peripheral Lung Adenocarcinoma].
DOI: 10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2023.102.48 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cough is one of the main complications after pulmonary surgery, which seriously affects the postoperative quality of life. Preserving the pulmonary branch of vagus nerve may reduce the incidence of postoperative cough. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate whether preserving the pulmonary branch of the vagus nerve could reduce the incidence of postoperative chronic cough in patients with stage I peripheral lung adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: A total of 125 patients who underwent single-port thoracoscopic radical resection for lung cancer in the Department of Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of Science and Technology of China from June 2022 to June 2023 were retrospectively selected, and divided into two groups according to whether the vagopulmonary branch was preserved during the operation, namely, the vagopulmonary branch group (n=61) and the traditional group (n=64). The general clinical data, perioperative conditions, lymph node dissection, Mandarin Chinese version of The Leicester Cough Questionnaire (LCQ-MC) scores before and 8 weeks after operation were recorded in the two groups. Both the two groups were divided into tamponade group and non-tamponade group according to whether autologous fat or gelatin sponge was tamponade after lymph node dissection. LCQ-MC scores and postoperative chronic cough of both groups were calculated.
RESULTS: The LCQ-MC score of the traditional group was significantly lower than that of the vagopulmonary branch group in physiological, psychological, social and total scores at 8 weeks after surgery, and the difference was statistically significant (P&lt;0.05). There were more cough patients in the traditional group than the vagopulmonary branch group at 8 weeks after surgery, with significant difference (P=0.006). Subgroup analysis was conducted separately for the vagopulmonary branch group and the traditional group. Among the patients in the vagopulmonary branch group and the traditional group, the LCQ-MC scores of the non-tamponade group 8 weeks after surgery were lower than those of the tamponade group (P&lt;0.05). There were more patients with cough in the group 8 weeks after surgery than in the tamponade group (P=0.001, P=0.024).
CONCLUSIONS: For patients with stage I peripheral lung adenocarcinoma, the preservation of the pulmonary branch of vagus nerve is safe and effective, which can reduce the incidence of postoperative chronic cough and improve the postoperative quality of life of the patients.

### PMID 37650514 (2023) — Diagnostic and interventional radiology (Ankara, Turkey)
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of transcatheter arterial embolization for hemodynamically unstable bleeding after percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy.
DOI: 10.4274/dir.2023.232253 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) in controlling hemodynamically unstable bleeding following a percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy (PTNB).
METHODS: A total of seven patients (four men and three women; mean age, 62 &#xb1; 12 years) who received TAE for post-PTNB bleeding between May 2007 and March 2022 were included. The observed types of bleeding were hemothorax (n = 3), hemoptysis (n = 2), and a combination of both (n = 2). In patients with active bleeding, the technical success of TAE was defined as superselective embolization of the target artery with no active bleeding visible on post-TAE angiography. Clinical success was defined as sustained cessation of bleeding without hemodynamic instability, requirement of repeat TAE, or the need for post-TAE hemostatic surgery during the initial admission. The metrics analyzed included technical and clinical success rates, complications, and 30-day mortality.
RESULTS: All seven patients achieved technical success, with a clinical success rate of 86% (6/7). Six patients were discharged alive, while one patient died of respiratory failure accompanied by hemothorax 19 days post-biopsy. The angiographic findings associated with bleeding were contrast media extravasation or pseudoaneurysm (n = 3) and vascular hypertrophy with tortuosity (n = 2). The implicated bleeding arteries included the intercostal artery (n = 2), bronchial artery (n = 2), and internal thoracic artery (n = 1). In two cases, no clear bleeding foci were identified; nonetheless, prophylactic embolization was performed on the right intercostal artery (n = 1) and right intercostobronchial trunk (n = 1). The embolic agents utilized included microcoils (n = 1), gelatin sponge particles (n = 2), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with gelatin sponge particles (n = 1), PVA with microcoils (n = 1), microcoils with gelatin sponge particles (n = 1), and microcoils with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and gelatin sponge particles (n = 1). The 30-day mortality rate was 14% (1/7). No ischemic complications related to TAE were observed.
CONCLUSION: The study suggests that TAE is safe and effective for controlling hemodynamically unstable bleeding following a PTNB.

### PMID 37636777 (2023) — Indian journal of otolaryngology and head and neck surgery : official publication of the Association of Otolaryngologists of India
TITLE: Epistaxis Treatment Options: Literature Review.
DOI: 10.1007/s12070-023-03824-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Epistaxis means bleeding from nostrils, nasal cavity or nasopharynx. To summarize the available epistaxis treatment options. Methods: 61 articles published in the last 20&#xa0;years were included. Duplicate records, irrelevant and inaccessible ones were excluded. &#xa0;Epistaxis can be treated with first aid measures such as external pressure and ice packing and applying topical agents, e.g. oxymetazoline that stops 65-75% of nosebleeds in A&amp;E. Also, with electrocautery which is more effective and has fewer recurrences (14.5% vs. 35.1%) than chemical cauterization and applying tranexamic acid that promotes hemostasis in 78% of patients, versus 35% and 31% respectively in patients treated with oxymetazoline and nasal packing. Furthermore, nasal packing can be applied with non-absorbable materials, e.g. petroleum jelly, BIPP gauze, PVA nasal tampons (Merocel), Foley catheter, balloons (Rapid-Rhino), absorbable materials, e.g. nasal tampon (Nasopore), and with newer hemostatic materials which are more effective and with fewer complications, e.g. hemostatic gauzes (Surgicel), thrombin matrix (Floseal), gelatin sponge (Spongostan) and fibrin glue. Moreover, epistaxis can be achieved with endoscopic ligation of arteries, mainly SPA, which is more effective than conventional nasal packing (97% vs. 62%), and with endoscopic cauterization&#xa0;which is more effective than ligation. Finally, for intractable cases embolization can be applied using gelatin sponge, foam, PVA and coils with 80% success rate and comparable efficacy and complications to surgical methods. Epistaxis can be dealt with various methods depending on patient's history and available resources. Newer hemostatic agents in combination with endoscopic methods have advantages over traditional methods.

### PMID 37309862 (2023) — Innovations (Philadelphia, Pa.)
TITLE: The Efficacy of BloodSTOP iX, Surgicel, and Gelfoam in Vascular Operations: First-in-Human Head-to-Head Study.
DOI: 10.1177/15569845231176291 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study aims to compare the efficacy and safety of 3 different hemostatic agents in vascular surgeries in humans. Twenty-four patients were enrolled in the present study with 40 vascular anastomoses including 16 aortic and 24 femoral. The patients were randomized (computer-based) to either BloodSTOP iX, Gelfoam, or Surgicel. The hemostatic agent was applied at the site of the vascular anastomosis before declamping. The site of anastomosis was then observed for bleeding from the suture line for 2 min. If any bleeding was detected, blood was then collected for 5 min, and the time needed to stop bleeding was measured. A suction drain was fixed in the surgical bed to collect serous fluid postoperatively more than 48 h afterward. The volume of blood collected in 5 min was significantly lower in the BloodSTOP group compared with the other 2 hemostatics. There was a significant reduction in the mean time needed to stop bleeding from the anastomotic surface in the BloodSTOP group compared with the Surgicel and Gelfoam groups. In addition, Surgicel showed the highest rate of complication (46.2%) compared with BloodSTOP (7%). BloodSTOP iX dramatically reduced bleeding volume and time compared with the other hemostatic agents. Furthermore, it showed a lower complication rate and did not interfere with the healing process at the application sites.

### PMID 36870088 (2023) — Clinical neurology and neurosurgery
TITLE: Keyhole retrosigmoid approach without watertight dural closure - Evaluation of a minimalistic approach.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2023.107625 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The retrosigmoid craniotomy is a versatile surgical approach to the cerebellopontine angle though cerebrospinal fluid leak remains a concern, with a reported prevalence of 0-22 %. A host of closure materials and strategies have been proposed to achieve a watertight dural closure to varying degrees of success. We review our series of keyhole retrosigmoid craniotomies and describe our simple, standardized method of closure without watertight dural closure.
METHODS: A retrospective review of all retrosigmoid craniotomies performed by the senior author was completed. Closure was achieved by placing an oversized piece of gelatin in the subdural space. The dura is grossly approximated. An oversized sheet of collagen matrix is placed as an overlay followed by gelatin sponge in the craniectomy defect held in place with titanium mesh. The superficial layers are approximated. The skin is closed with a running sub-cuticular suture followed by skin glue. Patient demographics, cerebrospinal fluid leak risk factors, and surgical outcomes were determined.
RESULTS: A total of 114 patients were included. There was one case (0.9 %) of CSF leak, which resolved with placement of a lumbar drain for 5 days. The patient had one defined risk factor (morbid obesity, BMI 41.0&#xa0;kg/m2).
CONCLUSIONS: Obtaining a watertight dural layer closure has been the generally accepted strategy in preventing CSF leaks in a traditional retrosigmoid approach. In keyhole retrosigmoid approaches it may not be necessary by utilizing a simple gelfoam bolstered collagen matrix onlay technique potentially improving outcome measures including operative time.

### PMID 34284130 (2022) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: MRI appearance of adjunct surgical material used in spine surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2021.07.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Early postoperative MR images are frequently necessary after spine surgery. The appearance of commonly used adjunct hemostatic agents and dural sealants in MR images has not been systematically evaluated.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this experimental study was to systematically analyze and describe the characteristics of the most commonly applied hemostatic agents and dural sealants in spine surgery on early postoperative MR images.
STUDY DESIGN: Cadaver Study METHODS: Four commonly applied dural sealants (Duraseal, Bioglue, Tachosil, Tisseel) and five commonly used hemostatic agents (Surgiflo, Bonewax, , Spongostan, Gelfoam, Avitene) were investigated. The experimental setting involved a human cadaver where a standard left-sided laminotomy was performed on nine levels of the thoracolumbar spine, and the materials were separately applied and mixed with fresh blood or water for hemostatic and dural sealants, respectively. The cadaver model was scanned at a 3 Tesla MRI and the imaging findings for all materials were compared to the surrounding tissue and systematically reported.
RESULTS: All investigated dural sealants and hemostatic agents were distinguishable from the surrounding tissue on MR images with different appearances on the MR sequences. A detailed atlas for the identification of the materials in postoperative spine MRI was established.
CONCLUSION: Commonly used hemostatic agents and dural sealants can be successfully identified on early postoperative spine MRI.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Knowledge about MRI appearances of commonly used adjunct surgical materials helps in interpretation of postoperative imaging and supports clinical decision making.

### PMID 35097100 (2022) — World journal of clinical cases
TITLE: Tension pneumocephalus following endoscopic resection of a mediastinal thoracic spinal tumor: A case report.
DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i2.725 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Pneumocephalus is a rare complication presenting in the postoperative period of a thoracoscopic operation. We report a case in which tension pneumocephalus occurred after thoracoscopic resection as well as the subsequent approach of surgical management.
CASE SUMMARY: A 66-year-old man who received thoracoscopic resection to remove an intrathoracic, posterior mediastinal, dumbbell-shaped, pathology-proven neurogenic tumor. The patient then reported experiencing progressively severe headaches, especially when in an upright position. A brain computed tomography scan at a local hospital disclosed extensive pneumocephalus. Revision surgery for resection of the pseudomeningocele and repair of the cerebrospinal fluid leakage was thus arranged for the patient. During the operation, we traced the cerebrospinal fluid leakage and found that it might have derived from incomplete endoscopic clipping around the tumor stump near the dural sac at the T3 level. After that, we wrapped and sealed all the possible origins of the leakage with autologous fat, tissue glue, gelfoam, and duraseal layer by layer. The patient recovered well, and the computed tomography images showed resolution of the pneumocephalus.
CONCLUSION: This report and literature review indicated that the risk of developing a tension pneumocephalus cannot be ignored and should be monitored carefully after thoracoscopic tumor resection.

### PMID 36714615 (2022) — Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology
TITLE: Advances in the development and optimization strategies of the hemostatic biomaterials.
DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.1062676 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Most injuries are accompanied by acute bleeding. Hemostasis is necessary to relieve pain and reduce mortality in these accidents. In recent years, the traditional hemostatic materials, including inorganic, protein-based, polysaccharide-based and synthetic materials have been widely used in the clinic. The most prominent of these are biodegradable collagen sponges (Helistat&#xae;, United States), gelatin sponges (Ethicon&#xae;, SURGIFOAM&#xae;, United States), chitosan (AllaQuixTM, ChitoSAMTM, United States), cellulose (Tabotamp&#xae;, SURGICEL&#xae;, United States), and the newly investigated extracellular matrix gels, etc. Although these materials have excellent hemostatic properties, they also have their advantages and disadvantages. In this review, the performance characteristics, hemostatic effects, applications and hemostatic mechanisms of various biomaterials mentioned above are presented, followed by several strategies to improve hemostasis, including modification of single materials, blending of multiple materials, design of self-assembled peptides and their hybrid materials. Finally, the exploration of more novel hemostatic biomaterials and relative coagulation mechanisms will be essential for future research on hemostatic methods.

### PMID 33635752 (2022) — Acta chirurgica Belgica
TITLE: Effect of hyperthermic chemotherapy on topical hemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.1080/00015458.2021.1888199 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: There is no clear consensus as to which topical hemostatic agent is best used during cytoreductive surgery combined with hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of hyperthermic chemotherapy on the biomechanical properties of organic topical hemostatic agents and histologically fibrin formation rates.
METHODS: Four topical hemostatic agents (Spongostan&#x2122;, Surgicel&#xae;, Fibrillar&#x2122;, Arista&#xae;) were evaluated. All agents were mixed with 3&#x2009;ml blood in sterile tubes separately to form clot formation. The resulting clot formations were incubated with 36&#x2009;&#xb0;C and 42&#x2009;&#xb0;C with saline or cisplatin for 1&#x2009;h. Strength and flexibility of hemostatic samples were evaluated under weight of 0&#x2009;g, 50&#x2009;g, 100&#x2009;g, 200&#x2009;g and 300&#x2009;g. All samples were stained with hemotoxylin-eosin and compared histologically for fibrin clot formation under light microscope.
RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences according to strength and flexibility of topical hemostatic agents on hyperthermic chemotherapy. Histopathologically, the highest fibrin formation was observed in Surgicel&#xae;, followed by Fibrillar&#x2122;. The least fibrin formation was detected in Arista&#xae;.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that exposure to hyperthermic chemotherapy did not significantly affect the biomechanical properties of organic topical hemostatic agents and the fibrin clot formation.

### PMID 36149056 (2022) — eLife
TITLE: Consequences of PDGFR&#x3b1;+ fibroblast reduction in adult murine hearts.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.69854 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Fibroblasts produce the majority of collagen in the heart and are thought to regulate extracellular matrix (ECM) turnover. Although fibrosis accompanies many cardiac pathologies and is generally deleterious, the role of fibroblasts in maintaining the basal ECM network and in fibrosis in vivo is poorly understood. We genetically ablated fibroblasts in mice to evaluate the impact on homeostasis of adult ECM and cardiac function after injury. Fibroblast-ablated mice demonstrated a substantive reduction in cardiac fibroblasts, but fibrillar collagen and the ECM proteome were not overtly altered when evaluated by quantitative mass spectrometry and N-terminomics. However, the distribution and quantity of collagen VI, microfibrillar collagen that forms an open network with the basement membrane, was reduced. In fibroblast-ablated mice, cardiac function was better preserved following angiotensin II/phenylephrine (AngII/PE)-induced fibrosis and myocardial infarction (MI). Analysis of cardiomyocyte function demonstrated altered sarcomere shortening and slowed calcium decline in both uninjured and AngII/PE-infused fibroblast-ablated mice. After MI, the residual resident fibroblasts responded to injury, albeit with reduced proliferation and numbers immediately after injury. These results indicate that the adult mouse heart tolerates a significant degree of fibroblast loss with a potentially beneficial impact on cardiac function after injury. The cardioprotective effect of controlled fibroblast reduction may have therapeutic value in heart disease.

### PMID 34109754 (2022) — The FEBS journal
TITLE: Collagen VI as a driver and disease biomarker in human fibrosis.
DOI: 10.1111/febs.16039 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Fibrosis of visceral organs such as the lungs, heart, kidneys and liver remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality and is also associated with many other disorders, including cancer and metabolic disease. In this review, we focus upon the microfibrillar collagen VI, which is present in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of most tissues. However, expression is elevated in numerous fibrotic conditions, such as idiopathic pulmonary disease (IPF), and chronic liver and kidney diseases. Collagen VI is composed of three subunits &#x3b1;1, &#x3b1;2 and &#x3b1;3, which can be replaced with alternate chains of &#x3b1;4, &#x3b1;5 or &#x3b1;6. The C-terminal globular domain (C5) of collagen VI &#x3b1;3 can be proteolytically cleaved to form a biologically active fragment termed endotrophin, which has been shown to actively drive fibrosis, inflammation and insulin resistance. Tissue biopsies have long been considered the gold standard for diagnosis and monitoring of progression of fibrotic disease. The identification of neoantigens from enzymatically processed collagen chains have revolutionised the biomarker field, allowing rapid diagnosis and evaluation of prognosis of numerous fibrotic conditions, as well as providing valuable clinical trial endpoint determinants. Collagen VI chain fragments such as endotrophin (PRO-C6), C6M and C6M&#x3b1;3 are emerging as important biomarkers for fibrotic conditions.

### PMID 36455277 (2022) — Neurosurgical focus
TITLE: A simple surgical technique for sellar closure after transsphenoidal resection of pituitary adenomas in the context of risk factors for cerebrospinal fluid leaks and meningitis.
DOI: 10.3171/2022.9.FOCUS22225 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The transsphenoidal approach is the standard for most pituitary tumors. Despite low morbidity, postoperative CSF fistulas and meningitis are specific complications. Various surgical closure techniques for intraoperative CSF (iCSF) leak and sellar reconstruction have been described. For many years the authors have applied synthetic materials for iCSF leak repair and sellar closure in a standardized fashion in their department. Here they analyze the surgical outcome as well as risk factors for iCSF leak and meningitis.
METHODS: All patients with transsphenoidal resection of a pituitary adenoma performed by the same surgeon between January 2013 and December 2019 were screened retrospectively. A small amount of iCSF flow without a diaphragmatic defect was classified as a minor leak, and obvious CSF flow with or without a diaphragmatic defect was classified as a major leak. In case of iCSF leak, a fibrin- and thrombin-coated sponge was used to cover the diaphragmatic defect and another one was used for the sellar opening. A gelatin sponge was placed in the sphenoid sinus as an abutment. The primary and secondary outcomes were the number of postoperative CSF (pCSF) leaks and meningitis, respectively. Clinical, histological, and perioperative data from medical records were collected to identify risk factors for CSF leak and meningitis.
RESULTS: Of 417 transsphenoidal surgeries, 359 procedures in 348 patients with a median age of 54 years were included. There were 96 iCSF leaks (26.7%; 37.5% major, 62.5% minor). In 3 of 359 cases (0.8%) a pCSF fistula occurred, requiring revision surgery in 2 patients and a lumbar drain in 1 patient. Meningitis occurred in 3 of 359 cases (0.8%). All 3 patients recovered without sequelae after antibiotic therapy. According to univariate analysis, risk factors for iCSF leak were macroadenoma (p = 0.006) and recurrent adenoma (p = 0.032). An iCSF leak was found less often in functioning adenomas (p = 0.025). In multivariate analysis recurrent tumors remained as a risk factor (p = 0.021) for iCSF leak. Patients with iCSF leak were at increased risk for a pCSF leak (p = 0.005). A pCSF leak in turn represented the key risk factor for meningitis (p = 0.033).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with macroadenomas and recurrent adenomas are especially at risk for iCSF leak. An iCSF leak in turn increases the risk for a pCSF leak, which carries the risk for meningitis. The authors' surgical technique leads to a very low rate of pCSF leaks and meningitis without using autologous graft materials. Hence, this technique is safe and improves patient comfort by avoiding the disadvantages of autologous graft harvesting.

### PMID 35937594 (2022) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: A practical and economical method for frontal sinus reconstruction after frontal craniotomy: A single-center experience with 140 patients.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.919276 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Frontal sinus exposure is a common consequence of frontal craniotomy. Cerebrospinal fluid leakage and infection are the major postoperative complications that may occur as a result of the open frontal sinus. The successful filling of the open frontal sinus provides an approach to prevent significant complications caused by frontal sinus exposure.
OBJECTIVE: This article describes a new technique to reconstruct the exposed frontal sinus cavity with the combined application of gelatin sponge and a vascularized pericranial flap.
METHODS: A total of 140 patients underwent frontal sinus reconstruction using gelfoam and vascularized pericranial flaps from 2016 to 2021. Gelatin sponge was used to fill the frontal sinus, and a vascularized pericranial flap was used to cover the frontal sinus when the bone flap was retracted.
RESULTS: Postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage and infection did not occur in any patient.
CONCLUSION: Our results validated the effectiveness of our technique in the prevention of exposed frontal sinus-related postoperative complications.

### PMID 35831797 (2022) — BMC musculoskeletal disorders
TITLE: Comparison of blood loss between tranexamic acid-soaked absorbable Gelfoam and topical retrograde injection via drainage catheter plus clamping in cervical laminoplasty surgery.
DOI: 10.1186/s12891-022-05626-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To compare the safety and efficacy of tranexamic acid (TXA)-soaked absorbable Gelfoam and the retrograde injection of TXA through a drain with drain-clamping in degenerative cervical laminoplasty patients.
METHODS: Patients were assigned into either TXA retrograde injection (TXA-RI), TXA-soaked absorbable Gelfoam (TXA-Gel), or control groups. The demographics, operative measurements, volume and length of drainage, length of hospital stay, complete blood cell count, coagulopathy, postoperative complications, and blood transfusion were recorded.
RESULTS: We enrolled 133 patients, with 44, 44, and 45 in the TXA-RI, TXA-Gel, and control groups, respectively. The baseline characteristics did not differ significantly among the three groups. The TXA-RI group exhibited a lower volume and length of postoperative drainage compared to the TXA-Gel and control groups (126.60&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;31.27 vs. 156.60&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;38.63 and 275.45&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;75.27&#x2009;mL; 49.45&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.70 vs 58.70&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;10.46 and 89.31&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.50&#x2009;hours, all P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). The TXA-RI group also had significantly shorter hospital stays compared to the control group (5.31&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.18 vs 7.50&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.25&#x2009;days, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) and higher hemoglobin and hematocrit levels (12.58&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.67 vs 11.28&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.76&#x2009;g/dL; 36.62&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.66% vs 33.82&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.57%, both P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) at hospital discharge. In the TXA-RI and TXA-Gel groups, the D-dimmer (DD) and fibrinogen (FIB) were significantly lower than those in the control group after surgery (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). None of the patients required blood transfusion. No complications, including thromboembolic events, were reported.
CONCLUSION: Topical retrograde injection of TXA through a drain with drain-clamping at the conclusion of unilateral posterior cervical expansive open-door laminoplasty may effectively reduce postoperative blood loss and the length of hospital stays without increasing postoperative complications.

### PMID 35397405 (2022) — Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials
TITLE: Assessing the aneurysm occlusion efficacy of a shear-thinning biomaterial in a 3D-printed model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2022.105156 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Metallic coil embolization is a common method for the endovascular treatment of visceral artery aneurysms (VAA) and visceral artery pseudoaneurysms (VAPA); however, this treatment is suboptimal due to the high cost of coils, incomplete volume occlusion, poor reendothelialization, aneurysm puncture, and coil migration. Several alternative treatment strategies are available, including stent flow diverters, glue embolics, gelfoam slurries, and vascular mesh plugs-each of which have their own disadvantages. Here, we investigated the in vitro capability of a shear-thinning biomaterial (STB), a nanocomposite hydrogel composed of gelatin and silicate nanoplatelets, for the minimally-invasive occlusion of simple necked aneurysm models. We demonstrated the injectability of STB through various clinical catheters, engineered an in vitro testing apparatus to independently manipulate aneurysm neck diameter, fluid flow rate, and flow waveform, and tested the stability of STB within the models under various conditions. Our experiments show that STB is able to withstand at least 1.89&#xa0;Pa of wall shear stress, as estimated by computational fluid dynamics. STB is also able to withstand up to 10&#xa0;mL&#xa0;s-1 pulsatile flow with a waveform mimicking blood flow in the human femoral artery and tolerate greater pressure changes than those in the human aorta. We ultimately found that our in vitro system was limited by supraphysiologic pressure changes caused by aneurysm models with low compliance.

### PMID 33453711 (2021) — Turkish journal of medical sciences
TITLE: The histopathological effects of reabsorbable polyethylene glycol hydrogel (Coseal) on epidural fibrosis in an experimental postlaminectomy model in rats.
DOI: 10.3906/sag-2009-241 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND/AIM: To investigate the histopathological effects of reabsorbable polyethylene glycol hydrogel (RPGH, Coseal) on epidural fibrosis (EF) following laminectomy in rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 24 rats were equally divided into three groups. In the first group, no treatment was applied after laminectomy (control group, Group 1). In the second group, hemostasis was achieved after laminectomy, and 2 mm absorbable gelatin sponge soaked in saline was placed over the epidural space and the wound was closed (Group 2). In the third group, hemostasis was achieved following laminectomy, and 0.5 mL RPGH (Coseal, Group 3) was squeezed over the dura mater, and the wound was closed. A histopathological examination was undertaken to evaluate arachnoidal invasion and EF.
RESULTS: The results of EF in the Group 2 and Group 3 were significantly lower compared to the Group 1 (p = 0.023 and p = 0.002, respectively). No statistically significant difference was found between the Group 2 and Group 3 in terms of EF (p = 0.957). There was also no statistically significant difference between the mean arachnoidal invasion of the three groups (p &gt; 0.171). However, the rate of arachnoidal invasion was the lowest in the Group 3.
CONCLUSION: Intraoperative Coseal, a polyethylene glycol polymer, tends to reduce the risk of epidural fibrosis, although this is not statistically significant.

### PMID 33128601 (2021) — European radiology
TITLE: Ten-year experience with arterial embolization for peptic ulcer bleeding: N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue versus other embolic agents.
DOI: 10.1007/s00330-020-07427-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To compare our experience with N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue as the primary embolic agent versus other embolic agents for transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) in refractory peptic ulcer bleeding and to identify factors associated with early rebleeding and 30-day mortality.
METHODS: Retrospective study of 148 consecutive patients comparing the clinical success rate in 78 patients managed with Glubran&#xae;2 N-butyl cyanoacrylate metacryloxysulfolane (NBCA-MS) alone or with other agents and 70 with other embolic agents only (coils, microspheres, ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer, or gelatin sponge) at a university center in 2008-2019. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses were done to identify prognostic factors.
RESULTS: The technical success rate was 95.3% and the primary clinical success was 64.5%. The early rebleeding and day-30 mortality rates were 35.4% and 21.3%, respectively. Rebleeding was significantly less common with than without Glubran&#xae;2 (OR, 0.47; 95% CI, 0.22-0.99; p&#x2009;=&#xa0;.047) and significantly more common with coils used alone (OR, 20.4; 95% CI, 10.13-50.14; p&#x2009;=&#xa0;.024). The only other factor independently associated with early rebleeding was having two or more comorbidities (OR, 20.14; 95% CI, 10.01-40.52; p&#x2009;=&#xa0;.047). Day-30 mortality was similar in the two treatment groups. A lower initial hemoglobin level was significantly associated with higher day-30 mortality (OR, 10.38; 95% CI, 10.10-10.74; p&#x2009;=&#xa0;.006). Fluoroscopy time was significantly shorter with Glubran&#xae;2 (20.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;11.5&#xa0;min vs. 35.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;23.4&#xa0;min, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.002). Both groups (Glubran&#xae;2 vs. other agents) had similar rates of overall complications (10.7% vs. 9.1%, respectively, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.786).
CONCLUSIONS: Glubran&#xae;2 NBCA-MS as the primary agent allowed for faster and better clinical success compared to other embolic agents when used for TAE to safely stop refractory peptic ulcer bleeding.
KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Choice of embolic agent for arterial embolization of refractory peptic ulcer bleeding is still debated. We compared our experience with N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue vs. other embolic agents. &#x2022; The use of Glubran&#xae;2 NBCA glue in the endovascular management of refractory peptic ulcer bleeding was significantly faster and more effective, and at least as safe compared to other embolic agents. &#x2022; NBCA glue offers several advantages compared to other embolic agents and provides rapid hemostasis when used for arterial embolization to treat refractory peptic ulcer bleeding. It should be the first-line therapy.

### PMID 34233632 (2021) — BMC neurology
TITLE: Evaluation of the hemostatic effect of a combination of hemostatic agents and fibrin glue in a rabbit venous hemorrhage model.
DOI: 10.1186/s12883-021-02272-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: In neurosurgery, it is important to use local hemostatic agents. We have explored a more powerful method of hemostasis by the combination of commercially available hemostatic agents with fibrin glue in the hopes of synergistic effects.
METHOD: A bleeding model was constructed by puncturing the rabbit posterior vena cava with a needle. After applying the sample to the bleeding point, compression was performed for 10&#xa0;s. If temporary hemostasis was achieved after pressure release, a 30&#xa0;s wash was performed to confirm that ultimate hemostasis was achieved. Up to three hemostasis attempts were performed on the same bleeding point until hemostasis was achieved, and the number of attempts required for hemostasis was counted. If hemostasis was not achieved after three attempts, it was counted as four times. Four groups were evaluated: (1) gelatin sponge alone, (2) gelatin sponge&#x2009;+&#x2009;fibrin glue, (3) oxidized cellulose alone, and (4) oxidized cellulose&#x2009;+&#x2009;fibrin glue; each group was tested 16 times.
RESULTS: The median value (range minimum value-maximum value) of the number of hemostatic attempts in Group 1 to Group 4 was 3 (1-4), 1 (1-1), 4 (4-4), and 4 (2-4). In Group 2, there were two test exclusions owing to deviations of the test procedure.
CONCLUSIONS: The compatibility of gelatin sponge and fibrin glue was very good, with a very strong and rapid hemostatic effect compared to other methods, showed its usefulness. This combination method may be effective for a variety of venous hemorrhages in neurosurgery.

### PMID 33444844 (2021) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: CSF Rhinorrhoea After Endonasal Intervention to the Skull Base (CRANIAL) - Part 1: Multicenter Pilot Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.12.171 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: CRANIAL (CSF Rhinorrhoea After Endonasal Intervention to the Skull Base) is a prospective multicenter observational study seeking to determine 1) the scope of skull base repair methods used and 2) corresponding rates of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea in the endonasal transsphenoidal approach (TSA) and the expanded endonasal approach (EEA) for skull base tumors. We sought to pilot the project, assessing the feasibility and acceptability by gathering preliminary data.
METHODS: A prospective observational cohort study was piloted at 12 tertiary neurosurgical units in the United Kingdom. Feedback regarding project positives and challenges were qualitatively analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 187 cases were included: 159 TSA (85%) and 28 EEA (15%). The most common diseases included pituitary adenomas (n&#xa0;= 142/187), craniopharyngiomas (n&#xa0;= 13/187). and skull base meningiomas (n&#xa0;= 4/187). The most common skull base repair techniques used were tissue glues (n&#xa0;= 132/187, most commonly Tisseel), grafts (n&#xa0;= 94/187, most commonly fat autograft or Spongostan) and vascularized flaps (n&#xa0;= 51/187, most commonly nasoseptal). These repairs were most frequently supported by nasal packs (n&#xa0;= 125/187) and lumbar drains (n&#xa0;= 20/187). Biochemically confirmed CSF rhinorrhea occurred in 6/159 patients undergoing TSA (3.8%) and 2/28 patients undergoing EEA (7.1%). Four patients undergoing TSA (2.5%) and 2 patients undergoing EEA (7.1%) required operative management for CSF rhinorrhea (CSF diversion or direct repair). Qualitative feedback was largely positive (themes included user-friendly and efficient data collection and strong support from senior team members), demonstrating acceptability.
CONCLUSIONS: Our pilot experience highlights the acceptability and feasibility of CRANIAL. There is a precedent for multicenter dissemination of this project, to establish a benchmark of contemporary practice in skull base neurosurgery, particularly with respect to patients undergoing EEA.

### PMID 33900986 (2021) — International journal of spine surgery
TITLE: Dural Tears During Lumbar Spinal Endoscopy: Surgeon Skill, Training, Incidence, Risk Factors, and Management.
DOI: 10.14444/8038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Incidental dural tears during lumbar endoscopy can be challenging to manage. There is limited literature on their appropriate management, risk factors, and the clinical consequences of this typically uncommon complication.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To improve the statistical power of studying durotomy with lumbar endoscopy, we performed a retrospective survey study among endoscopic spine surgeons by email and chat groups on social media networks, including WhatsApp and WeChat. Descriptive and correlative statistics were done on the surgeons' recorded responses to multiple-choice questions. Surgeons were asked about their clinical experience with spinal endoscopy, training background, the types of lumbar endoscopic decompression they perform by approach, the decompression instruments they use, and incidental durotomy incidence with routine lumbar endoscopy.
RESULTS: There were 689 dural tears in 64&#x2009;470 lumbar endoscopies, resulting in an incidental durotomy incidence of 1.07%. Seventy percent of the durotomies were reported by 20.4% of the surgeons. Eliminating these 19 outlier surgeons yielded an adjusted durotomy rate of 0.32. Endoscopic stenosis decompression (54.8%; P &lt; .0001), rather than endoscopic discectomy (44.1%; 41/93), was significantly more associated with durotomy. Medium-sized dural tears (1-10 mm) were the most common (52.2%; 48/93). Small pinhole durotomies (less than 1 mm) were the second most common type (46.7%; 43/93). Rootlet herniations were seen by 46.2% (43/93) of responding surgeons. The posterior dural sac injury during the interlaminar approach (57%; 53/93) occurred more frequently than traversing nerve-root injuries (31.2%) or anterior dural sac (23.7%; 22/93). Exiting nerve-root injuries (10.8%;10/93) were less common. Over half of surgeons did not attempt any repair or closure (52.2%; 47/90). Forty percent (36/90) used sealants. Only 7.8% (7/90) of surgeons attempted an endoscopic repair or sutures (11.1%; 10/90). DuralSeal was the most commonly used brand of commercially available sealant used (42.7%; 35/82). However, other sealants such as Tisseal (15.9%; 13/82), Evicel (2.4%2/82), and additional no-brand sealants (38; 32/82) were also used. Nearly half of the patients (48.3%; 43/89) were treated with 24-48 hours of bed rest. The majority of participating surgeons (64%; 57/89) reported that the long-term outcome was unaffected. Only 18% of surgeons reported having seen the development of a postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-fistula (18%;16/89). However, the absolute incidence of CSF fistula was only 0.025% (16/64&#x2009;470). Severe radiculopathy with dysesthesia; sensory loss; and motor weakness in association with an incidental durotomy were reported by 12.4% (11/89), 3.4% (3/89), and 2.2% (2/89) of surgeons, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of dural tears with lumbar endoscopy is about 1%. The incidence of durotomy is higher with the use of power drills and the interlaminar approach. Stenosis decompression that typically requires the more aggressive use of these power instruments has a slightly higher incidence of dural tears than does endoscopic decompression for a herniated disc. Most dural tears are small and can be successfully managed with mechanical compression with Gelfoam and sealants. Two-thirds of patients with incidental dural tears had an entirely uneventful postoperative course. The remaining one-third of patients may develop a persistent CSF leak, radiculopathy with dysesthesia, sensory loss, or motor function loss. Patients should be educated preoperatively and reassured.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 3.

### PMID 33682323 (2021) — ANZ journal of surgery
TITLE: Review of topical gelatin-based haemostatic agents; an insidious culprit of intraoperative anaphylaxis?
DOI: 10.1111/ans.16716 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An under-recognized complication of gelatin-based haemostatic agents is their potential to cause anaphylactic reactions. This review aims to collate and analyse case in the literature of intraoperative anaphylaxis secondary to locally applied haemostatic agents.
METHODS: An electronic search was performed on databases Medline, Embase, Pubmed and ProQuest. A total of 7671 articles were reviewed from title and abstract. After exclusion criteria and duplicates removed, 19 articles with 21 cases were included for analysis. Data extracted from each of the articles included patient demographics, haemostatic agent used, surgery type, known allergies and any objective evidence of hypersensitivity post anaphylactic episode, that is tryptase levels, IgE levels, skin prick testing.
RESULTS: Fifty-seven percent of cases involved patients &lt;18&#x2009;years of age; 57% of cases involved spinal surgery; 100% of cases displayed objective evidence of hypersensitivity (tryptase levels, bovine or porcine IgE levels, or skin prick testing). Thirty-three percent of patients had exposure preoperatively to a known agent causing anaphylaxis or allergy which would preclude the use of a gelatin-based haemostat. These products included vaccines, spam meats, red meat, Jell-O and CollaPlug. Gelatin-based haemostat agents included Floseal, Gelfoam, Surgiflo, fibrin glue, Avitene, haemofibrine sponge, topical bovine thrombin and thrombin-soaked gelatin.
CONCLUSION: Increased awareness of allergy to gelatin-based haemostats for surgical and anaesthetic is imperative, with 33% of cases having a known contraindication to gelatin-based haemostat. This review highlights important aspects in the pre-operative patient history and post-event patient investigation that could assist anaesthetists and surgeons in the prevention of future events.

### PMID 33676505 (2021) — BMC women's health
TITLE: Clinical observation of the regeneration process of defects after breast cancer resection.
DOI: 10.1186/s12905-021-01219-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The present study aims to use two different kinds of filling materials, oxidized regenerated cellulose and gelatin sponge, to repair defects of breast-conserving surgery due to breast cancer, and compare the clinical efficacy, cosmetic effect and complication rate among groups.
METHODS: A total of 125 patients, who had breast -conserving surgery due to breast cancer, were enrolled into the present study. Postoperative efficacy was assessed by a doctor and patient, according to the Harvard/NSABP/RTOG Breast Cosmetic Grading Scale.
RESULTS: Among these patients, 41 patients received conventional breast-conserving surgery, and 84 patients received breast-conserving surgery plus filling implantation (41 patients in the oxidized regenerated cellulose group and 43 patients in the gelatin sponge group). All patients had small to medium sized breasts (cup size A and B). The average weight of tumor tissues was 56.61&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;11.57&#xa0;g in the conventional breast-conserving surgery group, 58.41&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.53&#xa0;g in the oxidized regenerated cellulose group, and 58.77&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.90&#xa0;g in the gelatin sponge group. The difference in pathological factors, average operation time, length of stay and local infection rate was not statistically significant among the three groups. 18 patients in the oxidized regenerated cellulose group and 15 patients in the gelatin sponge group were evaluated to have a good cosmetic effect by the surgeon and patient, while 12 patients in the conventional breast-conserving surgery group were evaluated to be have good cosmetic effect by the surgeon and patient. The cosmetic effects in the oxidized regenerated cellulose group and gelatin sponge group were comparable, and these were superior to those in the conventional breast-conserving surgery group.
CONCLUSION: The use of oxidized regenerated cellulose and gelatin sponge is a feasible approach for defect repair after breast-conserving surgery.

### PMID 34104007 (2021) — Medical devices (Auckland, N.Z.)
TITLE: Avitene&#x2122; Microfibrillar Collagen Hemostat for Adjunctive Hemostasis in Surgical Procedures: A Systematic Literature Review.
DOI: 10.2147/MDER.S298207 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Adequate hemostasis during surgical procedures is essential for successful patient outcomes and reduced healthcare resource utilization. Topical hemostatic agents can act as catalysts for the clotting cascade or as a scaffold to promote platelet activation or aggregation. Although an ever-increasing number of topical absorbable hemostatic agents are now available for perioperative use, health care providers are disadvantaged by the lack of comparative data on feasibility, clinical effectiveness, advantages, and limitations of each in specific surgical settings. This knowledge is important for appropriate product choice when patient characteristics, type of surgical procedure, type of bleeding, and product availability may differ widely. This manuscript provides the first comprehensive overview of Avitene&#x2122; Microfibrillar Collagen Hemostat (MCH), a bovine collagen-based absorbable hemostat that has been widely used for over four decades in the United States and abroad. MCH is indicated as an adjunct to hemostasis across a broad spectrum of surgical specialties and has been shown to achieve hemostasis with positive patient outcomes and a favorable safety profile in many applications, including hepatic, orthopedic, splenic, oral, and otolaryngologic surgery. Although published clinical data regarding the use of MCH in cardiovascular surgery is limited, evidence suggests moderate use in this specialty. The information contained in this systematic review will help health care providers understand the clinical use and effectiveness of the product to determine appropriate use in differing bleeding scenarios across multiple surgical specialties. Future studies may include comparative functional and cost analyses to explore the economic advantages of using absorbable hemostatic agents compared with each other or with conventional techniques of hemostasis, when appropriate.

### PMID 33160636 (2021) — Surgery
TITLE: Association between intraoperative application of microfibrillar collagen hemostat and anastomotic leakage after anterior resection for rectal cancer: A retrospective case-control study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.surg.2020.09.038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The purpose of the study was to evaluate the association between microfibrillar collagen hemostat and anastomotic leakage after anterior resection.
METHOD: Between March 2015 and December 2019, a total of 203 consecutive rectal cancer patients who underwent elective anterior resection were included. Patient parameters were analyzed. The relevant risk factors were identified by univariate and multivariate analysis. Propensity score matching was performed to reduce the selection bias.
RESULTS: In total, 26 (12.8%) of the 203 study patients developed clinical anastomotic leakage. The length of hospital stay was significantly prolonged by anastomotic leakage. In univariate analysis and multivariate analysis, male sex, low tumor location, and intraoperative application of microfibrillar collagen hemostat significantly increased the risk of anastomotic leakage. Furthermore, analysis after propensity score matching confirmed the independent role of microfibrillar collagen hemostat in anastomotic leakage. In addition, the median time of anastomotic leakage occurrence from the initial operation in patients with microfibrillar collagen hemostat was 9.00 days, which was significantly later than that in patients without microfibrillar collagen hemostat.
CONCLUSION: In addition to male sex and low tumor location, intraoperative application of microfibrillar collagen hemostat was demonstrated to be a significant risk factor for anastomotic leakage. This finding suggested that surgeons should be fully aware of this potential risk in anterior resection. Because of the limitation of retrospective study, however, randomized controlled trials are needed to confirm this association in the future.

### PMID 33305506 (2021) — Thoracic cancer
TITLE: New treatment of bronchopleural fistula following surgical resection of the dorsal segment of the left lower lobe: A case report.
DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.13734 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anatomical segment-based or subsegmental resection for early lung cancer surgery has been used in selected cases, although postoperative complications of bronchopleural fistula sometimes occur. Persistent air leaks can cause complications such as empyema and aspiration pneumonia, resulting in prolonged patient hospitalization. The traditional treatment for postoperative bronchopleural fistula is reoperation, but the advent of bronchoscopic interventional therapy usually prevents patients from needing a second operation. This article details a case of thoracoscopic segmentectomy of the left lower lung dorsal segment resulting in residual subsegmental pleural fistula, and because the use of pleural adhesives made the patient's fistula inappropriate for surgical repair, we finally used bronchoscopic injury of the airway mucosa combined with an absorbable gelatin sponge and an autologous blood closure method for successful treatment.

### PMID 31893336 (2020) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: In vitro evaluation of the hemostatic effect of method involving the combined use of Hydrofit&#xae; and Spongel&#xae;.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-019-01282-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We developed an effective hemostatic method using Hydrofit&#xae; and a hemostatic gelatin sponge (Spongel&#xae;). We evaluated the hemostatic effect in comparison to the conventional silicone sheet method.
METHODS: A simulated circuit was created using the pump of a Nipro ventricular assist system and a prosthetic graft. A hole was made in the graft by a needle and three hemostatic methods were applied: the silicone sheet method (SS) using Hydrofit&#xae; and a silicone sheet, the bread and butter method (BB) using Hydrofit&#xae; and a gelatin sponge instead of a silicone sheet, and French toast method (FT) using Hydrofit&#xae; and a gelatin sponge over which water was poured before compression. The amount of leakage before and after the application each of the methods was measured according to the compression time.
RESULTS: In the 60&#xa0;s compression, the amount of leakage after SS, BB, and FT was 0.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.8, 0.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.6, and 0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.0&#xa0;ml, respectively, and FT showed no leakage. In the 30&#xa0;s compression, the amount of leakage after SS, BB, and FT was 14.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;27.9, 1.0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.2, and 7.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;22.6&#xa0;ml, respectively, and did not differ to a statistically significant extent.
CONCLUSIONS: The method of combining Hydrofit&#xae; and Spongel&#xae; could obtain reliable hemostasis in 60&#xa0;s.

### PMID 32944921 (2020) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Use and Efficacy of Hemostats in Neurosurgery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Hemostasis plays a central role throughout neurosurgery. In microneurosurgery, a bloodless operating field under an operating microscope allows fast and effective surgery, thereby reducing the risk of postoperative hemorrhage. Apart from mechanical methods, such as positioning of the patient's head and body, bone plugging, suction, and metal clips, neurosurgical hemostasis is achieved mainly with bipolar coagulation, which permits optimal control of hemorrhage, allows for fine coagulation of small vessels and is safe in patients with pacemakers and defibrillators. Gelatin sponge is a non-antigenic protein that can absorb 45 times its weight in blood, and, when wet, is plastered to the irregularities of the bleeding surface. It enables the repair of torn veins, such as the superior sagittal sinus, without compromising the patency of the vessel. Surgicel&#xae; (Johnson &amp; Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ), the first oxidized cellulose to be introduced, is used to control capillary, venous, or smaller arterial bleeding because it acts as a matrix for the formation of a clot. Over the past few decades, research on the development of hemostatic agents has shifted to the use of fibrin sealants and flowable agents such as Tisseel Fibrin Sealant&#xae; (Baxter, Deerfield, IL), Evicel Fibrin Sealant&#xae; (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) and FloSeal&#xae; (Baxter). Very recently, advanced hemostats with sealant properties similar to those of fibrin sealants have been introduced, such as Tachosil&#xae; (Baxter, Deerfield, IL) and Hemopatch Sealing Hemostat&#xae; (Baxter). Due to the different properties of these products it is important that we understand the efficacy of each hemostatic agent in different neurosurgical settings, such as in the control of parenchymal, subdural and epidural bleeding in both cranial and spinal surgery. The aim of this work was to review the principal technical aspects of hemostatic agents to optimize their use in different neurosurgical procedures.

### PMID 32864435 (2020) — Laryngoscope investigative otolaryngology
TITLE: Topical fibroblast growth factor-2 for treatment of chronic tympanic membrane perforations.
DOI: 10.1002/lio2.395 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy of fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) in treating chronic nonhealing tympanic membrane (TM) perforations.
METHOD: Double-blinded, randomized placebo controlled phase 2 clinical trial for patients with chronic TM perforations of more than 3&#x2009;months duration with a cross-over arm. Patients received either FGF-2 or placebo (sterile water) saturated gelatin sponge in the perforation after rimming the perforation under topical anesthesia. The perforation was then covered with Tisseel fibrin glue. The primary endpoint was complete closure of the TM perforation. Secondary end points included change in hearing and partial TM closure rates. The TM was examined every 3&#x2009;weeks with otoendoscopy for closure. The treatment was repeated if there was incomplete closure every 3&#x2009;weeks up to a total of three treatments per arm.
RESULTS: Seventy four patients were recruited for the study. Fifty seven met eligibility criteria and fifty four completed the study. Ten of 14 perforations closed completely in the placebo group (71.4%) and 23 of 40 perforations closed completely in the FGF-2 treatment group (57.5%), P value = .36. Pure tone averages and word recognition scores were not statistically significantly different between study groups post-treatment. After initial complete closure, re-perforation occurred in seven FGF-2 treated patients and two placebo patients making the effective final closure rate 40% for FGF and 57% for placebo, respectively.
CONCLUSION: No statistically significant difference in tympanic membrane perforation closure rate was found between the FGF-2 and placebo groups. There were no differences in hearing outcomes between the groups.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 1b.

### PMID 33708570 (2020) — Annals of maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Randomized Clinical Trial Comparing Three Local Hemostatic Agents for Dental Extractions in Patients under Chronic Anticoagulant Therapy - A Comparative Study.
DOI: 10.4103/ams.ams_276_20 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Oral anticoagulants are widely used worldwide for many systemic diseases. Recent oral surgical protocols suggest that therapeutic levels of the anticoagulant drug should be maintained for simple dental extractions because bleeding complications could be managed with proper local hemostasis. The aim of the present study was to compare bleeding complication of three different local hemostatic agents for dental extractions without interrupting drug administration in patients undergoing oral Vitamin K antagonist chronic anticoagulant therapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Randomized control trial of three hemostatic agents for dental extractions, in patients under oral anticoagulant therapy without drug interruption. The present study included 240 patients with international normalized ratio between 1.5 and 3.5. Patients took their anticoagulation drug normally. A single surgeon performed calibrated simple dental extractions and applied a plug of bismuth subgallate (BS), fibrin tissue adhesive (FTA) or microfibrillar collagen (MC), assigned randomly. Statistical analysis of bleeding between the groups was performed using the Chi-square test.
RESULTS: There was no hemorrhagic complication in the BS group, and only one in the FTA group. However, in the MC group, 10 patients (12.5%) suffered postoperative bleeding. Data analysis showed statistical differences between the MC group and the other two groups (P &lt; 0.05).
DISCUSSION: BS and FTA showed similar clinical effectiveness and were more effective than MC for the control of postoperative bleeding in oral anticoagulated patients.

### PMID 32664170 (2020) — Medicine
TITLE: Fatal vascular complications during transradial percutaneous coronary intervention: A case report.
DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000021205 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: RATIONALE: Vascular complications of transradial percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) are rare and usually occur at the access site below the elbow. However, vessels along the tract of the wire or catheter can be injured at any point, causing various types of bleeding complications.
PATIENT CONCERNS: A 57-year-old man visited due to chest discomfort. Coronary angiography showed significant stenosis at the distal right coronary artery (RCA). Immediately after the coronary guidewire was passed through the distal RCA, he started a vigorous cough. The voice changed, dyspnea occurred within minutes, and lip cyanosis and stridor were observed. After endotracheal intubation, successful stenting of the distal RCA was achieved. He was extubated at 30&#x200a;minutes after coronary stenting, but 1-hour post-extubation, his blood pressure suddenly decreased to 70/50 mmHg.
DIAGNOSIS: Mediastinal widening was newly noted on chest X-ray, and blood hemoglobin was decreased. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography showed mediastinal hematoma, tracheal compression, and hemothorax. Contrast extravasation was noted in the terminal branches of the inferior thyroid artery on brachiocephalic angiography.
INTERVENTIONS: Successful hemostasis was achieved with endovascular embolization therapy using a Tornado embolization microcoil, Gelfoam gelatin sponge, and Histoacryl glue. The next day, the mediastinal hemorrhage was drained by mediastinoscopy. The endotracheal intubation and ventilator care were maintained for 2 days, and 6 units of packed red blood cells were transfused. Antithrombotics were used to prevent stent thrombosis, and antibiotics to control infection, respectively.
OUTCOMES: After successful hemostasis, thrombocytosis and high on-treatment platelet reactivity that disappeared at 2 weeks post-discharge were noted. Follow-up chest imaging showed the normalized mediastinal widening. At 14 months post-discharge, the patient remains healthy.
LESSONS: As life-threating vascular complications, such as brachiocephalic, subclavian vessel dissection, and vessel perforation in the internal mammary, costocervical, and thyrocervical arteries, can occur anytime during transradial PCI, the intervention cardiologist should be well aware of it and have the appropriate countermeasures implemented in the routine procedure.

### PMID 32635957 (2020) — Cardiology in the young
TITLE: Transhepatic atrial septal defect closure: simple way to achieve haemostasis in a patient with important co-morbidities.
DOI: 10.1017/S1047951120001833 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Percutaneous closure is the gold standard treatment for atrial septal defects, but the procedure can be complex in case of femoral thrombosis. Although unusual for congenital interventionists, transhepatic atrial septal defect closure is an attractive alternative to the internal jugular vein, especially when approaching the interatrial septum. Herein, we report the case of an adult patient with significant co-morbidities who had successful transhepatic atrial septal defect closure after a failed transjugular attempt. We describe the use of an absorbable haemostatic gelatin sponge to efficiently and safely achieve haemostasis after the use of a large vascular sheath with combined anticoagulation and antiplatelet therapy.

### PMID 32634637 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Gelfoam Migration: A Potential Cause of Recurrent Hydrocephalus.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.06.214 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Gelfoam is a simple and effective hemostatic agent that is used to seal brain corticotomies or skull burr holes. Owing to its low cost, it is one of the most widely used tools in neurosurgical daily practice. However, migration of Gelfoam fragments can cause occlusion of endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) or shunt, leading to hydrocephalus recurrence.
CASE DESCRIPTION: Two cases of Gelfoam migration causing recurrent hydrocephalus are presented: a 12-year-old girl who underwent surgery for posterior fossa tumor removal and ETV for associated hydrocephalus, where a portion of Gelfoam (used to seal the burr hole) migrated up to close the ETV, and a preterm 8-month-old boy who was treated by neuroendoscopic brain lavage and afterward by ventriculoperitoneal shunt for posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus, where all the Gelfoam used to close the corticotomy migrated into the lateral ventricle, thus reopening the corticotomy and releasing small fragments that ultimately obstructed the shunt. A new endoscopic procedure was required in both patients (the second patient also required a shunt revision).
CONCLUSIONS: Review of the pertinent literature discloses other complications of Gelfoam migration (e.g., mass effect, granulomatous reaction) as well as other causes of uncommon ETV/shunt obstruction. Nonetheless, Gelfoam will remain an indispensable tool for neurosurgeons. The present report emphasizes the importance of its correct use to avoid complications.

### PMID 32622108 (2020) — Clinical neurology and neurosurgery
TITLE: Gelfoam Padding, an innovative surgical technique improving the total resection rate of cystic gliomas.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2020.105818 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The cystic gliomas are the special type of malignant tumors in the brain and often lead to unsatisfied prognosis, but the microsurgical resection is still the most important treatment. However, they are difficult to be totally removed with craniotomy, especially for those who have flimsy cyst walls. Recently, we attempted to resect them via an innovative surgical technique, "Gelfoam Padding", in order to improve the total resection rate of the tumors safely.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifteen patients suffering intracerebral cystic gliomas underwent surgical intervention via "Gelfoam Padding" technique between 2015 and 2018, and the different histopathological results and their features of cyst walls were recorded. Then, the total resection rate of tumors as well as the complications after surgeries were analyzed to assess the applied value of this technique.
RESULTS: All the patients were improved in the clinical symptoms after the operations. According to the intraoperative assessment and MRI examinations performed within 72&#x202f;h after surgery, total resection of the tumor was achieved in all patients. Besides, there were no serious postoperative complications in these cases with this technique.
CONCLUSION: The cystic glioma with the flimsy wall was the best applied indication of "Gelfoam Padding" technique, which could not only improve the total resection rate of tumors, but also be safe for the patients.

### PMID 32201390 (2020) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Two Cases of Late-onset Brain Edema after Craniotomy for Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms Suspected to be due to an Allergic Reaction to Arachnoid Plasty Material].
DOI: 10.11477/mf.1436204165 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report two rare cases of late-onset brain edema after craniotomy for clipping or coating of unruptured intracranial aneurysms, possibly due to an allergic reaction to topically applied fibrin glue or gelatin sponge used for arachnoid plasty to cover the opened sylvian cistern. Both patients were women in their 60s with an allergic predisposition and both followed a similar clinical course. A slight fever and headache persisted during the postoperative period. Five to six weeks after surgery without complications, MR images showed an extensive T2 prolongated region in the white matter around the operative field, indicative of vasogenic edema, with mass effect and meningeal enhancement around the sylvian fissure that had been covered with gelatin sponge and sprayed fibrin glue. Swelling of the cerebral cortex around the sylvian fissure subjected to arachnoid plasty was also observed. Blood tests showed the absence of an inflammatory reaction and cerebrospinal fluid examination showed lymphocytosis that was considered to be due to an aseptic meningeal reaction or meningitis. Clinical symptoms and imaging findings steadily improved with the administration of steroids and antiallergic agents. Delayed brain edema may occur around the arachnoid plasty area despite an uneventful chronic postoperative period, which could be due to an allergic reaction to locally administered fibrin glue or gelatin sponge. Thus, the application of arachnoid plasty using fibrin glue and gelatin sponge in patients with a predisposition to allergies needs to be carefully considered.

### PMID 32101860 (2020) — Stereotactic and functional neurosurgery
TITLE: Microvascular Decompression Alone without Rhizotomy Is an Effective Way of Treating Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia: Clinical Analysis of 46 Cases.
DOI: 10.1159/000505712 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Microvascular decompression (MVD) has been the right choice for glossopharyngeal neuralgia (GPN) patients. However, whether glossopharyngeal/vagal nerve root rhizotomy should be combined with MVD is still controversial.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether glossopharyngeal/vagal nerve root rhizotomy during MVD is necessary for the treatment of GPN.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective study of 46 GPN patients who underwent MVD surgery alone in our hospital, and their patient demographics, clinical presentations, and intraoperative findings are shown. The immediate and long-term follow-up outcomes were investigated to show the treatment's efficiency and safety; the outcome was also compared with our previous study. The relevant literature was reviewed to show complications for GPN patients undergoing glossopharyngeal/vagal nerve root rhizotomy with MVD.
RESULTS: The most common offending vessel was the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (60.9%). 100% of the patients were pain-free (score of I on the Barrow Neurological Institute pain intensity [BNI-P] scale) immediately after MVD surgery, while 1 patient relapsed with occasional pain 12 months after the operation (score of III on the BNI-P scale). Poor wound healing and hearing loss were found in 1 case each. No complications related to the glossopharyngeal nerve/vagal nerve were reported. Some surgical techniques, such as thorough exploration of the CN IX-X rootlets, full freeing from arachnoid adhesions, and usage of a moist gelatin sponge, can improve the success rate of the operation.
CONCLUSIONS: MVD alone without rhizotomy is an effective and safe method for patients with GPN.

### PMID 32035204 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: A Rare Case of Fatal Pulmonary Embolism in a Pediatric Spine Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.01.225 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An 11-year-old girl had undergone posterior spinal fusion surgery for scoliosis. The surgery was complicated by intraoperative bleeding, and hemostasis was achieved by topically applying gelatin sponges.
CASE DESCRIPTION: She developed acute pulmonary embolism and cardiac arrest during the surgery, which was confirmed by transesophageal echocardiography.
CONCLUSIONS: Autopsy shortly after revealed that her death was associated with unintended intravascular entry of gelatin sponge fragments, resulting in an embolic event and secondary cardiopulmonary collapse.

### PMID 31689570 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Treatment of Typical Enneking Stage 3 Thoracic Aggressive Vertebral Hemangiomas with Pain and Neurologic Deficits: Results After at Least 36 Months of Follow-Up.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2019.10.158 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficiency of a comprehensive treatment strategy for patients with Enneking stage 3 thoracic aggressive vertebral hemangioma (AVH).
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of radiographic and clinical outcomes was performed for 17 patients who received treatment for Enneking stage 3 thoracic AVH accompanied by pain and neurologic deficits between January 2010 and February 2015. A visual analog scale (VAS) was used to clinically evaluate the level of pain. Neurologic examinations were performed to assess the patients' sensory symptoms, motor deficits, and Frankel grade.
RESULTS: The average operative time was 181.8 &#xb1; 37.1 minutes, and the average intraoperative blood loss was 1226.5 &#xb1; 151.2 mL (range, 900-1450 mL). All patients underwent preoperative embolization to minimize intraoperative blood loss. All patients experienced immediate pain relief and resolution of their neurologic symptoms. All 17 patients achieved Frankel grade D at the final follow-up; moreover, they reported that their pain was relieved (mean VAS score, 2.82 &#xb1; 0.81; P &lt; 0.05) and their neurologic deficits had resolved. No surgery-related complications were noted. No patients exhibited signs of recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: We recommend a comprehensive treatment strategy for patients with Enneking stage 3 thoracic AVH that includes preoperative embolization, vertebroplasty, posterior decompression, and internal fixation. We recommend that absorbable gelatin sponge particles be used for intraoperative embolization prior to the injection of bone cement, which may significantly reduce intraoperative bleeding, operative time, and occurrence of surgery-related complications.

### PMID 31258357 (2019) — The Eurasian journal of medicine
TITLE: The Use of Three Different Hemostatic Agents during Laparoscopic Partial Nephrectomy: A Comparison of Surgical and Early Renal Functional Outcomes.
DOI: 10.5152/eurasianjmed.2018.18293 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compare the effects of three different hemostatic agents on surgical and early renal functional outcomes after laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (LPN).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 126 cases of LPN performed between November 2008 and September 2016 were enrolled in this study. Spongostan&#x2122; Absorbable Hemostatic Gelatin Sponge (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) or Surgicel&#xae; Original Absorbable Hemostat (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA), or a total of 5 mL of Floseal&#xae; Hemostatic Matrix (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, IL) was used for additional hemostasis. According to the hemostatic agent used, patients were divided into three groups; and patient characteristics, body mass index (BMI), American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score, tumor characteristics, perioperative parameters, serum creatinine levels, and complications were compared among these three groups.
RESULTS: Age, BMI, ASA score, tumor characteristics, operative time, warm ischemia time, complication rates, and length of hospital stay were similar among the groups, whereas estimated blood loss was significantly lower in the Floseal Group (p=0.01). Postoperative serum creatinine levels and differences between preoperative and postoperative serum creatinine levels were also similar among the groups.
CONCLUSION: The type of hemostatic agent used in LPN may affect the estimated blood loss. However, it has no substantial effect on other surgical parameters and early renal functional outcomes.

### PMID 31143266 (2019) — Asian journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Bespoke GelFoam Wafers: A Practical and Inexpensive Alternative to Oxycel for Hemostasis during Neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.4103/ajns.AJNS_275_18 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Since the beginning of neurosurgery, intraoperative parenchymal bleeding has been a major problem. Achievement of hemostasis is the endpoint of any cranial or spinal neurosurgical exercise and is mandatory to avoid postoperative hematomas which mar the ultimate outcome of the surgery. Several biosurgical agents are used to achieve this goal. Agents such as oxidized cellulose, gelatin foam, fibrillar collagen, fibrin sealants, and antifibrinolytic agents are used, each having a different mechanism of action.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The authors describe a simple technique for substituting oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel) for lining the surgical cavities after excising brain lesions, with customized gelfoam wafers fashioned on the surgical trolley. This has been used in over 8000 cases with excellent hemostatic results over the last 25 years. No complications are noted with use of these wafers.
RESULTS: In a randomized trial done by us, similar hemostatic effect was found between oxycel and the gelfoam wafers described by us with satisfactory outcomes of surgeries. No previous use of such custom-fashioned wafers has been described for neurosurgical hemostasis in the literature.

### PMID 31376559 (2019) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Impact of Surgeon Experience on Postoperative Rehemorrhage in Spontaneous Basal Ganglia Intracerebral Hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2019.07.182 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (SICH) is of high mortality and morbidity. SICH in the basal ganglia is usually attributed to chronic hypertension. Postoperative rehemorrhage is a severe complication, and it is relative to surgical techniques.
METHODS: A retrospective survey was conducted on 123 patients with basal ganglia SICH who received surgery from January 2015 to January 2019. Postoperative rehemorrhage within 24 hours was recorded. Preoperative clinical parameters, surgeon experience (&lt;10 and &gt;20 years), operation time, surgical approach, and hemostasis technique were recorded and analyzed.
RESULTS: The total postoperative rehemorrhage rate was 12.2% (15/123). The univariable analysis showed general surgeons had a higher postoperative rehemorrhage rate than experienced surgeons (30.4% vs. 8.6%, respectively; P&#xa0;= 0.068). The operation time (minutes) in experienced surgeons was significantly longer (164.9 &#xb1; 53.5 vs. 137.7&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;30.8, P&#xa0;= 0.016), but they had a higher chance to locate the responsible vessel (74.2% vs. 40.0%, P&#xa0;= 0.001), respectively. Logistic analysis indicated that experienced surgeons significantly reduced the risk of rehemorrhage (odds ratio [OR], 0.242; P&#xa0;= 0.021). Transsylvian approach was a protective factor for postoperative rehemorrhage (OR, 0.291; P&#xa0;= 0.045).
CONCLUSIONS: Surgeons' experience plays the most important role in postoperative rehemorrhage. Surgeons with rich experience were willing to spend more time to achieve definitive hemostasis in operation. The use of a transsylvian approach can significantly reduce the rehemorrhage rate. Packing hemostasis with gelatin sponge may increase complications.

### PMID 31214324 (2019) — Journal of surgical case reports
TITLE: Delayed thoracic wall bleeding after minimally invasive mitral valve repair.
DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjz187 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The first case of late thoracic wall bleeding after minimally invasive mitral valve repair treated by endovascular therapy is reported. A 55-year-old woman underwent mitral valve repair and tricuspid annuloplasty through a mini-thoracotomy approach. Her postoperative course was uneventful until she had anemia one week after the surgery. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed right hemothorax due to bleeding from a branch of the right lateral thoracic artery. Endovascular coil embolization and gelatin sponge injection were performed. The patient was discharged without any complications on postoperative day 20.

### PMID 31063141 (2019) — Diagnostic and interventional radiology (Ankara, Turkey)
TITLE: Transcatheter arterial embolization for postoperative arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery.
DOI: 10.5152/dir.2019.18212 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We aimed to study the technical and clinical outcome of urgent transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) for postoperative arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery, and to accumulate additional experience about the role of embolization for these injuries.
METHODS: Patients who received TAE procedure for arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery between September 1st, 2002 and December 1st, 2014 were screened on medical records and included in the analysis. Angiographic findings included active contrast agent extravasation, pseudoaneurysm formation, arteriovenous fistula, and other suspicious signs such as sighting of coarse margin or distortion of vessels. Embolic agents consisted of coils, gelatin sponge, and polyvinyl alcohol. Technical success was defined as complete occlusion of targeted artery through angiography, and clinical success as sustained resolution of symptoms.
RESULTS: A total of 22 patients (15 males, 19-76 years old) were enrolled. Prior to TAE, 12 patients developed hemorrhagic shock and the remaining 10 patients had hemorrhage-related pain, hematoma, or anemia. Contrast agent extravasation occurred in 12 cases, pseudoaneurysm formation in 5 cases, and other suspicious signs in 5 cases. Injury occurred in the internal iliac artery stem in 6 cases, inferior gluteal artery in 6 cases and superior gluteal artery in 6 cases. Multiple vascular lesions appeared in 5 cases. After TAE, technical success occurred in 22 patients and clinical success in 21 patients (95.5%). A 36-year-old woman died of irreversible multiple organ failure; no other severe procedure-related complications were recorded.
CONCLUSION: TAE is safe and effective for postoperative arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery.

### PMID 30962082 (2019) — Journal of stroke and cerebrovascular diseases : the official journal of National Stroke Association
TITLE: Cerebral Venous Sinus Incision for Surgical Thrombectomy Combined with Thrombolysis During Decompressive Craniectomy for Malignant Cerebral Venous Sinus Thrombosis Complicated with Cerebral Hernia.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2019.03.030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: For malignant cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) complicated with cerebral hernia, decompressive craniectomy may be life-saving, and thrombectomy combined with thrombolysis may obtain better outcomes. This report describes an approach performed on 2 patients diagnosed with CVST combined both thrombectomy and thrombolysis with decompressive craniectomy through incising the superior sagittal sinus. The general procedure of the operation is as follows. The anterior part of the superior sagittal sinus was exposed firstly. After cutting the dura matter for decompression, a superior sagittal sinus incision was taken to detect sinus thrombus. In order to facilitate hemostasis during detecting the sagittal sinus, 2 silk sutures were sutured along the incision. The incision was 5 millimeters long approximately along the middle line of the front third of the superior sagittal sinus. A silicone intubation was inserted in the sinus through the incision. Thrombus was seen in the suction tube. At a depth of about 10 cm, while it is difficult to penetrate the tube, we used the gelatin sponge to cover the sinus incision and fixed the suture lines after cross-knotting. The silicone intubation was drawn out through the forehead and connected to external micro pump for injecting anticoagulant drugs, then cut the dura mater into star-shaped and discard bone flap for decompression. Absorbable artificial dura mater was used to repair bilateral dura mater, respectively. At last, connect the catheter to the micro pump for pumping anticoagulant. After operation, the 2 patients received thrombolysis through the catheter placed in the sinus. Both of them recovered well. There was no incision-related bleeding occurred after surgery. Both the patients achieved incredibly good outcomes. For patients with malignant cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, acute cerebral hernia or cerebral hernia tendency, it may be an effective approach combined both thrombectomy and thrombolysis with decompressive craniectomy through incising the superior sagittal sinus.

### PMID 30921076 (2019) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Pericranial Flap Anterior Skull Base Reconstruction With Gelfoam Intradural Compression.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000005364 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anterior cranial base reconstruction is occasionally necessary following severe trauma. Several methods for reconstruction have been described and some authors have described their experiences regarding the use of a pericranial flap for anterior skull base reconstruction after trauma. A 26-year-old woman was admitted to our department with multiple facial bone fractures identified using facial bone computed tomography. Plastic surgeons performed surgery under general anesthesia for the patient's nasal bone fractures. On the seventh day after admission, the patient's brain computed tomography showed an abscess in the frontal lobe. Antibiotic treatment was started, but the lesion deteriorated. Anterior skull base reconstruction was then performed using a pericranial flap with gelfoam compression. No complications, including leakage of cerebrospinal fluid, cerebral hemorrhage, necrosis of the pericranial flap, or frontal lobe herniation, were observed 1 year following surgery. In our case, the authors performed a simple and effective treatment with reconstruction using pericranial flap and gelfoam compression without complications. This technique is useful for reconstructing defects in the base of the frontal bone resulting from various causes, as well as for fracture of the anterior skull base following trauma.

### PMID 30921064 (2019) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: A Rare Potential Compression Can Be Avoided by Lateral Spread Response Recordings During Microvascular Decompression for Hemifacial Spasm.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000005400 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors report a 34-year-old female with hemifacial spasm who was identified as a candidate for microvascular decompression. Lateral spread response (LSR) was not recorded at first because of anatomical shift of neurovascular relationship after drainage of cerebrospinal fluid, but they reappeared only after a piece of shredded gelatin sponge was placed near the posteroinferior cerebellar artery to expand surgical field. As the authors removed the gelatin sponge, the LSRs disappeared instantly. Subsequently, the authors put some soft shredded Teflon between the offending vessel and brainstem. Since then the authors did not find LSRs anymore. Clinical follow-up had been carried out with a questionnaire from 1 week to 3 months postoperatively, and the patient was cured with no complications. This report presented that the gelatin sponge placed in an inappropriate position resulting in compression potentially leading to the opposite effect of treatment. Such kind of excessive operation could be avoided by electrophysiological monitoring.

### PMID 30506328 (2019) — Pediatric radiology
TITLE: Percutaneous liver biopsy in Fontan patients.
DOI: 10.1007/s00247-018-4311-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Patients who have undergone the Fontan operation for palliation of congenital heart disease with single-ventricle pathophysiology are at high risk for developing progressive liver fibrosis. Pathological assessment from percutaneous liver biopsy is central to the management of Fontan-associated liver disease, but liver biopsy in this vulnerable population poses unique challenges and potential risks.
OBJECTIVE: This retrospective study describes our experience with percutaneous liver biopsy performed to assess changes of Fontan-associated liver disease, with particular regard to procedural outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data from liver biopsy procedure reports, pathology reports, cardiac angiography pressure measurements and laboratory values of patients with single ventricle heart disease after the Fontan operation who underwent ultrasound-guided percutaneous liver biopsy performed in interventional radiology at a pediatric tertiary care center during a 3-year period were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: Sixty-eight liver biopsies were performed in 67 patients (mean age: 20.2&#xa0;years, range: 7.2-39&#xa0;years). The technical success rate was 100%, and tissue was adequate for assessing liver disease in 100% of the procedures, including biopsies performed with a single pass. Anticoagulation was routinely suspended before biopsy, and no cardiac complications were encountered due to this suspension. A coaxial biopsy system using an 18-gauge (G) full-core instrument through a 17-G introducer trocar was most commonly used, in 41/68 cases (60%). The most common trough length was 2.3&#xa0;cm, used in 37 cases (54%). One pass was made in 27 procedures (40%) and two passes in 30 (44%); tract embolization with gelatin sponge was performed in 52 (76%). The only complication was hemorrhage, which occurred in 5/68 (7.4%) of the biopsies, minor in four (5.9%) and major in one (1.5%) -- similar to rates reported for liver biopsy in non-Fontan patients. Hemorrhage had a delayed presentation in three of these five cases. Immediate post-biopsy hemoglobin decrease of &#x2265;2&#xa0;mg/dL showed a low sensitivity for hemorrhage. The mean Fontan pressure measured during cardiac angiography was 13.8&#xa0;mmHg, and shunt pressures were not associated with an increased risk of hemorrhage.
CONCLUSION: Percutaneous liver biopsy in Fontan patients can be performed safely with high technical success rates and without increased complication rates. Meticulous technique and close observation are recommended to reduce post-biopsy complications. The degree of right heart pressure elevation was not associated with hemorrhage.

### PMID 29982857 (2019) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Pitfalls of skull base reconstruction in endoscopic endonasal approach.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-018-1006-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Various skull base reconstruction techniques have been developed in endoscopic endonasal approach (EEA) for skull base lesions to prevent postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. This study was performed to evaluate the efficacy and pitfalls of our method of skull base reconstruction after EEA. A total of 123 patients who underwent EEA (127 surgeries) between October 2014 and May 2017 were reviewed. Our algorithm for skull base reconstruction in EEA was categorized based on intraoperative CSF leakage graded as follows: grade 0 was excluded from this study; grade 1, dural suturing with abdominal fat graft or packing of gelatin sponge into the cavity; grade 2, method for grade 1 with addition of mucosal flap or nasoseptal flap (NSF); and grade 3, duraplasty in fascia patchwork closure with NSF. Bony reconstruction was not mandatory, and there was no postoperative bed rest or initial lumbar drainage (LD) insertion in any of the cases. Postoperative CSF leakage after EEA was mostly prevented (96.3%) by our algorithm without postoperative initial LD or bed rest. On the other hand, reconstruction surgery was required for postoperative CSF leakage in two cases-one with prior multitranssphenoidal surgery and radiotherapy and another patient with poor compliance due to communication difficulties. Both of the latter patients were obese. Greater care with regard to postoperative CSF leakage is required in patients with prior EEA with radiotherapy and obesity. In such high-risk patients, initial LD or bed rest may be required to prevent postoperative CSF leakage. It is also important to restrict activities that result in increased intracranial pressure.

### PMID 29334539 (2018) — Ophthalmic plastic and reconstructive surgery
TITLE: Gelatin-Based Hemostatic Agents: Histopathologic Differences.
DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000001048 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To delineate the histopathologic appearance of gelatin-based hemostatic agents, Surgiflo, Gelfoam, and Floseal, which are used by ophthalmic plastic surgeons, and which may incidentally be found as foreign materials in histopathologic tissue samples.
METHODS: Histopathologic analysis was performed with hematoxylin-eosin, periodic acid-Schiff, Masson trichrome, and elastin staining on tissue samples in which gelatin-based agents were found. To better characterize these materials, similar analyses were performed on in vitro samples of commonly used gelatin-based hemostatic agents.
RESULTS: Surgiflo and Gelfoam are composed of small stellate pieces of gelatin with a smooth, homogeneous quality. In tissues, they are faintly positive with periodic acid-Schiff staining, amphophilic with Masson trichrome staining, and ink-black with elastin staining. Floseal has a distinctly different morphology of large rectangular sheets, yet almost identical in vitro staining properties.
DISCUSSION: While the morphology of the gelatin-based hemostatic agents is consistent under various conditions, the staining properties of these materials differ based on whether they have been in contact with human tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Gelatin-derived hemostatic agents are best identified based on their morphologic characteristics. Elastin staining highlights these materials prominently within tissue samples and may be helpful in distinguishing them from other foreign materials.

### PMID 30544449 (2018) — Medicine
TITLE: Comparison the efficacy of hemorrhage control of Surgiflo Haemostatic Matrix and absorbable gelatin sponge in posterior lumbar surgery: A randomized controlled study.
DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000013511 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To compare the hemostatic effect of hematostatic agent Surgiflo and absorbable gelatin sponge (AGS) in posterior lumbar surgery.
METHODS: A total of 60 cases were recruited during August 2016 and June 2017 according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Patients were randomly allocated to the Surgiflo Haemostatic Matrix (SHM) group or the AGS group (AGS) by computer-generated randomization codes. The success rates of hemostasis for 3 minutes and 5 minutes, the time of operation, the amount of intraoperative bleeding, the volume of autogenously blood transfusion, the amount of blood during hemostasis, the amount of blood transfusion, and BP, RBC, HCT, HB of preoperative, 2 to 3 days, and 5 to 7 days following operation were recorded to compare. Daily drainage and all adverse events after operation were also compared.
RESULTS: All the patients were followed up for at least 1 month. The RBC and HCT of the AGS group before operation were lower than those in the control group (P&#x200a;=&#x200a;.039, P&#x200a;=&#x200a;.029), but there was no difference after operation (P&#x200a;&gt;.05). In the control group, 19 cases were successfully hemostatic in 3 minutes, 4 cases were successful in 5 minutes, and 7 cases were combined with hemostasis. In the SHM group, it was 22, 3, and 5 cases respectively. There was significant difference in blood loss during hemostatic process between the 2 groups (P&#x200a;&lt;.001). There was no difference in the amount of blood loss and autologous blood transfusion between the 2 groups, and there was no difference in the operation time between the 2 groups. In the AGS group, allogeneic blood was infused in 1 case during operation, and no allogeneic blood was infused in the other patients. The drainage volume on the 1st day and the 2nd to 4th day after operation in the AGS group was less than that in the control group (P&#x200a;=&#x200a;.015, P&#x200a;=&#x200a;.010).
CONCLUSION: Compared with AGS, SHM could decrease the blood loss during hemostatic process and the postoperative drainage volume in posterior operation of lumbar degenerative disease. SHM is a safe and effective hemostatic agent in lumbar posterior surgery.

### PMID 29464888 (2018) — Diagnostic cytopathology
TITLE: Postoperative cytological findings from the use of the Integran microfibrillar collagen hemostatic matrix in conization.
DOI: 10.1002/dc.23907 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The Integran microfibrillar collagen hemostatic matrix is one form of microfibrillar collagen hemostat. This form has a sheet-type structure and has explicitly been used in Japan. In gynecology, this sheet-type matrix has helped effect uterine surface hemostasis, especially in myomectomy and cervical conization. However, cytotechnologists and pathologists have overlooked the foreign materials used for conization in postoperative cervical cytology. We report two cases describing the characteristic cervical cytology findings when Integran was used in conization. The first case was a 67-year-old woman who underwent conization because of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) 3. Thirty-six days after the surgery, many cylindrical fragments of glossy acellular materials appeared in the cervical cytology. Fortunately, the content did not impede the diagnosis of NILM. The patient then underwent hysterectomy two months after conization. Surgical specimen revealed a high degree of inflammation and granulation without malignancy. Following surgery, the cylindrical fragments disappeared from microscopic findings. The second case was a 45-year-old woman who underwent conization because of CIN3. Thirty-four days after the surgery, many tubular pieces of glossy acellular materials appeared in cervical cytology, as seen in the first case. The cytological diagnosis was NILM. One hundred days after surgery, cervical cytology revealed many clue cells but no cylindrical fragments. These clusters of cylindrical fragments of glossy acellular materials in cervical cytology after conization might induce a delay in diagnosing the persistence and recurrence of cervical cancer. This article is the first report describing cervical cytology findings associated with Integran use.

### PMID 30187219 (2018) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Intracranial foreign material granulomas after cranial surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-018-3663-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Various synthetic materials are used in neurosurgery and left in place intentionally during surgery for several purposes such as hemostasis, dural closure, or cranioplasty. Although leaving such substances in surgical sites is considered safe, in general, foreign body granuloma may occur months or years after intracranial surgery. Thus, far relatively little is known about treatment and outcome of such lesions.
METHODS: A systematic review of 3466 histopathological examinations after cranial surgeries achieved over a 13-year period was performed. After excluding patients with Teflon granulomas or infection, a total of 12 patients with foreign body granulomas induced by synthetic material used in a prior surgery were identified. Patient records, imaging studies, and histopathological data were analyzed. Furthermore, postoperative outcome was assessed.
RESULTS: Mean age at the second surgery was 51&#xa0;years (range, 11-68&#xa0;years). The median time between the primary and the secondary surgery was 13&#xa0;months (range, 1-545&#xa0;months). Eight patients (75%) presented with signs and symptoms related to the foreign body granulomas. Total resection of the foreign body granulomas was performed in all patients. The granulomas were induced by oxidized cellulose polymer (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6), suture material (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3), Gelfoam (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1), methylmethacrylate (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1), and bone wax (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1). The mean postoperative follow-up time was 54&#xa0;months (range 1-137&#xa0;months). There was symptomatic improvement in all instances. Imaging studies did not demonstrate any recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Despite its rarity, foreign body granuloma should be taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis of intracranial mass lesions especially in cases of suspected tumor recurrence after prior surgery. The pathogenesis of foreign body granuloma still needs further clarification. Our study demonstrates that they have good prognosis after surgical removal.

### PMID 29946809 (2018) — Child's nervous system : ChNS : official journal of the International Society for Pediatric Neurosurgery
TITLE: Iatrogenic obstructive hydrocephalus resulting from Gelfoam accumulation within the cerebral aqueduct: a case report.
DOI: 10.1007/s00381-018-3874-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors present the case of a previously healthy 12-year-old male with intractable seizures localized to a right frontal area of encephalomalacia and porencephalic cyst who underwent resection of the seizure focus. The surgical resection cavity extended into the right lateral ventricle, and due to encountered hemorrhage, Gelfoam was used for optimal hemostasis. The patient did well following the procedure, but presented 5&#xa0;months later with headaches and emesis and was discovered to have obstructive hydrocephalus on imaging studies. Endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) was performed, where Gelfoam was encountered in the third ventricle, obstructing the cerebral aqueduct. After the completion of the ETV, the patient did well and continues to be asymptomatic 1&#xa0;year following the procedure.

### PMID 29608482 (2018) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Posterior Fossa Re-Exploration for Recurrent Trigeminal Neuralgia: Operative Findings and Surgical Techniques.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000004576 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Microvascular decompression (MVD) is considered the first choice for the surgical treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (TN). However, recurrence after MVD is still a problem and a challenge for neurosurgeons. In this study, we share our experience in the posterior fossa re-exploration of the recurrent cases.
METHODS: From January 2014 to January 2015, 15 recurrent TN patients who received fossa re-exploration were retrospectively studied. Surgeries were performed by retrosigmoid suboccipital approach. Brainstem auditory evoked potentials (BAEP) were monitored throughout the operation. Intraoperative findings and surgical techniques were recorded. Postoperative outcomes and complications were analyzed.
RESULTS: Among the 15 patients, Teflon adhesion was found in 14. Teflon felt displacement was found in 4 patients, and additional Teflon felt was used to interpose. New offending vessels were found in 5 patients. Three of them were small arteries and the other 2 were petrosal veins. After dissected, small pieces of wet gelatin sponge and Teflon felt were implanted respectively to ensure complete decompression. The remaining 6 patients had no vascular compression except severe adhesion, and nerve combing was performed. After surgery, 12 achieved complete pain relief, 2 gained partial pain relief, and 1 failed. Six patients experienced facial numbness postoperatively. There was no hearing impairment or other complications. During the mean 26-month follow-up, no recurrence occurred and all of 6 cases with facial numbness after surgery improved.
CONCLUSIONS: Teflon adhesion is a significant cause of recurrent TN. Wet gelatin-assisted method is good for Teflon interposition. If no vascular compression is found during re-exploration, trigeminal nerve combing can be used. Intraoperative BAEP monitoring is helpful to reduce the incidence of hearing loss.

### PMID 29485295 (2018) — Brain injury
TITLE: "Five-layer gasket seal" watertight closure for reconstruction of the skull base in complex bilateral traumatic intraorbital meningoencephaloceles: a case report and literature review.
DOI: 10.1080/02699052.2018.1440631 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Traumatic meningoencephalocele primarily occurs as a rare but complex complication of cranial base and orbital roof fractures. Traumatic intraorbital meningoencephalocele, which is rare and easily overlooked, can be life-threatening since cephalomeningitis occurs due to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. It is obscure for the operative indications or standard surgical methods of traumatic meningoencephaloceles since the combined intricate craniofacial and basal fractures, brain injury, and CSF leak may exist. This case report proposes a new operative method for the repair of complex skull base fractures following traumatic intraorbital meningoencephalocele.
METHODS: A 30-year-old male with a history of complex trauma presented with symptoms of exophthalmos and traumatic CSF rhinorrhea was evaluated via 3D CT of the skull base and brain MRI and was diagnosed with bilateral intraorbital meningoencephaloceles and multiple craniofacial bone, skull base, and orbit fractures.
RESULTS: Successful resection of the meningoencephaloceles and reconstruction of the skull base defects were performed via craniotomy using a "five-layer gasket seal" technique that involved, from extracranial to intracranial, a gelatin sponge, muscular paste, vascularized periosteum, RapidSorb Orbital Floor Plate (OrbFloor), and Neuro-Patch layers.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis and treatment of complex intraorbital meningoencephalocele require careful attention. Resection of herniated tissue is suggested due to potential contamination. The "five-layer gasket seal" watertight closure technique is recommended for successful repair of the skull base in cases involving traumatic meningoencephalocele with complex skull base fractures.

### PMID 29061456 (2018) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Multilayer Dura Reconstruction After Thoracoscopic Microdiscectomy: Technique and Results.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2017.10.056 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Anterior transthoracic approaches, including thoracoscopic microdiscectomy (TMD), are the preferred techniques for central, broad-based, calcified thoracic disc herniations (TDHs). Dural defects due to manipulation or transdural extension may create a potentially life-threatening subarachnoid-pleural fistula. We evaluate a fast, sutureless technique for reconstructing the dura.
METHODS: We analyzed 476 anterior transthoracic approaches for TDHs (437 TMDs, 31 mini-thoracotomies, 7 transaxillary approaches, and 1 sternotomy). Dural defects were closed using an onlay dura substitute, fibrin glue, an autologous fat graft, and another layer of fibrin glue topped by an absorbable gelatin sponge. A chest tube was used to provide a water seal, and the use of external lumbar drains (ELDs) was discontinued in recent years.
RESULTS: We encountered 35 dural defects (7.35%), including 27 in 279 procedures (9.67%) in the first 10 years and 8 in 197 (4.06%) in the past 6 years. Five defects were large, 23 were relatively small, and 5 had an intact arachnoid layer, likely preventing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) egress. Two CSF leaks in the early series were overlooked intraoperatively; 1 patient died following widespread cortical venous thrombosis, whereas the other merely had a headache that disappeared within 1 week. Overall, an ELD was inserted in 3 of 5 large defects and in 17 of 23 small defects; however, in the past 6 years, an ELD was inserted in no large defects and in only 1 of 5 small defects. The technique was successful in all but 1 patient, who underwent reoperation using a larger fat graft.
CONCLUSIONS: Dural defects encountered during anterior transthoracic approaches to TDHs can be reconstructed endoscopically, while avoiding the use of an ELD in most cases.

### PMID 29337125 (2018) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Facilitating Hemostasis After Proximal Aortic Surgery: Results of The PROTECT Trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2017.12.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study intended to evaluate the safety and hemostatic efficacy of a novel vascular sealant (Tridyne; Neomend, Inc, Irvine, CA) compared with an accepted adjunctive hemostatic agent applied to aortotomy and sutures lines in cardiovascular operations.
METHODS: Patients undergoing aortic valve replacement, ascending aortic replacement, or aortic root&#xa0;replacement were randomly assigned 2:1 to Tridyne (n&#xa0;= 107) or Gelfoam Plus (Baxter Healthcare Corp, Hayward, CA) (n&#xa0;= 51). These groups were similar with regard to age, sex, race, medical history, duration of bypass and cross-clamping, and number of suture lines treated. Suture lines were treated after confirmation of some leakage but before formal removal of the clamp.
RESULTS: The median bleeding time was significantly lower for Tridyne versus Gelfoam Plus (0 versus 10.0&#xa0;minutes, p &lt; 0.0001). Immediate hemostasis was achieved in 59.4% of the Tridyne group versus 16.0% of Gelfoam Plus group (p &lt; 0.0001). A significantly greater proportion of patients in the Tridyne group achieved successful hemostasis at the aortic suture line than patients in the Gelfoam Plus group (85.7% versus 40.0%, p&#xa0;&lt; 0.0001). The Clinical Events Committee adjudicated 7 patients with possible device-related serious adverse events: 3 patients (2.9%) in the Tridyne group and 4 patients (8.2%) in the Gelfoam Plus group (p&#xa0;= 0.2097).
CONCLUSIONS: Tridyne was safe and effective when used as an adjunct to conventional hemostasis to treat high-pressure vessels in patients who receive anticoagulation agents, in reducing time to hemostasis, and in promoting both immediate and persistent hemostasis.

### PMID 29411561 (2018) — Allergy, asthma &amp; immunology research
TITLE: A Case of Intraoperative Anaphylaxis Caused by Bovine-Derived Thrombin.
DOI: 10.4168/aair.2018.10.2.184 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative bovine-derived topical thrombin is still widely used for hemostasis during surgery. A 38-year-old woman with chronic spontaneous urticaria was referred to the orthopedic surgery department for herniated disk and myelopathy. During the first stage of operation, bovine-derived thrombin powder soaked in Gelfoam was used as a hemostatic aid. After 30 minutes, the patient developed anaphylactic shock with systemic skin rash and angioedema. Repeated intravenous bolus and infusion of vasopressor were carried out, and her blood pressure normalized. Skin test and specific immunoglobulin E test showed positive results for bovine thrombin and beef, respectively. During the second stage of operation (After 10 days from first stage of operation), bovine-derived thrombin powder was excluded and the operation was successful without any unexpected events. Therefore, bovine thrombin should be used with caution because it might cause anaphylaxis.

### PMID 29573937 (2018) — Academic radiology
TITLE: Comparison of Local Injection of Fresh Frozen Plasma to Traditional Methods of Hemostasis in Minimally Invasive Procedures.
DOI: 10.1016/j.acra.2018.03.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: To evaluate different techniques for reducing hemorrhagic complications in coagulopathic patients with elevated international normalized ratio having an image-guided percutaneous invasive procedure; techniques included systemic transfusion of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), local injection of FFP, percutaneous injection of gelatin sponge, and percutaneous placements of angiographic coils.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retrospective review of 232 consecutive patients with known coagulopathy undergoing image-guided minimally invasive procedures were selected. Ninety-one patients had local FFP injected, 40 patients underwent local synthetic gelatin injection, 16 patients had percutaneous coil embolization, and 85 patients received systemic FFP. The number of bleeds, complications related to bleeds, and systemic complications were recorded. A 30&#x2009;cc threshold was used to delineate significant bleeding.
RESULTS: No patients experienced clinically significant or insignificant bleeding with local FFP injection (P value &lt;.05). Other local hemostatic methods (Gelfoam, systemic FFP, and coil embolization) were associated with higher levels of bleeding (12.5%, 17.1%, 37.5%, respectively) and complications (7.5%, 31.4%, 37.5%, respectively). Systemic FFP infusion was associated with respiratory, infectious, and mortal complications.
CONCLUSIONS: Local injection of blood products provides a safe and efficacious hemostatic agent to reduce the incidence of postprocedural bleeding. The technique is associated with lower rates of bleeding and systemic complications when compared to other local and systemic techniques. Further randomized prospective studies with a larger patient cohort need to be performed to corroborate these initial findings.

### PMID 28736354 (2017) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Novel Technique of Percutaneous Fat Graft for Repair of Persistent Large Pseudomeningocele.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2017.07.089 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Pseudomeningocele is an uncommon but problematic complication in lumbar spine surgery. Initial conservative measures frequently are successful, but persistence requires additional management. The current surgical approach can involve a range of techniques, including blood patches, hydrogel/fibrin sealants, drains, open surgical repair of the dura, or a combination of the all techniques if symptoms persist. This report demonstrates a novel technique for repair via a percutaneous approach to deliver an autologous fat graft into the pseudomeningocele.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 64-year-old woman with a history of multiple complex lumbar spinal surgeries with previous durotomy had persistent positional headaches from an unresolved pseudomeningocele from L3 to L5. The defect and symptoms remained after all available surgical options were exhausted, including blood patches, hydrogel sealants (Duraseal), and open surgical repair with muscle and Gelfoam grafts. After autologous fat harvest, the patient underwent percutaneous repair of the pseudomeningocele with simultaneous aspiration of cerebrospinal fluid and injection of fat into the defect space.
CONCLUSIONS: At 3 months postoperatively, the patient's symptoms were resolved with no clinical or radiographic findings of nerve root or thecal sac impingement and complete obliteration of the pseudomeningocele. This less-invasive approach offers the option of open surgical repair for persistent pseudomeningocele with the use of autologous graft material.

### PMID 28632556 (2017) — Clinical spine surgery
TITLE: Watertight Sealing Without Lumbar Drainage for Incidental Ventral Dural Defect in Transthoracic Spine Surgery: A Retrospective Review of 53 Cases.
DOI: 10.1097/BSD.0000000000000249 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective review.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of the triple layer closure technique to establish watertight sealing without diversion of lumbar drainage, in preventing persistent incidental subarachnoid-pleural fistula and other neurological complications related to excessive drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) after dural defect in transthoracic ossified posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) surgery.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: CSF leakage into the pleural cavity leads to unfavorable conditions for natural healing of incidental durotomy due to the negative pressure environment of the pleural space and lack of wound healing around the bony cavity near the decompressed spinal cord. This often leads to a persistent incidental subarachnoid-pleural fistula. In addition, diversion of lumbar drainage may lead to excessive CSF drainage resulting in intracranial hypotension. To avoid this, we studied the efficacy of a modified sealing method to establish a more watertight covering at the ventral dural defect without lumbar CSF drainage.
METHODS: Fifty-three patients who had CSF leakage from the ventral aspect of the spinal cord during transthoracic spine surgery for thoracic OPLL between 2004 and 2013 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were divided into 2 groups: a conventional group (group A) and a triple layer closure group (group B). In group A (n=33 patients), the dural defect was covered with fibrin glue (Beriplast P) mixed with gelfoam (Spongostan Standard) with subsequent subarachnoid lumbar drainage. In group B (n=20 patients), the dural defect was sealed using the triple layer technique with 2 layers of fibrin glue and gelatin sponge plus a third layer of synthetic hydrogel (Duraseal, Dural Sealant System) without subsequent subarachnoid lumbar drainage. Both groups had chest tubes that drained through an underwater seal. Clinical data including duration and total amount of drainage (chest tube and lumbar drainage), related complications, and duration of hospital stay were compared between the 2 groups.
RESULTS: Compared with the patients in group A, group B had a significantly smaller total volume of drainage and shorter chest tube drainage time (P&lt;0.05) during their hospital stay. In group A, complications occurred in 6 cases (18.2%), including 3 cases of intracranial hypotension combined with transient mental status alteration, postural headache, and dizziness, 1 case of regional atelectasis with pneumonia, and 2 cases of revision thoracotomy. Revision thoracotomy was performed to treat persistent subarachnoid-pleural fistula due to significant and prolonged CSF leakage. In group B, there were no complications and no revision thoracotomy was needed. The mean duration of hospital stay was shorter in group B (15.6 d) compared with group A (22.4 d).
CONCLUSIONS: The established watertight closure of the dural defect using the triple layer sealing method without lumbar drainage was more effective and safe.

### PMID 29237485 (2017) — Journal of medical case reports
TITLE: Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta may increase the bleeding of minor thoracic injury in severe multiple trauma patients: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s13256-017-1511-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta, because of its efficacy and feasibility, has been widely used in treating patients with severe torso trauma. However, complications developing around the site proximal to the occlusion by resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta have almost never been studied.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 50-year-old Japanese woman fell from a height of approximately 10&#xa0;m. At initial arrival, her respiratory rate was 24 breaths/minute, her blood oxygen saturation was 95% under 10&#xa0;L/minute oxygenation, her pulse rate was 90 beats per minute, and her blood pressure was 180/120&#xa0;mmHg. Mild lung contusion, hemopneumothorax, unstable pelvic fracture, and retroperitoneal bleeding with extravasation of contrast media were observed in initial computed tomography. As her vital signs had deteriorated during computed tomography, a 7-French aortic occlusion catheter (RESCUE BALLOON&#xae;, Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was inserted and inflated for aortic occlusion at the first lumbar vertebra level and transcatheter arterial embolization was performed for the pelvic fracture. Her bilateral internal iliac arteries were embolized with a gelatin sponge; however, the embolized sites presented recanalization as coagulopathy appeared. Her bilateral internal iliac arteries were re-embolized by n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate. The balloon was deflated 18&#xa0;minutes later. After embolization, repeat computed tomography was performed and a massive hemothorax, which had not been captured on arrival, had appeared in her left pleural cavity. Thoracotomy hemostasis was performed and a hemothorax of approximately 2500&#xa0;ml was aspirated to search for the source of bleeding. However, clear active bleeding was not captured; resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta may have been the cause of the increased bleeding of the thoracic injury at the proximal site of the aorta occlusion.
CONCLUSIONS: It is necessary to note that the use of resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta may increase bleeding in sites proximal to occlusions, even in the case of minor injuries without active bleeding at the initial diagnosis.

### PMID 28436697 (2017) — AJR. American journal of roentgenology
TITLE: Liver Track Embolization After Islet Cell Transplant: Comparison of Two Techniques.
DOI: 10.2214/AJR.16.17148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to compare the efficacy and safety of microfibrillar collagen paste with those of gelatin sponge for liver track embolization after islet cell transplants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In a single-institution, retrospective study, 37 patients underwent 66 islet cell transplants from January 2005 through October 2015. Transplants were performed with 6-French transhepatic access, systemic anticoagulation, pretransplant and posttransplant portal venous pressure measurement, and image-guided liver track embolization with gelatin sponge (2005-2011) or microfibrillar collagen paste (2012-2015). The findings on 20 patients (two men, 18 women; mean age, 48 years) who underwent 35 gelatin sponge embolizations were compared with the findings on 13 patients (six men, seven women; mean age, 48 years) who underwent 22 microfibrillar collagen paste embolizations (four patients, nine procedures without embolization excluded). Medical record review was used to compare laboratory test results, portal venous pressures, and 30-day adverse bleeding events (classified according to Society of Interventional Radiology and Bleeding Academic Research Consortium criteria) between groups.
RESULTS: The technical success rates were 100% in the microfibrillar collagen paste group and 91% in the gelatin sponge group. Group characteristics were similar, there being no differences in platelet count, partial thromboplastin time, or number of islet cell transplants per patient (p &gt; 0.05). A statistical difference in international normalized ratio (1.0 versus 1.1) was not clinically significant (p = 0.012). Posttransplant portal venous pressure was slightly higher among patients treated with gelatin sponge (13 versus 9 mm Hg, p = 0.002). No bleeding occurred after microfibrillar collagen paste embolization, whereas nine bleeding events followed gelatin sponge embolization (0% versus 26%, p = 0.020). In univariate comparison of bleeding and nonbleeding groups, the use of gelatin sponge was statistically associated with postprocedure hemorrhage.
CONCLUSION: Microfibrillar collagen paste is effective and safe for liver track embolization to prevent bleeding after islet cell transplants. It appears to be more efficacious than gelatin sponge.

### PMID 29455488 (2017) — Zhongguo gu shang = China journal of orthopaedics and traumatology
TITLE: [Analysis of clinical effects of absorbable hemostatic fluid gelatin and absorbable gelatin sponge on the hemostasis during operation of unilateral open-door cervical expansive laminoplasty].
DOI: 10.3969/j.issn.1003-0034.2017.09.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To compare the hemostatic effect between absorbable hemostatic fluid gelatin (HFG) and absorbable gelatin sponge(GS) during operation of unilateral open-door cervical expansive laminoplasty.
METHODS: The clinical data of 83 patients underwent unilateral open-door cervical expansive laminoplasty from February 2014 to May 2016 were retrospectively analyzed. According to the used hemostatic materials, patients were divided into two groups. In HFG group, there were 30 males and 11 females, ranging in age from 29 to 81 years, with an average of(55.6&#xb1;11.6)years; 14 cases were simple cervical spinal stenosis, 9 were cervical spinal stenosis and ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament, and 18 were cervical spinal stenosis complicated with multiple cervical disc herniation. And in GS group, there were 32 males and 10 females, ranging in age from 36 to 78 years, with an average of (55.4&#xb1;11.1) years; 12 cases were simple cervical spinal stenosis, 10 were cervical spinal stenosis complicated with ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament, and 20 were cervical spinal stenosis complicated with multiple cervical disc herniation. There was no significant difference in the age, gender, and disease categories of patients between two groups (P&gt;0.05). The operative time, intraoperative bleeding, postoperative drainage, and postoperative complications were compared between two groups.
RESULTS: The average operative time, intraoperative bleeding, and postoperative drainage in HFG group were(137.2&#xb1;30.0) min, (156.1&#xb1;74.6) ml, and (212.1&#xb1;67.6) ml, respectively; and in GS group were (154.8&#xb1;33.5) min, (242.9&#xb1;120.7) ml, and(303.3&#xb1;115.5) ml, respectively. There were significantly differences in above items between two groups(P&lt;0.05). No acute heamatoma or related complications was found postoperatively.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with GS, HFG can obviously decrease operative time, intraoperative bleeding, and postoperative drainage. It is a safe and effective hemostatic material for the operation of unilateral open-door cervical expansive laminoplasty.

### PMID 28986228 (2017) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Application of Gelatin Sponge Impregnated with a Mixture of 3 Drugs to Intraoperative Nerve Root Block Combined with Robot-Assisted Minimally Invasive Transforaminal Lumbar Interbody Fusion Surgery in the Treatment of Adult Degenerative Scoliosis: A Clinical Observation Including 96 Patients.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2017.09.075 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Application of nerve root block is mainly for diagnosis with less application in intraoperative treatment. The aim of this study was to observe clinical and imaging outcomes of application of gelatin sponge impregnated with a mixture of 3 drugs to intraoperative nerve root block combined with robot-assisted minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion surgery in to treat adult degenerative lumbar scoliosis.
METHODS: From January 2012 to November 2014, 108 patients with adult degenerative lumbar scoliosis were treated with robot-assisted minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion surgery combined with intraoperative gelatin sponge impregnated with a mixture of 3 drugs. Visual analog scale and Oswestry Disability Index scores were used to evaluate postoperative improvement of back and leg pain, and clinical effects were assessed according to the 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey. Imaging was obtained preoperatively, 1 week and 3 months postoperatively, and at the last follow-up. Fusion status, complications, and other outcomes were assessed.
RESULTS: Follow-up was complete for 96 patients. Visual analog scale scores of leg and back pain on postoperative days 1-7 were decreased compared with preoperatively. At 1 week postoperatively, 3 months postoperatively, and last follow-up, visual analog scale score, Oswestry Disability Index score, coronal Cobb angle, and coronal and sagittal deviated distance decreased significantly (P&#xa0;= 0.000) and lumbar lordosis angle increased (P&#xa0;= 0.000) compared with preoperatively. Improvement rate of Oswestry Disability Index was 81.8% &#xb1; 7.4. Fusion rate between vertebral bodies was 92.7%.
CONCLUSIONS: Application of gelatin sponge impregnated with 3 drugs combined with robot-assisted minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion for treatment of adult degenerative lumbar scoliosis is safe and feasible with advantages of good short-term analgesia effect, minimal invasiveness, short length of stay, and good long-term clinical outcomes.

### PMID 28291642 (2017) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Chitosan Dextran gel as an anti adhesion agent in a postlaminectomy spinal sheep model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2017.02.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Post-operative peridural adhesions increase morbidity after neurosurgical procedures. Aim of this study is to assess safety and efficacy of Chitosan-Dextran (CD) gel as an anti-adhesion agent in a spinal laminectomy sheep model.
METHODS: Eighteen sheep were used in this study with 6 animals in each treatment arm (namely, CD gel, Gelfoam paste and normal saline control). Posterior lumbar laminectomy was performed in all animals and the dura was exposed intact. Test agents were applied over the exposed dura and the wound was closed in layers. Sheep were euthanized at the end of three months. MRI spine was performed after euthanasia to assess epidural fibrosis. Adhesion in the spinal specimen was assessed by Peel test and histopathology was used to assess safety of the agents.
RESULTS: Average scores for the Peel test for CD gel, Gelfoam and normal saline control groups were 1.16 (95% CI, 0.5-1.7), 1.5 (95% CI, 0.6-2.3) and 3 (95% CI, 2.1-3.8) respectively. There was significant reduction in adhesions between treatment and normal saline treated groups (p=0.0292), with no difference between Gelfoam and CD gel groups (p=0.56). Average scores on MRI for CD gel, Gelfoam and normal saline groups were 1.4 (95% CI, 0.9-1.8), 1.5 (95% CI, 1.2-1.8) and 1.6 (95% CI, 1.3-1.8) respectively, with no significant difference in fibrosis amongst (p=0.2992). Histopathology did not show any adverse effects.
CONCLUSION: CD gel is an effective agent to reduce epidural adhesions with a good safety profile in neural tissue.

### PMID 28162204 (2017) — Zhonghua wai ke za zhi [Chinese journal of surgery]
TITLE: [Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of dural tears and the consequent cerebrospinal fluid leak during spine surgery].
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5815.2017.02.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Dural tears (DT) and the consequent cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) leak are not rare in spine surgeries. CSF leak can be troublesome, leading to pseudomeningocele, cutaneous CSF fistula, and meningitis. Revision surgery is unavoidable in some cases. The reported incidences of DT and CSF leak are different according to the various pathologies. Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament, revision spine surgery and multi-segment laminectomy have higher risks for DT. Various techniques have been described to manage this complication, such as bed rest, repair with dural substitutes, fibrin glue, gelatin sponge, lumbar drain, muscle flap, etc.Through objective evaluation of the evidence and transparency in the process of making recommendations, it is Chinese Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons' goal to develop evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of incidental DT and the consequent CSF leak during spine surgery. The current clinical guidelines focus on 9 clinical questions and the strength of recommendations were made based on the quality of the literature. The work group considers that this guideline recommendations aim to assist in delivering optimum, efficacious treatment and functional recovery from this complication. &#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x5916;&#x79d1;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x53d1;&#x751f;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x53ca;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x5e76;&#x4e0d;&#x7f55;&#x89c1;&#x3002;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x4f1a;&#x5e26;&#x6765;&#x591a;&#x79cd;&#x5e76;&#x53d1;&#x75c7;&#xff0c;&#x5982;&#x5047;&#x6027;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x81a8;&#x51fa;&#x3001;&#x76ae;&#x4e0b;&#x7aa6;&#x9053;&#x53ca;&#x86db;&#x7f51;&#x819c;&#x708e;&#x7b49;&#xff0c;&#x5c11;&#x6570;&#x60a3;&#x8005;&#x751a;&#x81f3;&#x9700;&#x8981;&#x63a5;&#x53d7;&#x7ffb;&#x4fee;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x3002;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x75be;&#x75c5;&#x7684;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x548c;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x53d1;&#x751f;&#x7387;&#x4e5f;&#x6709;&#x6240;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x3002;&#x540e;&#x7eb5;&#x97e7;&#x5e26;&#x9aa8;&#x5316;&#x3001;&#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x7ffb;&#x4fee;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x3001;&#x591a;&#x8282;&#x6bb5;&#x690e;&#x677f;&#x5207;&#x9664;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x7684;&#x98ce;&#x9669;&#x66f4;&#x9ad8;&#x3002;&#x9488;&#x5bf9;&#x8fd9;&#x4e00;&#x95ee;&#x9898;&#xff0c;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x91c7;&#x53d6;&#x4e86;&#x591a;&#x79cd;&#x63aa;&#x65bd;&#x8fdb;&#x884c;&#x5904;&#x7406;&#xff0c;&#x5305;&#x62ec;&#x5e73;&#x5367;&#x5236;&#x52a8;&#xff0c;&#x4f7f;&#x7528;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x8865;&#x7247;&#x3001;&#x7ea4;&#x7ef4;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x80f6;&#x3001;&#x660e;&#x80f6;&#x6d77;&#x7ef5;&#x4fee;&#x590d;&#x3001;&#x8170;&#x690e;&#x5f15;&#x6d41;&#x3001;&#x808c;&#x74e3;&#x586b;&#x585e;&#x7b49;&#x3002;&#x4e2d;&#x56fd;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x534f;&#x4f1a;&#x9aa8;&#x79d1;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x5206;&#x4f1a;&#x6307;&#x5357;&#x7f16;&#x5199;&#x5de5;&#x4f5c;&#x7ec4;&#x4f9d;&#x636e;&#x5faa;&#x8bc1;&#x533b;&#x5b66;&#x65b9;&#x6cd5;&#xff0c;&#x9488;&#x5bf9;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x60c5;&#x51b5;&#x5236;&#x5b9a;&#x4e86;&#x300a;&#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x53ca;&#x672f;&#x540e;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x7684;&#x5faa;&#x8bc1;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x8bca;&#x7597;&#x6307;&#x5357;&#x300b;&#xff0c;&#x7740;&#x91cd;&#x5173;&#x6ce8;9&#x4e2a;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x95ee;&#x9898;&#xff0c;&#x5e76;&#x4f9d;&#x636e;&#x6587;&#x732e;&#x8bc1;&#x636e;&#x7b49;&#x7ea7;&#x7ed9;&#x51fa;&#x76f8;&#x5e94;&#x7684;&#x63a8;&#x8350;&#x7b49;&#x7ea7;&#x3002;&#x5de5;&#x4f5c;&#x7ec4;&#x5e0c;&#x671b;&#x672c;&#x6307;&#x5357;&#x80fd;&#x591f;&#x4e3a;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x7684;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x8bca;&#x7597;&#x63d0;&#x4f9b;&#x6700;&#x4f73;&#x7684;&#x3001;&#x6709;&#x6548;&#x7684;&#x6cbb;&#x7597;&#x65b9;&#x6848;&#xff0c;&#x4ece;&#x800c;&#x8ba9;&#x60a3;&#x8005;&#x83b7;&#x5f97;&#x6700;&#x4f73;&#x7684;&#x5eb7;&#x590d;&#x6548;&#x679c;&#x3002;.

### PMID 27658949 (2016) — Veterinary surgery : VS
TITLE: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Appearance and Mechanism of Action of Five Hemostatic Agents Used in Neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.1111/vsu.12551 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To describe the magnetic resonance (MR) image appearance of 5 hemostatic agents placed in the brain, and to review their clinical application.
STUDY DESIGN: Descriptive ex vivo and in vivo study.
ANIMALS: Canine cadavers (n=4), client-owned dogs (n=4).
METHODS: Heads from 4 canine cadavers were used, each with 5 hemostatic agents placed in specific locations in the brain. Hemostatic agents were used in their native form in 2 cadaveric brains, and in 2 others the materials were saturated with fresh whole blood prior to placement to mimic application in a field of active hemorrhage. The heads underwent MR imaging and the images were reviewed. Postoperative MRI images from 4 dogs undergoing brain tumor resection were retrospectively reviewed and compared to the images from the cadavers. All clinical cases and cadaveric specimens underwent surgical closure prior to MR imaging including placement of titanium mesh over the craniotomy defect with a dural graft of porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS) sealed with Tisseel (fibrin sealant).
RESULTS: The SIS and Tisseel used in the dural graft were consistently indistinguishable from the surrounding tissues on MR images. The MR imaging appearance of the remaining 4 hemostatic agents (Gelfoam, Avitene, Surgicel, and Floseal) placed on the surface or in the parenchyma of canine brain, varied with MR sequence weighting and blood saturation.
CONCLUSION: Accurate evaluation of the degree of brain tumor resection on postoperative MR images requires careful differentiation between hemorrhage, residual tumor, and hemostatic agents implanted.

### PMID 26549473 (2016) — Journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery : official journal of the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
TITLE: Oral Surgical Procedures Performed Safely in Patients With Head and Neck Arteriovenous Malformations: A Retrospective Case Series of 12 Patients.
DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2015.10.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This case series describes patients with head and neck arteriovenous malformations who underwent oral and maxillofacial surgical procedures combined with interventional radiology techniques to minimize blood loss.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twelve patients underwent femoral cerebral angiography to visualize the extent of vascular malformation. Before the surgical procedures, surgical sites were devascularized by direct injection of hemostatic or embolic agents. Direct puncture sclerotherapy at the base of surgical sites was performed using Surgiflo or n-butylcyanoacrylate glue. Surgical procedures were carried out in routine fashion. A hemostatic packing of FloSeal, Gelfoam, and Avitene was adapted to the surgical sites.
RESULTS: Direct puncture sclerotherapy with Surgiflo or n-butylcyanoacrylate glue resulted in minimal blood loss intraoperatively. Local application of the FloSeal, Gelfoam, and Avitene packing sustained hemostasis and produced excellent healing postoperatively.
CONCLUSION: Patients with arteriovenous malformations can safely undergo routine oral and maxillofacial surgical procedures with minimal blood loss when appropriate endovascular techniques and local hemostatic measures are used by the interventional radiologist and oral and maxillofacial surgeon.

### PMID 26091112 (2016) — Journal of neurological surgery. Part A, Central European neurosurgery
TITLE: A Sandwich Technique for Prevention of Cerebrospinal Fluid Rhinorrhea and Reconstruction of the Sellar Floor after Microsurgical Transsphenoidal Pituitary Surgery.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1547357 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks are a well-known complication of transsphenoidal surgery. Several autologous and artificial grafts have been used to close the sellar floor in an attempt to prevent postoperative CSF rhinorrhea.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate and describe a sandwich technique to close the sellar floor using autologous bone, absorbable gelatin sponge, and coated collagen fleece.
METHODS: We reviewed 50 consecutive patients between April 2010 and August 2011 who underwent transsphenoidal surgery ending with reconstruction of the sellar floor with a particular sandwich technique. Patients with an intraoperative CSF leak received an additional lumbar drain.
RESULTS: There were no cases of CSF rhinorrhea at postoperative follow-up after 6 weeks and no revision surgery.
CONCLUSION: The proposed sandwich technique for closure of the sellar floor to the sphenoid sinus is a suitable alternative to autologous grafts and seems to be effective in preventing CSF rhinorrhea.

### PMID 25612915 (2015) — Hamostaseologie
TITLE: Interaction of von Willebrand factor with platelets and the vessel wall.
DOI: 10.5482/HAMO-14-12-0081 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: The initiation of thrombus formation at sites of vascular injury to secure haemostasis after tissue trauma requires the interaction of surface-exposed von Willebrand factor (VWF) with its primary platelet receptor, the glycoprotein (GP) Ib-IX-V complex. As an insoluble component of the extracellular matrix (ECM) of endothelial cells, VWF can directly initiate platelet adhesion. Circulating plasma VWF en-hances matrix VWF activity by binding to structures that become exposed to flowing blood, notably collagen type I and III in deeper layers of the vessel along with microfibrillar collagen type VI in the subendothelium. Moreover, plasma VWF is required to support platelet-to-platelet adhesion - i.&#x2009;e. aggregation - which promotes thrombus growth and consolidation. For these reasons, understanding how plasma VWF interaction with platelet receptors is regulated, particularly any distinctive features of GPIb binding to soluble as opposed to immobilized VWF, is of paramount importance in vascular biology. This brief review will highlight knowledge acquired and key problems that remain to be solved to elucidate fully the role of VWF in normal haemostasis and pathological thrombosis.

### PMID 26060599 (2015) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Efficacy of arachnoid plasty with collagen sheets and fibrin glue: An in vitro experiment and a case review.
DOI: 10.4103/2152-7806.157792 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative subdural fluid collection sometimes occurs after clipping of cerebral aneurysms. Arachnoid plasty is used to prevent such postoperative complications; however, the optimal materials for arachnoid plasty remain unclear. In this study, we aimed to clarify the optimal materials for arachnoid plasty and report our experience of arachnoid plasty after clipping of unruptured aneurysms.
METHODS: In an in vitro experiment, adhesive strengths of three materials permitted for use in the intradural space, such as collagen sheets, gelatin sponge, and oxidized cellulose sheets, were measured by assessing their water pressure resistance. Then, 80 consecutive cases surgically treated unruptured cerebral aneurysms were retrospectively reviewed to examine the occurrence rate of postoperative subdural fluid collection.
RESULTS: The collagen sheet exhibited the greatest adhesive strength, so we used collagen sheets for the arachnoid plasty procedures. In all of these cases, arachnoid plasty was performed with fibrin glue-soaked collagen sheets. No postoperative subdural fluid collection, inflammation, or allergic reactions occurred in any case.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that collagen sheet might be one of the optimal materials for arachnoid plasty. This technique is simple and may be effective to prevent subdural fluid collection after clipping.

### PMID 25886695 (2015) — Annals of allergy, asthma &amp; immunology : official publication of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, &amp; Immunology
TITLE: Intraoperative anaphylaxis likely due to Gelfoam in a pediatric patient undergoing liver biopsy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2015.03.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 25884946 (2015) — PloS one
TITLE: Renal denervation suppresses atrial fibrillation in a model of renal impairment.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124123 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A close association exists between renal impairment (RI) and atrial fibrillation (AF) occurrence. Increased activity of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) may contribute to the development of AF associated with RI. Renal denervation (RDN) decreases central sympathetic activity.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective of the study was to explore the effects of RDN on AF occurrence and its possible mechanisms in beagles with RI.
METHODS: Unilateral RI was induced in beagles by embolization of small branches of the renal artery in the right kidney using gelatin sponge granules in Model (n = 6) and RDN group (n = 6). The Sham group (n = 6) underwent the same procedure, except for embolization. Then animals in RDN group underwent radiofrequency ablation of the renal sympathetic nerve. Cardiac electrophysiological parameters, blood pressure, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, and AF inducibility were investigated. The activity of the SNS, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), inflammation and atrial interstitial fibrosis were measured.
RESULTS: Embolization of small branches of the renal artery in the right kidney led to ischemic RI. Heart rate, P wave duration and BP were increased by RI, which were prevented or attenuated by RDN. Atrial effective refractory period was shortened and AF inducibility was increased by RI, which were prevented by RDN. Antegrade Wenckebach point was shortened, atrial and ventricular rates during AF were increased by RI, which were attenuated or prevented by RDN. Levels of norepinephrine, renin and aldosterone in plasma, norepinephrine, angiotensin II, aldosterone, interleukin-6 and high sensitivity C-reactive protein in atrial tissue were elevated, and atrial interstitial fibrosis was enhanced by RI, which were attenuated by RDN.
CONCLUSIONS: RDN significantly reduced AF inducibility, prevented the atrial electrophysiological changes in a model of RI by combined reduction of sympathetic drive and RAAS activity, and inhibition of inflammation activity and fibrotic pathway in atrial tissue.

### PMID 24560706 (2015) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Efficacy of placing a thin layer of gelatin sponge over the subdural space during dural closure in preventing meningo-cerebral adhesion.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2014.02.032 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: One significant drawback during a cranial reoperation is the presence of meningocerebral adhesions. The appearance of connective tissue bridges between the inner surface of the dura and the pia-arachnoid is mostly related to dural closure and the condition in which the surgical field was left in the previous surgery. This study was done to determine the benefit of placing a thin-layer gelatin sponge of polypeptides subdurally to prevent meningocerebral adhesions.
METHODS: From September 2005 through May 2012, 902 craniotomies were performed for various lesions by the senior author (U.T.). Beginning in February 2009, we began placing a gelatin sponge under the dural flap to isolate the dural healing process from the cortical surface. To compare the degree of meningocerebral adhesions statistically, reoperation cases between February 2009 and May 2012 were divided into 2 groups as group G (gelatin) and group C (Control) in which the dural closure was made with and without subdural application of the gelatin sponge, respectively.
RESULTS: In all patients of group G (n = 15), a neomembrane was found when the dura was opened. This layer was easily dissected and showed no or minimal attachment to the underlying cerebral cortex. However, in group C (n = 14), meningocerebral adhesions in various degrees were detected. Adhesion scores were significantly greater in group C than in group G (P &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSION: This study proves that, during the dural closure, placing a thin layer of gelatin sponge in the subdural space is a safe and effective method for preventing meningocerebral adhesions.

### PMID 26254451 (2015) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Randomized trial of a dry-powder, fibrin sealant in vascular procedures.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2015.05.038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Topical hemostats are important adjuncts for stopping surgical bleeding. The safety and efficacy of Fibrocaps, a dry-powder, fibrin sealant containing human plasma-derived thrombin and fibrinogen, was evaluated in patients undergoing vascular surgical procedures.
METHODS: In this single-blind trial (clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01527357), adult patients were randomized 2:1 to Fibrocaps plus gelatin sponge (Fibrocaps) vs gelatin sponge alone. Results are presented for the patient subset undergoing vascular procedures with suture hole bleeding. The primary efficacy endpoint compared time to hemostasis (TTH) over 5&#xa0;minutes. Safety follow-up continued to day&#xa0;29.
RESULTS: A total of 175 patients were randomized and treated (Fibrocaps, 117; gelatin sponge, 58). Patients were predominately male (69%) and underwent arterial bypass (81%), arteriovenous graft formation (9%), or carotid endarterectomy (9%). Fibrocaps significantly reduced TTH compared with gelatin sponge (hazard ratio [HR], 2.1; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.5-3.1; median TTH, 2&#xa0;minutes; 95% CI, 1.5-2.5 vs 4&#xa0;minutes; 95% CI, 3.0-5.0; P&#xa0;&lt; .002). Significant reductions were also observed in patients receiving concomitant antiplatelet agents alone (HR, 2.8; 95% CI, 1.0-7.4; P&#xa0;= .03; n&#xa0;= 33), anticoagulants alone (HR, 2.0; 95% CI, 1.0-4.0; P&#xa0;= .04; n&#xa0;= 43), or both antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants (Fibrocaps vs gelatin sponge, HR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.2-4.3; P&#xa0;= .008; n&#xa0;= 65). Incidences of common adverse events (procedural pain, nausea, constipation) were generally comparable between treatment arms. Anti-thrombin antibodies developed in 2% of Fibrocaps-treated patients and no-gelatin-sponge patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrocaps, a ready-to-use, dry-powder fibrin sealant, was well-tolerated and reduced TTH in patients undergoing vascular procedures, including those receiving antiplatelet agents and/or anticoagulants, demonstrating its safety and usefulness as an adjunct to hemostasis.

### PMID 25458801 (2015) — Journal of the American College of Surgeons
TITLE: The FINISH-3 trial: a phase 3, international, randomized, single-blind, controlled trial of topical fibrocaps in intraoperative surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2014.09.019 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This Phase 3, international, randomized, single-blind, controlled trial (FINISH-3) compared the efficacy and safety of Fibrocaps, a ready-to-use, dry-powder fibrin sealant containing human plasma-derived thrombin and fibrinogen, vs gelatin sponge alone for use as a hemostat for surgical bleeding in 4 indications (ie, spinal, hepatic, vascular, soft tissue dissection).
STUDY DESIGN: Adults with mild to moderate surgical bleeding (randomized 2:1; Fibrocaps vs gelatin sponge) were treated at a single bleeding site (day 1). Time to hemostasis (TTH) during 5 minutes was compared (log-rank statistic) within each indication. Safety follow-up continued to day&#xa0;29.
RESULTS: Patients were treated (Fibrocaps, n&#xa0;= 480; gelatin sponge, n&#xa0;= 239) when undergoing spinal (n&#xa0;= 183), vascular (n&#xa0;= 175), hepatic (n&#xa0;= 180), or soft-tissue (n&#xa0;= 181) procedures. Fibrocaps was applied by spray device in 53% of all procedures (94% of hepatic and soft-tissue procedures). Fibrocaps significantly reduced TTH compared with gelatin sponge; estimated hazard ratios were 3.3, 2.1, 2.3, and 3.4 for the 4 surgical indications, respectively (each p &lt; 0.001; primary end point). Fibrocaps significantly reduced median TTH for each indication (p &lt; 0.001) and was superior for secondary efficacy end points of restricted mean TTH (p &lt; 0.001) and probability of hemostasis at 3 (p &lt; 0.001) and 5 (p &#x2264; 0.002) minutes. Adverse event incidences were generally similar between treatment arms. Non-neutralizing, anti-thrombin antibodies developed in 2% of Fibrocaps-treated and 3% of gelatin sponge-treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrocaps was well tolerated and significantly reduced TTH relative to gelatin sponge alone in all 4 surgical indications. These findings demonstrate the broad utility of Fibrocaps as a hemostatic agent for mild to moderate surgical bleeding.

### PMID 24428225 (2014) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Sutureless repair for left ventricular free wall rupture after acute myocardial infarction.
DOI: 10.1111/jocs.12286 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report three cases of left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) after acute myocardial infarction, which were repaired using a sutureless technique without cardiopulmonary bypass. At operation, a sheet of fibrin tissue-adhesive collagen fleece (TachoComb) was secured to the hematoma surrounding the tear and the infarcted area under compression by the surgeon's fingers. After complete hemostasis, several sheets of an absorbable gelatin sponge (Gelfoam) were glued onto the collagen fleece in layers. Intra-aortic balloon pumping was electively performed. Concomitant coronary artery bypass grafting was not carried out. All patients survived the operation but recurrence of the rupture occurred on postoperative day 10 in one patient and an LV aneurysm was found four months after repair in another patient. The sutureless technique may be a simple and fast option for treatment of an oozing type LVFWR; however, careful follow-up is mandatory.

### PMID 25419955 (2014) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Use of a Thrombin-gelatin Hemostatic Matrix (Surgiflo) in Spinal Surgery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A variety of techniques have been used to stop venous bleeding from the spinal epidural space. These generally consist of packing with Surgicel&#xae;, fibrillar collagen or Gelfoam&#xae;. Bipolar coagulation may also be used to control bleeding from spinal venous plexus, but it may bear the risk of healthy nervous tissue injury: dissipation of heat from the tips of the bipolar forceps may induce thermal injury to adjacent neural structures. In the case of intraspinal bleeding, quick and safe hemostasis is mandatory to ensure adequate visualization and safe preparation so as to avoid damaging nerves and spinal medulla. In addition, quick and safe hemostasis reduces the duration of surgery. Efficient control of bleeding can thereby reduce perioperative morbidity. During 6 months, the authors performed more than 170 major spinal surgeries, and in 67 procedures they used injection of thrombin-gelatin hemostatic matrix (Surgiflo, Johnson &amp; Johnson Wound Management, Somerville, NJ) into spinal epidural space to assist in hemostasis. When the venous bleeding continued from the epidural space after packing with hemostatic agents as Surgicel and fibrillar collagen, gelatin matrix was used to stop venous bleeding. In all cases, the results were judged to be excellent, with immediate stoppage of epidural bleeding, or good. No complications related to the thrombin-gelatin hemostatic matrix were encountered. The thrombin-gelatin matrix could represent a valuable tool when other hemostatic strategies are ineffective or suboptimal. It is safe and biocompatible when compared with hemostatic agents currently in use. This is the first study reporting the use of Surgiflo hemostatic matrix in spinal surgery.

### PMID 24927164 (2014) — Journal of medical economics
TITLE: Hospital economic impact from hemostatic matrix usage in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.3111/13696998.2014.928638 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Improved health outcomes can result in economic savings for hospitals and payers. While effectiveness of topical hemostatic agents in cardiac surgery has been demonstrated, evaluations of their economic benefit are limited. This study quantifies the cost consequences to hospitals, based on clinical outcomes, from using a flowable hemostatic matrix vs non-flowable topical hemostatic agents in cardiac surgery.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Applying clinical outcomes from a prospective randomized clinical trial, a cost consequence framework was utilized to model the economic impact of comparator groups. From that study, clinical outcomes were obtained and analyzed for a flowable hemostatic matrix (FLOSEAL, Baxter Healthcare Corporation) vs non-flowable topical hemostats (SURGICEL Nu-Knit, Ethicon-Johnson &amp; Johnson; GELFOAM, Pfizer). Costing analyses focused on the following outcomes: complications, blood transfusions, surgical revisions, and operating room (OR) time. Cardiac surgery costs were analyzed and expressed in 2012 US dollars based on available literature searches and US data. Comparator group variability in cost consequences (i.e., cost savings) was calculated based on annualized impact and scenario testing.
RESULTS: RESULTS suggest that if a flowable hemostatic matrix (rather than a non-flowable hemostat) was utilized exclusively in 600 mixed cardiac surgeries annually, a hospital could improve patient outcomes by a reduction of 33 major complications, 76 minor complications, 54 surgical revisions, 194 transfusions, and 242 h of OR time. These outcomes correspond to a net annualized cost consequence savings of $5.38 million, with complication avoidance as the largest contributor.
CONCLUSIONS: This cost consequence framework and supportive modeling was used to evaluate the hospital economic impact of outcomes resulting from the usage of various hemostatic agents. These analyses support that cost savings can be achieved from routine use of a flowable hemostatic matrix, rather than a non-flowable topical hemostat, in cardiac surgery.

### PMID 25458164 (2014) — International journal of pediatric otorhinolaryngology
TITLE: Mucosal trauma induced apoptosis in guinea pig middle ear: comparision of hemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.10.017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to compare the effects of the absorbable gelatin sponge (AGS), microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPH), and Ankaferd on wound healing after middle ear trauma and to evaluate their ototoxicity in an experimental guinea pig model.
METHODS: Middle ear mucosal trauma was created in 21 healthy adult guinea pigs. MPH, Ankaferd, and AGS were applied into the right tympanic bulla of the guinea pigs (7 ears for each treatment modality). The left ears of the seven animals were used as the sham group. At the fourth postoperative week (28-30 days), the guinea pigs were decapitated. Apoptosis was investigated, and the expression of Bcl-xl, Apaf, p53, cytochrome 3, and caspase 3 were evaluated.
RESULTS: The Ankaferd and AGS groups demonstrated significantly lower epithelial thickness, inflammation, and capillary dilatation than did the control group (p&lt;0.001, &lt;0.001, /0.001, &lt;0.001/, 0.005, and 0.005, respectively). A statistically significant decrease in Bcl-xl staining was observed in the middle ears of animals treated with MPH (p=0.003). There was significantly higher caspase 3 expression in the Ankaferd and AGS groups than in the control group (p&lt;0.001 and p=0.002, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Light microscopy indicates that Ankaferd and AGS create less inflammation and increased caspase expression, which seems to induce inflammatory cell apoptosis. Ankaferd seems to be a promising hemostatic agent in otology.

### PMID 25842652 (2014) — AANA journal
TITLE: Anaphylactic reaction with avitene: a pediatric case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anaphylaxis is an unanticipated severe allergic reaction that can occur during a surgical procedure. A patient is exposed to myriad foreign substances during surgery, such as anesthetic drugs, blood products, and surgical materials, including a commonly used hemostatic agent called Avitene Microfibrillar Collagen Hemostat. Anaphylaxis is the most severe immune-mediated reaction, and it generally occurs on reexposure to a specific antigen. This case report details a case of an acute anaphylactic reaction in a 10-year-old boy presumed to be from Avitene used during a routine ear, nose, and throat surgery. There will be a discussion of the mechanism and management of anaphylaxis as well as a brief overview of hemostasis and hemostatic agents. Education of anesthesia providers and the surgical team may enable early detection and management of anaphylactic reactions that may improve patient outcomes and save lives.

### PMID 25070019 (2014) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Modified hemostatic technique using microfibrillar collagen hemostat in endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery: technical note.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.tn.2014-0024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat (MCH) is accepted as an effective topical hemostatic agent during endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery (EETS), particularly to achieve venous hemostasis; however, handling MCH may be troublesome because of its adherence to gloves and instruments. We describe here a method of "injection" of MCH suspension using a syringe applicator. This technique allows a rapid and precise delivery of MCH to the bleeding points and thereby results in effective hemostasis; in addition, it is easy to prepare and it is also inexpensive.

### PMID 25010101 (2014) — Spine
TITLE: Fatal intraoperative cardiac arrest after application of surgifoam into a bleeding iliac screw defect.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000000513 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Case report.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the presentation, management, and autopsy findings in a case of a fatal intraoperative cardiac arrest after application of an absorbable hemostatic agent into a bleeding iliac bone screw defect.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: To the authors' knowledge, this represents the first reported complication of intraoperative death associated with Surgifoam (Ethicon) thromboembolization to the heart and lung microcirculation after its application into a bleeding bone defect.
METHODS: A 56-year-old male was undergoing revision fusion surgery for pseudarthrosis after multilevel thoracolumbosacral fusion with pelvic fixation for degenerative scoliosis. Intraoperatively, upon removal of the right iliac screw, heavy venous bleeding was encountered, which was stopped after application of 10 mL of Surgifoam into the screw defect. Approximately 5 minutes later, the patient's end tidal CO2 dropped, and his pulse was lost. Epinephrine was administered and the patient was immediately turned to supine position and cardiopulmonary resuscitation initiated. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed unsuccessfully for 30 minutes at the end of which the patient was pronounced dead.
RESULTS: Autopsy findings revealed angulated particles of hemostatic agent with entrapped red blood cells partially to completely occluding small-to-medium-sized vessels of the heart and lungs. The cause of death was pulmonary and cardiac embolization of foreign material from the surgical screw defect to the vessels of the heart and lungs, significantly compromising respiration and blood flow causing sudden death.
CONCLUSION: Although Surgifoam is an excellent hemostatic agent for use in spinal surgery, it must be used with extreme caution in the setting of heavily bleeding bone defects after pedicle cannulation or removal of instrumentation. In cases when brisk venous bleeding is encountered, signifying potential compromise of an emissary vein, use of other hemostatic agents such as bone wax may be a safer option.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: N/A.

### PMID 24390955 (2013) — Acta medica Iranica
TITLE: Foreign body granuloma mimicking recurrent intracranial tumor: a very rare clinical entity.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Gelatin sponge, oxidized cellulose and microfibrillar collagen are used to achieve hemostasis during neurosurgical procedures. Hemostatic agents may produce clinically symptomatic, radiologically apparent mass lesions. The differential diagnosis should include the foreign body along with recurrent tumor. We present a case of intracranial hemostatic agents found in a 56-year-old male patient seven years after undergoing a craniotomy for a left posterior parietal convexity meningioma. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested the presence of a recurrent tumor. We emphasize that although it is rare, a granuloma due to a foreign body reaction can result in a false image of tumor recurrence.

### PMID 23332688 (2013) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Collagen hemostat significantly reduces time to hemostasis compared with cellulose: COBBANA, a single-center, randomized trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2012.05.033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This single-center, randomized trial compares the hemostatic effectiveness of microfibrillar collagen and oxidized cellulose in arterial bypass surgery.
METHODS: In patients undergoing arterial bypass surgery, 2 hemostats, microfibrillar collagen and oxidized cellulose, were randomly used to achieve hemostasis. The primary endpoint was the time to hemostasis. The secondary endpoints were the complication rate, mortality, number of hemostats required, handling, and adhesion.
RESULTS: Collagen achieved hemostasis significantly faster than cellulose, with considerably less hemostats. In addition, its ease of use was rated substantially better.
CONCLUSION: In arterial bypass surgery, microfibrillar collagen is more effective than oxidized cellulose in achieving hemostasis.

### PMID 23615385 (2013) — Spine
TITLE: Prevention of peridural fibrosis using a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug) soaked in absorbable gelatin sponge: an experimental comparative animal model.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0b013e318297c795 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Experimental study.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of peridural parecoxib-soaked absorbable gelatin sponge, and cellulose membrane on peridural fibrosis prevention in an animal model.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Postoperative peridural fibrosis is one of the causes of failed back surgery syndrome. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit the inflammatory response, while an absorbable gelatin sponge or cellulose membrane interposes between the dura and the paraspinal muscle to staunch the surgical bleeding. These mechanisms may prevent peridural fibrosis.
METHODS: Forty L5-L6 laminectomized adult Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly allocated into 4 groups. The high parecoxib group received 6 mg of parecoxib soaked into an absorbable gelatin sponge placed over the dura. The low parecoxib group was given 2 mg of parecoxib soaked into an absorbable gelatin sponge. The dura in the cellulose group was covered with a cellulose membrane, while the control group received normal saline drip before surgical wound closure. All rats were killed at 6 weeks for histopathological assessment. The fibroblast density, inflammatory cell density, fibrous adherence, and adverse events were quantified. The obtained results were analyzed statistically.
RESULTS: The respective mean fibroblast density in the high parecoxib, low parecoxib, cellulose, and control groups was 217.77 &#xb1; 51.76, 317.51 &#xb1; 126.92, 321.80 &#xb1; 90.94, and 328.48 &#xb1; 73.41 cells/mm&#xb2;, while the respective mean inflammatory cell density was 539.65 &#xb1; 236.52, 910.17 &#xb1; 242.59, 1011.84 &#xb1; 239.30, and 1261.78 &#xb1; 319.68 cells/mm&#xb2;. The mean fibroblast and inflammatory cell densities of the high parecoxib group were significantly lower than the control. The high parecoxib group also showed statistically less fibrous adherence than low parecoxib, cellulose, and control groups.
CONCLUSION: The high-dose parecoxib-soaked absorbable gelatin sponge can prevent peridural fibrosis without complications. The low-dose parecoxib and cellulose membrane provided no significant benefit vis-&#xe0;-vis prevention of peridural fibrosis, as adduced from the lack of any statistically significant difference between the test and control rats.

### PMID 23453132 (2013) — Journal of cranio-maxillo-facial surgery : official publication of the European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery
TITLE: Use of medical aural and encephalic glue-soaked gelfoam for frontal sinus repair: a single-centre experience.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2013.01.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Frontal sinus (FS) perforation is a common complication in frontal craniotomy. The primary goal of treatment is to seal the FS without destroying physiological function.
OBJECTIVE: This article describes a new FS cavity reconstruction technique using medical aural and encephalic glue (EC glue)-soaked gelfoam.
METHODS: Between 2007 and 2012, 118 patients underwent FS reconstruction using EC glue-soaked gelfoam. The FS cavity was reconstructed in all patients and no patient experienced intracranial infection, frontal sinusitis, or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage.
RESULTS: Restoring physiological function is the primary goal of FS reconstruction. Difficulty often arises in sealing the sinus opening, especially when the mucosa is damaged. Mucosal border dissection and electric coagulation of the mucosal laceration can help to reconstruct the mucosal cavity. Sealing the sinus with autogenous or exogenous material, such as fascia, bone flap or gelfoam carries increased risks of intracranial infection, frontal sinusitis, and CSF leakage in the short term, and increased the occurrence of a FS mucocoele in the long term. Gelfoam saturated with EC glue obtained good results.
CONCLUSION: We describe the application of gelfoam saturated with EC glue to treat an open FS with or without mucosal violation during frontal craniotomy. Gelfoam saturated with EC glue is a quick, effective, low-cost and reliable means of sealing the FS while preserving its physiological function.

### PMID 23377877 (2013) — Acta radiologica (Stockholm, Sweden : 1987)
TITLE: Interventional embolization of giant thoracic tumors before surgical resection.
DOI: 10.1258/ar.2012.120339 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Preoperative embolization of tumors is a well-established procedure that has been successfully applied in various clinical situations. Preoperative embolization can reduce the vascularity of tumors resulting in a clearer operative field, less difficult dissection, decreased blood loss, and, in some cases, a decrease in tumor size. However, few studies have been conducted regarding the preoperative embolization of giant thoracic tumors.
PURPOSE: To examine the effectiveness and safety of interventional embolization of giant thoracic tumors before surgical resection.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 14 consecutive patients with giant thoracic tumors received angiography and the feeding arteries of the tumors were embolized using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) particles and gelatin sponges 1 day before surgical resection. The patient records were retrospectively reviewed and data regarding diagnoses, embolization, and surgical resection were recorded.
RESULTS: Angiography revealed the feeding arteries of the tumors to be characterized by multiple branches and thickened vessel trunks with abnormal distal branches superimposed of the tumor shadow. Embolization was successfully without complications in all patients, and all feeding vessels of each tumor were occluded. Embolization reduced the severity of bleeding during surgery and decreased the difficulty of resection of the tumor. No intraoperative or postoperative complications occurred.
CONCLUSION: Interventional embolization is a safe and efficient method to facilitate the surgical resection of giant thoracic tumors.

### PMID 22918401 (2013) — Annals of plastic surgery
TITLE: Cranialization in a cohort of 154 consecutive patients with frontal sinus fractures (1987-2007): review and update of a compelling procedure in the selected patient.
DOI: 10.1097/SAP.0b013e3182468198 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Retrospective review of charts of 180 consecutive patients with frontal sinus fractures managed by plastic surgeons at the University of Kentucky between 1987 and 2007 was performed with institutional review board approval. Twenty-six charts did not meet the criteria. The remaining 154 records provided 1-to-20-year follow-up. The study included 34 patients who underwent cranialization and 120 patients who did not. A low-complication rate of 6% after cranialization is ascribed by the authors to meticulous sinus mucosal debridement; thorough obliteration of the frontal sinus outflow tract (with sterile gelatin sponge pledgets and bone chips from the outer cortex of the temporoparietal skull); and avoidance of avascular barriers, such as abdominal fat. As high-resolution computerized tomography with parasaggital views was introduced, an increasing ability to preoperatively define the extent of injury of the medial and lateral sinus floor was observed. The authors conclude selective use of cranialization is indicated.

### PMID 22530221 (2012) — American journal of orthopedics (Belle Mead, N.J.)
TITLE: Hemostatic matrix application after open synovectomy in a hemophilic patient.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Recurrent, spontaneous bleeding is common in patients with hemophilia. The joints are commonly and repeatedly affected, and this can result in chronic synovitis and joint damage. Synoviorthesis or synovectomy are indicated after failure of appropriate medical management. Hemostasis in the perioperative period is paramount in these patients. We report a case study of a patient with hemophilia A inhibitors undergoing open synovectomy complicated by postoperative bleeding. In addition to an infusion of bypassing agents due to the presence of inhibitors, a topical hemostatic agent, FLOSEAL, and absorbable Gelfoam were applied. Hemostasis was achieved rapidly. The patient recovered without complications.

### PMID 22467482 (2012) — Journal of neurological surgery. Part A, Central European neurosurgery
TITLE: Fibrillary structure is key for hemostasis: a similar effect of collagen fleece and oxidized cellulose on experimental hemorrhagic brain injury.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1309064 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The choice of the ideal hemostatic agent for intraoperative cerebral bleeding is under continuous debate. Our aim was to assess the influence of such materials on bleeding time in hemorrhagic cerebral contusions. We compared oxidized regenerated cellulose in fibrillar form (ORC) to microfibrillar collagen fleece (CF) in an experimental study.
METHODS: N=50 Sprague Dawley rats underwent a bilateral craniectomy. 3 separate standardized superficial cortical impacts were inflicted using a high-speed drill. Immediately after lesion placement, each of the 3 lesions was covered with (a) nothing (control), (b) ORC, or (c) CF. We observed the 3 lesions with a surgical microscope. The bleeding times were recorded for each cerebral lesion and compared using ANOVA test.
RESULTS: All traumatic lesions produced significant bleeding. The statistical analysis showed a clear reduction in bleeding time for groups treated with either ORC or CF compared to the control group. Lesions covered with ORC and CF showed no significant difference with regard to bleeding time.
CONCLUSIONS: ORC and CF significantly reduce blood loss from hemorrhagic contusions. Our data suggest that they effectively reduce bleeding time. We advocate the use of hemostatic material for limiting bleeding from superficial cortical lesions.

### PMID 22955407 (2012) — Orthopedics
TITLE: Preoperative embolization significantly decreases intraoperative blood loss during palliative surgery for spinal metastasis.
DOI: 10.3928/01477447-20120822-27 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Several studies have evaluated the efficacy of preoperative embolization in devascularizing tumors. However, no study has measured intraoperative blood loss in a single palliative surgery compared with a control group without preoperative embolization. The purpose of this retrospective study was to evaluate the efficacy of preoperative embolization on intraoperative blood loss in palliative decompression and instrumented surgery using a posterior approach for spinal metastasis. Between 2000 and 2010, forty-six patients underwent palliative decompression and instrumented surgery using a posterior approach for spinal metastasis in the thoracic and lumbar spine. Preoperative embolization was performed in 23 patients (embolization group), and surgery was performed within 3 days after embolization. The embolic materials used were polyvinyl alcohol particles, gelatin sponge, and metallic coils. Twenty-three patients did not undergo embolization (no embolization group). Pain and neurologic symptoms in all 46 patients were relieved postoperatively. Average intraoperative blood loss was 520 mL (range, 140-1380 mL) in the embolization group and 1128 mL (range, 100-3260 mL) in the no embolization group (P&lt;.05). In the embolization group, intraoperative blood loss was not correlated with the degree of tumor vascularization, completeness of embolization, or time between embolization and surgery. Intraoperative blood loss after preoperative embolization was less than half that after no preoperative embolization.

### PMID 22609726 (2012) — Spine
TITLE: The frequency and treatment of dural tears and cerebrospinal fluid leakage in 266 patients with thoracic myelopathy caused by ossification of the ligamentum flavum.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0b013e31824586a8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective review.
OBJECTIVE: To perform a single-institution analysis of incidence, treatment, and clinical outcome in patients with thoracic ossification of the ligamentum flavum (OLF) who experienced dural tears and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: There is a paucity of clinical reports focusing on dural tears and CSF leakage after thoracic OLF surgery. Because dural adhesion and dural ossification are common features of thoracic OLF, the incidence of CSF leakage in OLF patients is high and represents a significant clinical challenge.
METHODS: A total of 266 patients with thoracic OLF were admitted to our hospital from 1995 to 2011. Each patient's medical records were reviewed to identify cases of dural tears and CSF leakage. Information on therapeutic strategy used to repair the dural tears and complications related to CSF leakage was extracted.
RESULTS: The incidence of dural tears and CSF leakage in OLF patients was 32% (85/266). The incidence of dural ossification was 25.2%. The dural tears were repaired with a range of materials, including gelatin sponge, muscle/fascia, artificial dura, silk suture, and fibrin glue. The intraoperative repair procedure did not resolve CSF leakage in 65 cases, and 16 of those cases experienced complications related to the continued CSF leakage, including CSF pseudocyst, wound dehiscence, and meningitis. Fifty-eight patients with CSF leakage were eventually cured by a series of comprehensive treatments, which included prone position, continuous pressure by sandbag, ultrasound-guided puncture, and aspiration. Only 7 patients required reoperation.
CONCLUSION: Dural ossification was the main reason for dural tears. In all, 78 of the 85 patients with CSF leakage or dural tear were successfully cured. The success rate was 91.8%, which indicated that a series of comprehensive treatments was an effective strategy to treat these patients.

### PMID 23021035 (2012) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: Intraoperative anaphylaxis to gelatin in topical hemostatic agents during anterior spinal fusion: a case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2012.08.425 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: The use of topical hemostatic agents is widespread and has been shown to reduce bleeding during a wide variety of surgical procedures. Nonetheless, as biologically active agents, there is potential for allergic reactions to these products.
PURPOSE: This is a report of intraoperative anaphylaxis to gelatin associated with the use of two topical hemostatic agents.
STUDY DESIGN: Case report. There is no outside funding or potential conflict of interest.
PATIENT SAMPLE: A patient with anaphylaxis during anterior spinal fusion.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Laboratory assays for tryptase, gelatin-specific immunoglobulin E&#xa0;(IgE), and total IgE.
METHODS: A 14-year-old male with myelomeningocele and scoliosis was treated with anterior spinal fusion from T12 to L3. Gelfoam sponges were applied during the preparation of the disc spaces. Approximately 1 hour later, Floseal hemostatic matrix was applied to a briskly bleeding screw hole in the L3 vertebral body, and the patient experienced an abrupt onset of hypotension and ventilatory difficulty. Epinephrine, dexamethasone, and blood products were administered for hemodynamic support while the surgical site was closed. Removal of the drapes revealed a widespread erythematous rash, and the patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit. When stable&#xa0;3 days later, he returned to the operating room for completion of the spinal fusion.
RESULTS: Postoperative laboratory assays were sent that revealed elevated levels of tryptase, total IgE, porcine, and bovine gelatin-specific IgE. The patient was counseled to avoid gelatin-containing products. At 6-month follow-up, his instrumented spine was radiographically fused and he reported no further allergic issues.
CONCLUSIONS: Anaphylaxis may occur because of animal gelatin components of topical hemostatic agents. Previous reports have focused on the thrombin components. Care should be taken in the administration of these products, particularly in the atopic individual.

### PMID 22040778 (2011) — Transfusion and apheresis science : official journal of the World Apheresis Association : official journal of the European Society for Haemapheresis
TITLE: Topical hemostatic agents in surgical practice.
DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2011.10.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Hemostasis is of critical importance in achieving a positive outcome in any surgical intervention. Different hemostatic methods can be employed and topical hemostatic agents are used in a wide variety of surgical settings. Procoagulation agents have different hemostatic properties and the choice of a specific one is determined by the type of surgical procedure and bleeding. Hemostatic treatments include fibrin sealants, microfibrillar collagen, gelatin hemostatic agents, oxidized regenerated cellulose and cyanoacrylates adhesives. Surgeons should be familiar with topical hemostatics to ensure an appropriate use. Our purpose is to illustrate the currently available agents, their mechanism of action and their effective applications, in order to ensure an optimal use in operating room.

### PMID 22019682 (2011) — Neurology India
TITLE: Absorbable gelatin sponge for postoperative dressing: a novel use to reduce pain and bleeding during dressing removal after neurosurgical procedures.
DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.86576 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 21869584 (2011) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Transarterial embolization with use of lipiodol and gelatin sponge for active nasal bleeding from hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis in the pituitary gland.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.51.592 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 58-year-old man presented with a very rare case of pituitary metastasis from hepatocellular carcinoma with active nasal bleeding which was treated by transarterial embolization using ethiodized oil (Lipiodol) and gelatin sponge. After treatment, nasal bleeding ceased and tumor size decreased. The prognosis for patients with pituitary metastases is very poor, so aggressive treatment is recommended to alleviate symptoms. This minimally invasive approach may be a reasonable therapeutic option for pituitary metastases.

### PMID 21422311 (2011) — Archives of otolaryngology--head &amp; neck surgery
TITLE: Injection medialization laryngoplasty in children.
DOI: 10.1001/archoto.2011.24 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To review our experience with vocal fold injection medialization in children.
DESIGN: Retrospective case series.
SETTING: Tertiary care academic children's hospital.
PATIENTS: All pediatric patients at our institution who underwent injection laryngoplasty for vocal fold medialization from 2003 to 2009.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Age, sex, indication for injection, injection material, surgical and anesthetic technique, outcomes including effect on voice and swallowing, and complications.
RESULTS: Thirteen patients underwent 27 injections. Mean patient age was 8.0 years (range, 1.3-18.0 years). The causes of glottic insufficiency included prolonged intubation (6 patients, 46%), patent ductus arteriosus ligation (2 patients, 15%), other cardiac surgery (2 patients, 15%), neck surgery or trauma (2 patients, 15%), and postviral status (1 patient, 8%). Eight patients had vocal fold paralysis or paresis; 3 had vocal fold atrophy; and 2 had vocal fold scarring. Indications for surgery included hoarseness (11 patients), aspiration (5 patients), and dysphagia without aspiration (1 patient). Materials injected included Gelfoam (n = 13), Radiesse Voice (n = 10), and Radiesse Voice Gel (n = 4). The average number of injections per patient was 2.1 (range, 1-9). Patients experienced improvement in symptoms (subjective or objective) after injection in 24 of 27 cases (89%); 15 of 16 injections in patients with hoarseness led to improvement (94%); and 11 of 13 injections in patients with dysphagia or aspiration led to improvement (85%). One patient experienced 2 days of inspiratory stridor postoperatively, which resolved spontaneously. There were no other complications.
CONCLUSIONS: This study supports injection laryngoplasty as a safe and effective intervention for children with glottic insufficiency. Further prospective studies are necessary to confirm these findings.

### PMID 21181543 (2011) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Low-grade CSF leaks in endoscopic trans-sphenoidal pituitary surgery: efficacy of a simple and fully synthetic repair with a hydrogel sealant.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-010-0862-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intra-operative CSF leak during endoscopic trans-sphenoidal surgery is not uncommon. Surgical repair with a variety of autologous grafts, rigid buttresses and CSF diversion techniques that add time and complexity have been reported.
OBJECTIVE: To describe a simple and purely synthetic closure for low-grade CSF leaks following endoscopic trans-sphenoidal pituitary surgery.
METHODS: A retrospective review of all endoscopic trans-sphenoidal surgery undertaken for pituitary pathology between 2005 and 2010 was carried out. The grade of CSF leak and success of graded repair was noted. Patients with no CSF leak (grade 0) had gelatin sponge placed in the tumour cavity. In those with low-grade CSF leak through small arachnoid defects (grade 1), repair was carried out using gelatin sponge and hydrogel sealant overlay. CSF diversion was not employed for low-grade CSF leaks.
RESULTS: Of the 255 endoscopic trans-sphenoidal surgeries, 158 (62%) had no leak (grade 0) and 74 (29%) had a low-grade leak (grade 1). Repairs in all cases were of grade 0, and all but two cases of grade 1 CSF leak were successful at a mean follow-up of 29 months. The 2 (2.7%) post-operative CSF leaks were seen within 6 weeks of surgery. Both cases were related to bouts of sneezing and were repaired using further trans-sphenoidal surgery and/or lumbar CSF diversion.
CONCLUSIONS: A simple purely synthetic repair of low-grade CSF leaks is described. This repair is safe and comparable in efficacy whilst avoiding the morbidity related to more complex sellar reconstructions previously described.

### PMID 21106141 (2011) — The Journal of laryngology and otology
TITLE: Management of intra-operative cerebrospinal fluid leak following endoscopic trans-sphenoidal pituitary surgery.
DOI: 10.1017/S0022215110002483 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Cerebrospinal fluid leakage is the most common complication of endoscopic trans-sphenoidal pituitary surgery. However, there is no uniformly accepted way of managing this complication when it occurs intra-operatively. This paper describes a quick, simple technique, involving layered fibrin glue and gelatin sponge, which does not compromise post-operative patient follow up.
METHOD: Retrospective review of all endoscopic pituitary surgery cases conducted at a single institution since the introduction of this technique in 2002.
RESULTS: A total of 120 endoscopic pituitary operations were performed (96 primary procedures and 24 revisions). All intra-operative cerebrospinal fluid leaks were managed using the described method, with a failure rate of 3.6 per cent. The overall post-operative leakage rate was 1.7 per cent.
CONCLUSION: This simple, conservative technique avoids the need for further dissection and the use of non-absorbable foreign material, and has a low incidence of post-operative cerebrospinal fluid leakage.

### PMID 21167039 (2010) — BMC surgery
TITLE: The effect of three hemostatic agents on early bone healing in an animal model.
DOI: 10.1186/1471-2482-10-37 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Resorbable bone hemostasis materials, oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) and microfibrillar collagen (MFC), remain at the site of application for up to 8 weeks and may impair osteogenesis. Our experimental study compared the effect of a water-soluble alkylene oxide copolymer (AOC) to ORC and MFC versus no hemostatic material on early bone healing.
METHODS: Two circular 2.7 mm non-critical defects were made in each tibia of 12 rabbits. Sufficient AOC, ORC or MFC was applied to achieve hemostasis, and effectiveness recorded. An autologous blood clot was applied to control defects. Rabbits were sacrificed at 17 days, tibiae excised and fixed. Bone healing was quantitatively measured by micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) expressed as fractional bone volume, and qualitatively assessed by histological examination of decalcified sections.
RESULTS: Hemostasis was immediate after application of MFC and AOC, after 1-2 minutes with ORC, and &gt;5 minutes for control. At 17 days post-surgery, micro-CT analysis showed near-complete healing in control and AOC groups, partial healing in the ORC group and minimal healing in the MFC group. Fractional bone volume was 8 fold greater in the control and AOC groups than in the MFC group (0.42 &#xb1; 0.06, 0.40 &#xb1; 0.03 vs 0.05 &#xb1; 0.01, P &lt; 0.001) and over 1.5-fold greater than in the ORC group (0.25 &#xb1; 0.03, P &lt; 0.05). By histology, MFC remained at the application site with minimal healing at the defect margins and early fibrotic tissue within the defect. ORC-treated defects showed partial healing but with early fibrotic tissue in the marrow space. Conversely, control and AOC-treated defects demonstrated newly formed woven bone rich in cellular activity with no evidence of AOC remaining at the application site.
CONCLUSIONS: Early healing appeared to be impaired by the presence of MFC and impeded by the presence of ORC. In contrast, AOC did not inhibit bone healing and suggest that AOC may be a better bone hemostatic material for procedures where bony fusion is critical and immediate hemostasis required.

### PMID 21116358 (2010) — Indian journal of urology : IJU : journal of the Urological Society of India
TITLE: Evolution of hemostatic agents in surgical practice.
DOI: 10.4103/0970-1591.70574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Topical hemostatic agents are used in a wide variety of surgical settings, and the evolution of this class of surgical tools is an interesting topic. We reviewed and outlined the historical progress of topical hemostats into present day surgery and urology, and highlight opportunities for future research.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A MEDLINE search of all available literature concerning several classes of topical hemostatic agents was performed. Fibrins sealants, Gelatin sponge hemostatics, cyanoacrylate adhesives, oxidized regenerated cellulose, and microfibrillar collagen were included. References were chosen from a broad range of surgical literature.
RESULTS: Topical hemostatic agents have historically taken advantage of a wide variety of mechanisms for hemostasis. Fibrin sealants have a rich history and large potential for further applications. Gelatin sponge hemostatics have been widely used since their introduction, but have changed little. Cyanoacrylate adhesives have a unique mechanism and opportunity for novel applications of existing products. Oxidized cellulose was original in the use of plant-based components. Microfibrillar collagen hemostats have evolved to a wide variety of formats.
CONCLUSIONS: A review of the evolution of topical hemostatic agents highlights opportunities for potential novel research. Fibrin sealants may have the most opportunity for advancement, and understanding the history of these products is useful. With the drive in urology for minimally invasive surgical techniques, adaptation of topical hemostatic agents to this surgical approach would be valuable and offers an opportunity for novel contributions.

### PMID 20823648 (2010) — Internal medicine (Tokyo, Japan)
TITLE: Foreign body granulomatous change from absorbable gelatin sponge and microcoil embolization after a guidewire-induced perforation in the distal coronary artery.
DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.49.3750 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report an autopsy case of treatment by absorbable gelatin sponge and microcoil embolization after perforation of the distal coronary artery by guidewire. Histological examination revealed a foreign body granuloma in the coronary artery with embolization. Foreign body reaction to absorbable gelatin sponge seemed to be stronger than that to the microcoil.

### PMID 19685251 (2010) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Two-bone flap craniotomy for the transpetrosal-presigmoid approach to avoid a bony defect in the periauricular area after surgery on petroclival lesions: technical note.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-009-0221-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors describe a two-bone-flap craniotomy technique to avoid the bone defect caused by the transpetrosal-presigmoid approach. Briefly, this technique includes three steps. The first step is to elevate a temporoparietal bone flap located superiorly to the transverse and sigmoid sinuses. The second step is to dissect the transverse and sigmoid sinuses away from the bone by inserting a gelatin sponge. This maneuver provides hemostasis and protects the sinuses from injury. The third step is to cut a second bone flap including part of the temporal bone and the outer table of the mastoid bone with a high-speed drill system. After the operation, the two bone flaps are fixed in place with titanium osteosynthesis fixation material. This approach provides a simple, easy, and safe technique for the transpetrosal-presigmoid approach. The technique has been performed in 83 patients treated for petroclival neoplasms with excellent cosmetic results.

### PMID 20113940 (2010) — Journal of the American College of Surgeons
TITLE: Safety and immunogenicity observations pooled from eight clinical trials of recombinant human thrombin.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2009.09.042 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: We evaluated safety and immunogenicity observations pooled from 8 clinical trials of recombinant human thrombin (rThrombin), an active topical hemostatic agent.
STUDY DESIGN: Recombinant thrombin was applied with an absorbable gelatin sponge or spray applicator during a surgical procedure (day 1). Adverse events and laboratory parameters were monitored until study end (day 29). Immunogenicity was evaluated after study completion on plasma samples collected at baseline and on day 29.
RESULTS: Studies included 583 rThrombin-treated patients (median age, 59 years; 54% men). Surgical procedures included: spinal, 33% of patients; hepatic resection, 14%; peripheral arterial bypass, 23%; arteriovenous graft formation for hemodialysis access, 18%; and skin graft after burn wound excision, 12%. Adverse events reported for &gt;or= 10% patients included incision site pain, procedural pain, nausea, constipation, pyrexia, anemia, insomnia, vomiting, and pruritus. Five of 552 patients developed antibodies to rThrombin (0.9%; 95% CI, 0.3 to 2.1; day 29); antibodies did not neutralize the biologic activity of native human thrombin. At baseline, 12 patients had pre-existing, antibodies recognizing rThrombin (12 of 552; 2.2%; 95% CI, 1.1 to 3.8); these patients had no previous exposure to rThrombin and their antibody titer did not increase &gt;or= 1.0 unit (&gt;or= 10-fold) at day 29.
CONCLUSIONS: Results from 8 clinical trials collectively demonstrated that rThrombin is well tolerated in numerous surgical settings when used as a topical adjunct to hemostasis. Adverse events and changes in laboratory parameters were consistent with commonly reported postoperative events. Less than 1% of patients developed antibodies to rThrombin; the antibodies did not neutralize native human thrombin.

### PMID 22282693 (2010) — Journal of blood medicine
TITLE: Thrombin use in surgery: an evidence-based review of its clinical use.
DOI: 10.2147/JBM.S6622 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Retracted Publication
ABSTRACT: When surgical ligation of bleeding fails, or is not possible, surgeons rely on a number of hemostatic aids, including thrombin. This review discusses the history, pharmacology and clinical application of thrombin as a surgical hemostat. The initial thrombin was bovine in origin, but its use has been complicated by the formation of antibodies that cross-react with human coagulation factors. This has been associated with life-threatening bleeding and in some circumstances anaphylaxis and death. Human thrombin, isolated from pooled plasma of donors, was developed in an effort to minimize these risks, but its downsides are its limited availability and the potential for transmitting blood-borne pathogens. Recently a recombinant thrombin has been developed, and approved for use by the FDA. It has the advantage of being minimally antigenic and devoid of the risk of viral transmission. Thrombin is often used in conjunction with other hemostatic aids, including absorbable agents such as Gelfoam, and with fibrinogen in fibrin glues. The last part of this review will discuss these agents in detail, and review their clinical applications.

### PMID 19404570 (2009) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Management strategies of intercavernous sinus bleeding during transsphenoidal surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-009-0356-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Transsphenoidal surgery has been well established as an effective primary treatment for tumours of the sellar region. During the dural opening, the prominent intercavernous sinus poses limitations for this approach and may contribute to incomplete tumour resections.
METHOD: Based on our experience from 940 cases of conventional transsphenoidal surgery, we have developed a stepwise protocol for achieving bleeding control in 72 cases (7.7%) that had prominent anterior intercavernous sinus.
FINDINGS: A custom-made 45-degree right- or left-angled bipolar coagulator (38 cases) or Landolt bipolar coagulator (29 cases; Aesculp, Tuttlingen, Germany) was inserted into the small dural opening, and both of the dural layers were coagulated together so that the potential space between the endoosteal layer and meningeal layer could be sealed, and the dural opening could be extended. When the anterior portion of the medial wall of the cavernous sinus was accidentally opened, we then placed a small piece of oxidised regenerated cellulose (Surgicel; Johnson &amp; Johnson, North Yorkshire, UK) at the opening of the medial wall of the cavernous sinus and coagulated both dural layers together starting from the sellar floor side with a custom-made 45-degree angled bipolar coagulator. For the relatively large opening of the cavernous sinus, a microfibrillar collagen haemostat (Avitene; MedChem Products, Woburn, MA) or fleece-coated fibrin glue (TachoComb; Nycomed Austria, Linz, Austria) patch was applied over the opened cavernous sinus with gentle compression and was found to be effective in most cases. Rarely, direct suture of the opened medial wall of the cavernous sinus was necessary in five cases.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a stepwise approach to overcome unusual bleedings from the prominent intercavernous sinus during conventional transsphenoidal surgery. Our surgical experience reveals that these methods can be very effective for the control of sinus bleeding.

### PMID 19196066 (2009) — Journal of endourology
TITLE: Safety and efficacy of a surgeon-prepared gelatin hemostatic agent compared with FloSeal for hemostasis in laparoscopic partial nephrectomy.
DOI: 10.1089/end.2008.0535 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Postoperative hemorrhage is a significant risk after laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (LPN). Hemostatic agents have become increasingly popular as adjuncts to renorrhaphy because of their potential to minimize intracorporeal suturing and lessen warm ischemia time. The objective of our study was to compare the safety and efficacy of an inexpensive, surgeon-prepared hemostatic agent with that of a more expensive, commercially prepared one.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Between August 2006 and July 2008, 40 LPNs were performed by a single surgeon at two separate institutions. A commercially available gelatin matrix thrombin, FloSeal, was used at one institution (cohort 1, n=19), while a less expensive, surgeon-prepared gelatin hemostatic agent, Gelfoam, was used at a separate institution (cohort 2, n=21) over the same period. Outcomes, including estimated blood loss (EBL), operative time, transfusion rates, and complications, were compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: The median operative and warm ischemia times in cohorts 1 and 2 were 150 (range 132-192) and 16 (range 12-29) minutes and 150 (range 120-300) and 20 (range 14-37) minutes, respectively (P = 0.16, 0.07). The median EBL was 150 mL (range 50-250) and 100 mL (range 50-1000) (P = 0.09), and the postoperative transfusion rate was 0% and 4.8% (P = 0.33). Median LOS was 2 (range 2-7) and 3 (range 2-7) days (P = 0.62). Potential cost saved per case was $200 to $450.
CONCLUSION: As health care costs continue to rise, delivering high-quality care in a cost-effective manner is paramount. Our study demonstrates similar safety and efficacy of a surgeon-prepared, cheaper gelatin matrix compared with FloSeal. Generic hemostatic agents are a viable alternative to more expensive agents in institutions in which commercially available agents are not available or cost prohibitive.

### PMID 19589406 (2009) — Cirugia espanola
TITLE: [Topical hemostatic devices in surgery: between science and marketing].
DOI: 10.1016/S0009-739X(09)71624-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Review
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic agents have been used in surgery with varying degrees of success. These agents include oxidized cellulose, absorbable gelatin sponges, microfibrillar collagen and fibrin seals. Fibrin seals have become widely used as they improve perioperative hemostasis, reduce the need for red blood cell transfusions and prevent biliary leaks. Their widespread use, however, contrasts with the scarcity of data from controlled studies to support their clinical effectiveness. Therefore, a prospective, randomized, controlled, single-center study was performed in 300 patients who underwent elective hepatectomy, with and without application of fibrin seal on the raw liver surface. None of the variables evaluated (blood loss, transfusions, biliary fistulas and postoperative results) differed between the two groups. We conclude that the application of fibrin seal does not seem justified and that discontinuing its routine use would substantially reduce costs. The use of a new agent, Tachosil, is supported by a single multicenter, prospective, randomized, controlled trial, which is limited by the small number of patients and by the fact that the variable analyzed--time from application to hemostasis--may not be clinically relevant.

### PMID 19545072 (2009) — Archivos de cardiologia de Mexico
TITLE: [Percutaneous transluminal septal myocardial ablation in patients with obstructive septal hypertrophic myocardiopathy. Acute results and 3-year follow-up].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To report the acute and Long term results of percutaneous transluminal septal myocardial ablation (PTSMA), for the treatment of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM). PTSMA has been considered as an alternative to surgical treatment in patients with HOCM and drug-refractory symptoms or unresponsive to the implantation of a pacemaker. Acute response is generally satisfactory, but long term results have not been sufficiently described.
METHODS: We did PTSMA in eight patients, with functional class III-IV of NYHA, and with a transaortic gradient at rest &gt; or = 40 mmHg. ALcohol was administered to seven of them, and small absorbant gelatin sponge particles in the other. Acute and long term clinical and echocardiographical follow-up was done.
RESULTS: During the procedure the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) gradient at rest was reduced significantly and the systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve (SAM) also. Five remained on functional class I, and two in class II. One patient died one year later of sepsis unrelated to the cardiopathy.
CONCLUSIONS: PTSMA is an excellent non surgical option to reduce the LOVT gradient and the consequent symptoms in this patients. Long term follow-up shows they remain in a good functional class and their evolution is free of cardiovascular complications.

### PMID 19246867 (2009) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Rapid reduction of syrinx associated with traumatic intracranial hypotension by direct surgery: case report.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.49.66 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A woman in her early twenties presented with cerebellar tonsillar herniation with syrinx in the cervicothoracic spinal cord manifesting as postural headache after suffering trauma to the hip. She was treated under a diagnosis of traumatic intracranial hypotension. Cranial magnetic resonance (MR) imaging demonstrated tonsillar herniation to the upper rim of the C1 lamina, associated with effacement of the basal cisterns and flattening of the pons against the clivus, sagging of the optic chiasm, and protrusion of the pituitary gland into the suprasellar cistern. Spinal MR imaging and computed tomography (CT) myelography showed cervicothoracic syrinx and arachnoid diverticulum. Three applications of epidural blood patches produced no improvement. Surgery identified cerebrospinal fluid leakage from two small holes in the spinal dural sac, slightly proximal from the origin of the left L1 root sleeve, and arachnoid diverticulum. These two holes were sutured and a few sheets of gelatin sponge were placed around the arachnoid diverticulum and sealed with fibrin glue. The cervicothoracic syrinx was reduced significantly and tonsillar herniation disappeared within 10 days. Simple surgical repair of the dural tears may rapidly improve symptoms and imaging findings in patients with tonsillar herniation caused by traumatic intracranial hypotension.

### PMID 18495543 (2009) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: Increased postoperative cervical myelopathy and cord compression resulting from the use of Gelfoam.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2008.03.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: The immunogenicity of Gelfoam (Pharmacia and Upjohn, Kalamazoo, MI) or microfibrillar collagen, applied during laminectomy, may promote postoperative swelling and significant neural compression.
PURPOSE: To document how Gelfoam contributes to marked cord/root compression on unenhanced/enhanced postoperative magnetic resonance (MR) scans.
STUDY DESIGN/SETTING: This is a case report from the United States.
PATIENT SAMPLE: A case report.
OUTCOME MEASURE: The patient's neurological status was assessed using Nurick Grades.
METHODS: A 73-year-old female with moderate myeloradiculopathy (Nurick Grade III) and MR/computed tomography (CT)-documented cord compression underwent a C6/C7 laminectomy (undercutting of C5-T1) with Gelfoam applied to the laminectomy site, followed by a C2-T2 fusion for instability (iliac autograft, Beta TriCalcium Phosphate).
RESULTS: The patient improved for the first postoperative week (Nurick Grade 0-I), but deteriorated over the successive second and third postoperative weeks (Nurick Grade III). When the 3-week postoperative MR study documented marked dorsolateral cord compression at the laminectomy site, likely attributed to a postoperative seroma/hematoma, a second operation was performed. At surgery, no significant seroma/hematoma was found. Rather, markedly engorged Gelfoam densely adherent to and compressing the underlying dura was encountered; this was meticulously removed under the operating microscope using a small nerve hook. Postoperatively, the patient immediately improved. As the intraoperative culture revealed Acinetobacter baumannii, she required 6 weeks of intravenous Ertapenem (1-betamethyl-carbapenem). The MR scan performed on the third postoperative week revealed no residual cord compromise.
CONCLUSIONS: Delayed postoperative deterioration in a 73-year-old female was attributed to reactive swelling/engorgement of Gelfoam at the C6-C7 laminectomy site.

### PMID 19151266 (2009) — Anesthesia and analgesia
TITLE: Thromboemboli, acute right heart failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation after intraoperative application of a topical hemostatic matrix.
DOI: 10.1213/ane.0b013e31818d3f48 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic agents are frequently used in spine surgeries to control or reduce bleeding. Although there are a number of commercially available products, at our institution, an absorbable gelatin powder (Surgifoam) is mixed with bovine thrombin and used for this purpose. We report the case of a patient undergoing a posterior spinal fusion for scoliosis who developed acute right heart failure, cardiac arrest, and disseminated intravascular coagulation after probable intravascular hemostatic agent-induced emboli. Clinicians need to be aware of this potentially deadly complication associated with topical hemostatic agents.

### PMID 18981845 (2008) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Comparative safety and efficacy of topical hemostatic agents in a rat neurosurgical model.
DOI: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000327031.98098.DD | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Adequate hemostasis is extremely important in neurosurgery, commonly requiring the use of topical hemostatic agents. Apart from variable efficacy, the residual presence of these agents may cause foreign body reaction, infection, and delayed bone growth. This study compares the safety and efficacy of commonly used agents with a newly approved agent, Arista (microporous polysaccharide hemospheres; Medafor, Inc., Minneapolis, MN).
METHODS: A brain tissue defect was created in 228 Wistar outbred rats, and either no agent (negative control), Arista, Surgicel (oxidized cellulose; Ethicon, Inc., Somerville, NJ), Avitene (microfibrillar collagen; Alcon, Inc., Humacao, PR), FloSeal (gelatin matrix thrombin sealant; Baxter Healthcare Corp., Deerfield, IL), or kaolin (positive control) was implanted. Time to hemostasis was documented. The animals were sacrificed at different intervals up to 28 days, and presence of residual material and foreign body reaction was determined.
RESULTS: Arista, Avitene, FloSeal, and Surgicel performed better (defined as complete hemostasis within 1 minute) than control (no treatment). Residual material was not present at any time with Arista, markedly contrasting with the presence of residual material in 100% of lesions in the Avitene, FloSeal, and Surgicel groups on Day 14. Avitene and FloSeal also demonstrated a propensity for causing granuloma formation, whereas Arista and Surgicel showed no such evidence.
CONCLUSION: Each of these hemostatic agents was effective in controlling bleeding in the majority of standardized neurosurgical lesions. Arista degrades more rapidly than Surgicel, Avitene, and FloSeal and does not result in any foreign body reaction.

### PMID 19292252 (2008) — Orthopedics
TITLE: Microporous polysaccharide hemospheres do not inhibit bone healing compared to bone wax or microfibrillar collagen.
DOI: 10.3928/01477447-20080301-10 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostats may reduce bone bleeding but the presence of residual matter may inhibit bone growth. We compared a recently approved hemostat, microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (Arista AH, Medafor Inc, Minneapolis, Minnesota), with conventional hemostatic agents in a rabbit calvarial model. Standard defects were created and microfibrillar collagen (Avitene; C.R. Bard Inc, Murray Hill, New Jersey), bonewax, or microporous polysaccharide hemospheres was applied. Bone growth was evaluated after fluorescent labeling the mineralization front. At 7 weeks bonewax and microfibrillar collagen had reduced bone growth compared to control or microporous polysaccharide hemospheres. Microporous polysaccharide hemospheres and control animals also had reduced rabbit calvarial defects compared to bonewax or microfibrillar collagen.

### PMID 18590447 (2008) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Postoperative acute disseminated encephalomyelitis after exposure to microfibrillar collagen hemostat.
DOI: 10.3171/JNS/2008/109/7/0149 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat, known by its trade name Avitene, has been used in neurosurgery for decades. Complications with this product have been documented in other surgical specialties and described as mostly immune-mediated foreign-body reactions that can lead to a granulomatous reaction. There has never been a case of disseminated encephalomyelitis associated with this topical hemostatic agent. In this report the authors present a case of postoperative acute disseminated encephalomyelitis after exposure to Avitene. Possible pathophysiological mechanisms are discussed and the pertinent literature is reviewed.

### PMID 19267971 (2008) — Zhonghua er bi yan hou tou jing wai ke za zhi = Chinese journal of otorhinolaryngology head and neck surgery
TITLE: [Glossopharyngeal neurotomy through laterocervical approach to treat idiopathic glossopharyngeal neuralgia].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To introduce a modified laterocervical approach for glossopharyngeal neurotomy to treat idiopathic glossopharyngeal neuralgia.
METHODS: The clinical data, the operative technique, the operative effects and (the results of) follow-up of 12 patients were presented. Through reviewing pertinent literatures, the therapeutic advancement of glossopharyngeal neuralgia and the modified technique of laterocervical approach for glossopharyngeal neurotomy were discussed. New idea on operations, of which the use of insulation coverings when cauterizing the inferior ganglion of glossopharyngeal nerve and Jacobson nerve were brought. Homonymous superior laryngeal nerve was excised at the same time.
RESULTS: All patients (the cases) were followed-up for 3 months to 3 years with an median of 15 months. Among the 12 patients suffered from glossopharyngeal neuralgia, 11 patients were satisfied with the outcomes and remained disease free after surgical treatment. The remission rate of pain was 100.0%, complete remission rate of pain was 91.7%. Only a few patients had complications. Intraoperative leakage of cerebrospinal fluid was obstructed with gelatin sponge and pasted with mucilage in 1 case and no complication appeared in the convalescence stage. Postoperatively, facial palsy was found in 1 case which was self-cured after a week, postoperative voice depression in 1 case, and foreign body sensation in 2 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Laterocervical approach for glossopharyngeal neurotomy is an available method to treat idiopathic glossopharyngeal neuralgia.

### PMID 18497493 (2008) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Endovascular treatment for traumatic ear bleeding associated with acute epidural hematoma.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.48.208 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 44-year-old woman presented with intractable ear bleeding after head trauma. Computed tomography showed a longitudinal petrosal bone fracture and a mastoid air cell hematoma with a small acute epidural hematoma. Conservative therapy for more than 12 hours failed to stop the bleeding, so we planned endovascular treatment rather than open surgery. Angiography of the external carotid artery demonstrated continuous extravasation of contrast material from the middle meningeal artery near the fracture line in the temporal bone. Intravascular embolization was performed using polyvinyl alcohol particles and gelatin sponge pieces, resulting in immediate successful hemostasis. Endovascular management should be considered for the treatment of intractable traumatic ear bleeding.

### PMID 18241525 (2008) — Current medical research and opinion
TITLE: Phase 3, randomized, double-blind study of plasma-derived human thrombin versus bovine thrombin in achieving hemostasis in patients undergoing surgery.
DOI: 10.1185/030079908X273426 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of plasma-derived human thrombin and bovine thrombin for achieving hemostasis during surgery.
METHODS: Adults (N = 305) with &gt; or = 1 mild or moderate bleeding site not manageable by conventional modalities during elective cardiovascular, neurologic, or general surgical procedures at multiple study centers were randomized to human (n = 153) or bovine (n = 152) thrombin, applied topically with an absorbable gelatin sponge. Bleeding was assessed 3, 6, and 10 min post-application. Other evaluations included laboratory assessments, vital signs, blood loss, blood transfusions, time in specialty-care units, procedure duration, and length of hospital stay. Blood samples for antibody assessment were collected at baseline and postoperative week 5.
RESULTS: The proportion of patients achieving hemostasis within 10 min (primary outcome) was equivalent for human and bovine thrombin (97.4 vs. 97.4%, respectively; ratio, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.96-1.05). The proportions of patients achieving hemostasis at 6 min (94.8 vs. 92.8%) and 3 min (73.2 vs. 72.4%) were also equivalent. No clinically meaningful differences were noted for other variables. The products had similar adverse event profiles. More patients (12.7%) who received bovine thrombin demonstrated seroconversion for &gt; or = 1 of the 4 antibodies assayed than patients who received human thrombin (3.3%). No patients in the human thrombin group developed seroconversion for anti-human thrombin or anti-human factor V/Va antibodies. Limitations of this study include the lack of a placebo-control group, the potential for inter-surgeon variability, and the fact that antibody assessment was not evaluable in all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma-derived human thrombin and bovine thrombin were equivalent in achieving hemostasis within 10, 6, and 3 min and had comparable safety profiles. None of the patients receiving human thrombin developed seroconversion for antibodies to any of the human antigens.

### PMID 17379329 (2008) — International journal of cardiology
TITLE: Use of the Amplatzer Vascular Plug for treatment of coronary steal.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2006.11.203 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: The left internal mammary artery (LIMA) is a widely used conduit during coronary artery bypass graft surgery because of its excellent long-term patency. Although large LIMA side branches are typically ligated during the surgery, the occurrence of a coronary steal phenomenon related to these side branches following surgery remains controversial. A variety of devices, including coil embolization and gelatin sponge particles, have been used in the percutaneous treatment of LIMA side branch induced coronary steal. The Amplatzer Vascular Plug has recently been applied in variety of clinical situations, including the occlusion of aortopulmonary collaterals, patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. The Amplatzer Vascular Plug is a self-expandable, cylindrical device made from nitinol that offers several potential advantages in this setting including ease of delivery, a wide range of device sizes and the ability to safely remove the device if placement location in not optimal. In this case report, we present a patient with objective ischemia in the left anterior descending artery distribution secondary to coronary steal from a large LIMA side branch that was successfully treated using the Amplatzer Vascular Plug.

### PMID 19707440 (2008) — Biologics : targets &amp; therapy
TITLE: Clinical use of topical thrombin as a surgical hemostat.
DOI: 10.2147/btt.s2435 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: When surgical ligation of bleeding fails, or is not possible, surgeons rely on a number of hemostatic aids, including thrombin. This review discusses the history, pharmacology and clinical application of thrombin as a surgical hemostat. The initial thrombin was bovine in origin, but its use has been complicated by the formation of antibodies that cross react with human coagulation factors. This has been associated with life threatening bleeding and in some circumstances anaphylaxis and death. Human thrombin, isolated from pooled plasma of donors, has been developed in an effort to minimize these risks, but its downside is the potential of transmitting blood-borne pathogens and limited availability. Recently a recombinant thrombin has been developed and approved for use by the FDA. It has the advantage of being minimally antigenic and devoid of the risk if viral transmission. Thrombin is often used in conjunction with other hemostatic aids, including absorbable agents (like gelfoam, collagen, and cellulose), and with fibrinogen in fibrin glues. The last part of this review will discuss these agents in detail, and review their clinical applications.

### PMID 17710287 (2007) — Brazilian oral research
TITLE: Effects of fibrin sealer and resorbable gelatin on the repair of osseous defects in rat tibia.
DOI: 10.1590/s1806-83242007000300006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Gelfoam - a biologically resorbable gelatin sponge - has the function of restricting hemorrhage, providing platelet rupture, and supporting fibrin threads. Beriplast - a fibrinogen-thrombin compound - is used to adhere tissues, to consolidate sutures and in hemostasis. The objective of this study was to perform a histological analysis of the effects of haemostatic agents on osseous repair. These materials were inserted into surgical sites in young rat right and left tibiae. After the observation periods of 7, 14, 30 and 45 days, according to the bioethic protocol, the animals were killed, the tibiae were removed and fixed in 10% formalin and decalcified in equal parts of formic acid and sodium citrate solutions. After routine processing, the specimens were embedded in paraffin for microtomy. Analysis of the results demonstrated that the haemostatic agents are effective in controlling hemorrhage; they stimulate osteogenesis, featuring a pattern of osseous tissue formation similar to the control pattern, although the amount of osseous trabeculae was superior, especially in the Gelfoam group in the periods of 7 and 14 days; 30 days after surgery, the delay in tissue healing in the control group in relation to the experimental groups started to decrease, and the control and experimental groups exhibited similar tissue repair after 45 days, when all the groups exhibited secondary osseous tissue.

### PMID 17965563 (2007) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Use of gelatin-thrombin matrix hemostatic sealant in cranial neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.47.462 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The present study evaluated the hemostatic efficacy and handling of gelatin-thrombin matrix hemostatic sealant during intracranial procedures. A retrospective analysis of 478 consecutive patients undergoing intracranial procedures identified seven patients with acute intense or persistent intraoperative bleeding which could not be arrested in time by standard hemostatic methods. The efficacy of gelatin-thrombin matrix was assessed by determining bleeding severity before and after application, time to hemostasis, amount of gelatin-thrombin matrix necessary, need for additional hemostatic measures, and need for reoperation to control hemorrhage. Immediate hemostasis was achieved in five of seven patients. Two of these five patients had abnormal clotting parameters. Cessation of bleeding was achieved by additionally applying either fibrinogen or gelatin sponge to the bleeding site in the other two patients. No complications attributable to gelatin-thrombin matrix use were recorded. The gelatin-thrombin matrix was ready to use within 1 minute in every case. Gelatin-thrombin matrix appears to be an effective, easy-to-use, and readily available hemostatic agent for cranial neurosurgery. Combination with fibrinogen is recommended in special situations.

### PMID 17719390 (2007) — Journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery : official journal of the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
TITLE: Evaluation of autologous platelet-poor plasma gel as a hemostatic adjunct after posterior iliac crest bone harvest.
DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2006.09.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D018848">Controlled Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the hemostatic efficacy of autologous platelet-poor plasma (PPP) gel following posterior iliac crest bone graft harvesting for oral and maxillofacial reconstruction.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a prospective study of 24 consecutive patients involving 26 posterior iliac crest bone harvests that had bone wax and either 1-gram of bovine microfibrillar collagen or 20 mL of autologous PPP, activated as a gel, used as adjunct hemostatic agents. Compression bulb suction drain was placed into the graft site and drain output recorded every 8 hours for 64 hours. Cost analysis was also undertaken between the 2 methods. Statistical significance between means of each group was determined by Student's t test and found significant for P &lt; .05.
RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences in average drain output between the PPP and MFC groups for each 8-hour interval. There was no statically significant difference in average total drain output between the PPP and MFC groups over the entire 64 hour period. Additionally, unlike the addition of MFC, the addition of PPP added no additional costs to the procedure.
CONCLUSION: PPP gel, when compared with bovine microfibrillar collagen, is an effective and inexpensive adjunct in hemostasis following posterior iliac crest bone harvest.

### PMID 17465365 (2007) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Hydrogel-induced cervicomedullary compression after posterior fossa decompression for Chiari malformation. Case report.
DOI: 10.3171/ped.2007.106.4.302 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The use of an absorbable hydrogel dural sealant has been approved for neurosurgical applications with no published reports of complications to date. The authors present the case of a 13-year-old girl with syringomyelia and quadriparesis who underwent posterior fossa decompression and dural augmentation for Chiari malformation Type I. Dural closure was performed with a dural substitute patch, hydrogel dural sealant, and gelatin sponge. Magnetic resonance imaging, performed after initial postoperative improvement in the patient's quadriparesis deteriorated, demonstrated an expanding epidural mass collection causing cervicomedullary compression. Exploration on postoperative Day 15 revealed an expanded layer of hydrogel underlying a layer of gelatin sponge. The authors conclude that hydrogel dural sealants should be used cautiously in spaces that cannot tolerate significant mass effect.

### PMID 16160756 (2006) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Transcatheter arterial embolization for tumor seeding in the chest wall after radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma.
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-004-0107-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Tumor seeding in the chest wall was depicted at follow-up CT obtained 9 months after radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Transcatheter arterial embolization was successfully performed, injecting emulsion of 10 mg of epirubicin and 1 ml of iodized oil followed by gelatin sponge particles via the microcatheter placed in the right eleventh intercostal artery. The patient died of tumor growth in the liver one year after the embolization, but no progression of the tumor seeding was noted during the follow-up period. We conclude that transcatheter arterial embolization was effective for the control of tumor seeding after radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma.

### PMID 16108751 (2005) — Journal of laparoendoscopic &amp; advanced surgical techniques. Part A
TITLE: Tissue adhesives for repairing inguinal hernia: a preliminary study.
DOI: 10.1089/lap.2005.15.424 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: AIM: To investigate the efficacy of tissue adhesives for closing the orifice of the inguinal hernia sac (IHS) as an alternative method for treating inguinal hernia.
METHODS: Five-week-old male Lewis rats (n=4) were used, because Lewis rats have a large patent IHS. The rats were divided into 9 groups (n=6 in each) according to the type of tissue adhesive used: G1, fibrin glue (Beriplast); G1b, Beriplast plus blood; G2, microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene); G2b, Avitene plus blood; G3, fibrinogen-based sealant (TachoComb); G3b, TachoComb plus blood; G4, synthetic absorbable sealant (Advaseal); G5, bilateral single port laparoscopic injection of octylcyanoacrylate (Dermabond); and G6, sham operation (control group). In G1-G4, surgery was performed through a midline lower abdominal incision. In G5, a 5-mm laparoscope was inserted in the epigastrium, a fine catheter was passed through the side port of the laparoscope into the right HIS, and 0.2 mL Dermabond was injected. The left IHS was treated in the same way. All rats were sacrificed 3 months after treatment, and IHS patency was examined macroscopically. All rats in G5 and G6 were mated 50 days after treatment to check fertility.
RESULTS: All rats survived until sacrifice. At sacrifice, all IHS were patent in G6. All IHS were also patent in G1-G4, but all IHS were closed at the internal ring in G5. In G5 there were no adhesions between the orifice of the closed sac and the small bowel in 5/6, and only minor adhesions in 1/6. G5 fertility (5/6: 83%) was the same as for the control group (G6).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that laparoscopic injection of Db into the IHS is simple, safe, reliable, virtually scarless, and may be a reasonable alternative to standard open surgical inguinal hernia repair.

### PMID 16525952 (2005) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Haemostasis using a ready-to-use collagen sponge coated with activated thrombin and fibrinogen.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Adequate haemostasis is an important part of any surgical procedure, but particularly so in the case of visceral organ surgery where apparently insignificant ooze can ultimately result in significant haemorrhage and coagulopathy. To achieve haemorrhage control, the surgeon may use conventional techniques (eg, suture ligation, diathermy, and swab compression), but failing this has the option of using physical coagulation tools (eg, the argon beam coagulator) and haemostasis adjuncts (eg, fibrin glues and collagen sheets). Advances in manufacturing have led to development of several other haemostatic products including absorbable gelatin sponges, cyanoacrylates, and polymer-based adhesives. One such product consists of a fixed, ready-to-use equine collagen sponge coated with human thrombin and fibrinogen. It may be applied directly to the bleeding surface, without the need for preparation or reconstitution. This chapter reviews the published evidence and compares its use to other classes of haemostasis adjuncts across a range of surgical specialties, namely hepatic, splenic, thoracic, vascular, and minimally invasive surgery. It also aims to highlight the apparent advantages and limitations of the fibrinogen and thrombin-coated collagen sponge compared to other commercially available haemostasis adjuncts, and identify potential applications for the product.

### PMID 16153573 (2005) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: Evaluation of hyaluronic acid sheet for the prevention of postlaminectomy adhesions.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2005.01.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Various materials have been tested for their ability to maintain a barrier between muscles and epidural space in order to physically or chemically inhibit scar ingrowths. Hyaluronic acid (HA) solution and gel have been reported to be effective in preventing adhesions postlaminectomy; however, neither has been used clinically after spinal surgery.
PURPOSE: To determine the efficacy of HA sheet for the prevention of postlaminectomy adhesions compared with that of HA gel or another sheet.
STUDY DESIGN/SETTING: An animal model of lumbar laminectomy in rabbits was used to study postoperative scar tissue formation around the spinal cord. The histologic effects of HA sheet were compared with those of Gelfoam (GF) and further evaluated by an inflammation model using rhTNF-alpha.
PATIENT SAMPLE: Rabbit.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Histologic examination.
METHODS: Five rabbits were killed at 2, 4, 8, and 24 weeks after laminectomy, respectively. Another 18 rabbits were examined in an environment of active inflammation experimentally induced by rhTNF-alpha to compare the effects of HA sheet with those of GF or HA gel. Histologic examination was performed to quantitatively assess invasive scar formation or inflammation postlaminectomy, and then, the histologic effects of HA sheet were compared with those of GF or HA gel.
RESULTS: In the HA group, significantly, the area of subarachnoid space was larger, distance from the surface of dura to scar tissues was greater, the number of inflammatory cells in the scar tissues at the site of laminectomy was less, and enlargement of dura was suppressed. Using an inflammation model, we also demonstrated the efficacy of HA sheet treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: In an experimental laminectomy model, HA sheet formed a solid interpositional membrane barrier and exhibited anti-inflammatory activity. Further investigations will be needed for HA sheet to be used clinically.

### PMID 15936392 (2005) — Surgical neurology
TITLE: Method for measuring sinus and vein pressure during surgery: technical note.
DOI: 10.1016/j.surneu.2004.07.046 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Measurement of dural sinus or drainage vein pressure is useful for determining the appropriate treatment for some patients. We report a novel measurement procedure that reduces bleeding from the needle puncture site as well as further tearing of the wall.
METHODS: The vessel is punctured through the patch by gelatin sponge with fibrin sealant and a siliconized elastic needle is introduced. After obtaining the desired measurements, the needle is withdrawn through the fibrin sealant-bearing patch whose presence facilitates sealing of the puncture site. To further decrease the incidence of complications due to incomplete hemostasis, an additional identically prepared path is placed over the site.
RESULTS: We have used this method in several operations and have encountered no complications. Our method also makes it possible to safely approach the drainers of pial arteriovenous malformations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our method is easy and convenient and prevents the leakage of blood from the puncture site and further tearing of the venous wall.

### PMID 15098782 (2004) — The American surgeon
TITLE: Improved intraoperative management of anastomotic bleeding during aortic reconstruction: results of a randomized controlled trial.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: In a randomized controlled trial, the effectiveness of a polymeric surgical sealant (CoSeal) was compared to Gelfoam/thrombin for managing anastomotic bleeding after implantation of Dacron grafts during aortic reconstruction for nonruptured aneurysms. Each treatment was directly applied to the suture line after confirmation of anastomotic bleeding. The proportion of suture line sites that achieved immediate sealing and the proportion sealed within 5 minutes were determined among 37 experimental (59 sites) and 17 control subjects (27 sites). A significantly greater proportion of bleeding suture line sites treated with the polymeric sealant achieved immediate sealing following reestablishment of blood flow compared with control-treated sites [48 of 59 (81%) vs 10 of 27 (37%); P = 0.002]. The difference between treatment groups was maintained after 5 minutes with approximately 85 per cent (50 of 59) of CoSeal sites compared to just over one-half (14 of 27) of control sites demonstrating ultimate sealing (P = 0.01). There were no adverse events related to the use of the polymeric sealant in this study. These results support the use of this novel sealant for the intraoperative management of anastomotic bleeding during aortic reconstruction procedures.

### PMID 15214828 (2004) — Archives of pathology &amp; laboratory medicine
TITLE: Textiloma (gossypiboma) mimicking recurrent intracranial tumor.
DOI: 10.5858/2004-128-749-TGMRIT | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: CONTEXT: Resorbable substances used to achieve hemostasis during neurosurgical procedures comprise 3 principal classes based on chemical composition: (1) gelatin sponge, (2) oxidized cellulose, and (3) microfibrillar collagen. Nonresorbable hemostatic aides include various forms of cotton and rayon-based hemostats (cottonoids and kites). Resorbable and nonresorbable hemostatic agents have been reported to cause symptomatic mass lesions, most commonly following intra-abdominal surgery. Histologic examination typically shows a core of degenerating hemostatic agent surrounded by an inflammatory reaction. Each agent exhibits distinctive morphologic features that often permit specific identification. Hemostat-associated mass lesions have been variously referred to as textilomas, gossypibomas, gauzomas, or muslinomas.
OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to (1) identify cases of histologically proven cases of textiloma in neurosurgical operations, (2) characterize the specific hemostatic agent associated with textiloma formation, and (3) characterize the preoperative magnetic resonance imaging appearance of textiloma.
DESIGN: Cases in which a textiloma constituted the sole finding on repeat surgery for recurrent brain tumor, or was a clinically significant component of a radiologically identified mass lesion together with residual tumor, constituted the study set.
RESULTS: Five textilomas were identified and evaluated. The primary neoplasm was different in each case and included pituitary adenoma, tanycytic ependymoma, anaplastic astrocytoma, gliosarcoma, and oligodendroglioma. In all cases, preoperative magnetic resonance imaging suggested recurrent tumor. Textilomas included all categories of resorbable hemostatic agent. Other foreign bodies were present in some cases; the origin of these foreign bodies was traced to fibers shed from nonresorbable hemostatic material placed temporarily during surgery and removed before closure (cottonoids and kites). Inflammatory reactions included giant cells, granulomas, and fibroblastic proliferation. Microfibrillar collagen (Avitene) textilomas were associated with a striking eosinophil infiltration that was not seen with any other hemostatic agent.
CONCLUSIONS: Hemostatic agents may produce clinically symptomatic, radiologically apparent mass lesions. When considering a mass lesion arising after intracranial surgery, the differential diagnosis should include textiloma along with recurrent tumor and radiation necrosis.

### PMID 15052237 (2004) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2003.11.068 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016420">Comment, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 14665952 (2004) — The Journal of urology
TITLE: Central renal stab wounds: treatment with augmented fibrin sealant in a porcine model.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ju.0000101000.08371.79 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We determined whether fibrin sealant augmented by an absorbable bolster could salvage kidneys with major, centrally located stab wounds.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A grade 4 renal injury was created in 16 commercial swine via a 1.5 cm sagittal, centrally located, through-and-through right renal laceration. Animals were randomized to 1 of 4 treatment arms, including control groups that received conventional renal capsule suture repair with an absorbable gelatin sponge bolster (3 in group 1) or a microfibrillar collagen sheet (3 in group 2) and experimental groups that received sutureless treatment entailing fibrin sealant instillation into the knife tract augmented by an external gelatin sponge (5 in group 3) or an external microfibrillar collagen sheet (5 in group 4). Arterial occlusion was not performed. Blood loss and time to hemostasis were recorded. Abdominal computerized tomography was performed at 1 week and necropsy was done at 6 weeks.
RESULTS: Renal reconstruction with fibrin sealant resulted in significantly lower blood loss (62 vs 155 ml, p &lt;0.05) and time to hemostasis (3.5 vs 6.5 minutes, p &lt;0.05) than in the conventional suture groups. There was no radiographic or gross evidence of significant postoperative bleeding, urinoma formation or abnormal tissue healing in the recovery period. Gelatin sponge and collagen sheet demonstrated similar hemostatic efficacy.
CONCLUSIONS: In this porcine renal trauma model fibrin sealant augmented by absorbable gelatin sponge or a microfibrillar collagen sheet effectively promoted hemostasis and renal salvage. Because of its safety, ease of use and efficiency, fibrin sealant appears to be an appropriate adjunct for managing challenging renal injuries.

### PMID 14560228 (2003) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Prospective randomized multicenter trial of fibrin sealant versus thrombin-soaked gelatin sponge for suture- or needle-hole bleeding from polytetrafluoroethylene femoral artery grafts.
DOI: 10.1016/s0741-5214(03)00474-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the safety and efficacy of the fibrin sealant Beriplast P (FSBP; Aventis-Behring) for hemostasis in anastomosis of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) grafts to the femoral artery.
METHODS: In a single-blinded randomized prospective multicenter clinical trial, FSBP was compared with thrombin-soaked gelatin sponge (TSG) for efficacy in stopping bleeding from needle or suture holes in PTFE grafts after anastomosis to the femoral artery. Patients were randomized to FSBP application, which requires a 3-minute period of arterial clamping to enable the fibrin clot to adhere, or to TSG application, which requires pressure from gauze sponges, after completion of the femoral artery anastomosis. The primary end point was hemostasis, defined as absence of any detectable bleeding as judged by the operating surgeon, by 4 minutes after randomization. Secondary end points included actual time from randomization to hemostasis, time to beginning of wound closure, measured blood loss (weighed sponges), incidence of recurrent bleeding, stay in the intensive care unit, and hospital length of stay. Data were analyzed with the intention-to-treat method.
RESULTS: Two hundred thirty-five subjects were enrolled at 26 medical centers; 34 were subsequently excluded from the study. Of the 201 randomized subjects, 100 received FSBP and 99 received TSG. Hemostasis was achieved by 4 minutes in 64 subjects (63%) in the FSBP group and 40 subjects (40%) in the TSG group (P =.0018). In the FSBP group, compared with the TSG group, time to hemostasis was shorter (median, 4.0 minutes; 95% confidence interval [CI], 3.8-4.18 minutes vs median, 5.6 minutes, 95% CI, 4.5-7.0; P =.008), blood loss was less (mean, 4.0 +/- 29.7 g vs mean, 15.6 +/- 28.4 g; P &lt;.0001), and time to wound closure was shorter (median, 15 minutes; 95% CI, 10.47-18.67 minutes vs median, 22.8 minutes; 95% CI, 18.67-30.67; P =.005). There were no differences in recurrent bleeding or any other adverse events. There was no significant difference in ICU stay, but hospital length of stay was shorter in the FSBP group compared with the TSG group, and the difference approached significance (median, 6.5 days; 95% CI, 5.00-7.00 days vs median, 7.0 days; 95% CI,. 6.00-8.00 days; P =.0565).
CONCLUSION: FSBP is more effective than TSG for achieving hemostasis of needle or suture hole bleeding from PTFE femoral artery grafts.

### PMID 12761682 (2003) — Minimally invasive neurosurgery : MIN
TITLE: Influence of TachoComb in comparison to local hemostyptic agents on epidural fibrosis in a rat laminectomy model.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2003-39335 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This animal experimental study was designed to examine the effects of TachoComb, a fixed combination of collagen with tissue adhesive, as an interposition membrane on the development of spinal epidural fibrosis in comparison to other hemostyptic materials. In 10 Wistar rats, four laminectomies were performed at lumbar and sacral vertebrae. Alternately, a piece of TachoComb, Spongostan, or Tabotamp was placed into each laminectomy site. One laminectomy site served as an empty control (n = 10). 8 weeks later, the animals were sacrificed, and the spinal column including surrounding muscle tissue was removed en bloc from each rat and fixed in formaldehyde. After decalcification and staining the specimens were graded by a neuropathologist in a blindfold test for severity of epidural fibrosis as "light-moderate" or "marked". Epidural scarring of variable density was seen in all laminectomy sites. Light epidural fibrosis, without any adhesion to dura, as only noted in cases after application of TachoComb (n = 4/10) and Spongostan (n = 1/10). All other slices showed marked epidural fibrosis with dura adherence regardless of the implanted material. Statistical analysis revealed significantly lower epidural fibrosis after application of TachoComb compared to all other groups (p &lt; 0.05). In this series, TachoComb is more effective in reducing the epidural fibrosis than Spongostan, and Tabotamp. However, complete prevention of scar tissue formation was not achieved.

### PMID 14502137 (2003) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Comparative study of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Colgel) and oxidized cellulose (Surgicel) in high transfusion-risk cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/s0022-5223(03)00042-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The effects of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Colgel) and oxidized cellulose (Surgicel) on bleeding and allogeneic transfusions were compared in cardiac operations with a predicted high risk of bleeding.
METHODS: Between August 1999 and November 2001, 71 patients undergoing elective, high risk of bleeding operations were studied after giving informed consent. The procedures included repeat cardiac operations (aorta-coronary bypass operations or valvular operations), ascending aortic aneurysm repair necessitating deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, and ascending aortic grafting without deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. Subjects were excluded if they had recent (&lt;5 days) acetylsalicylic acid ingestion, thrombolytic therapy, or anticoagulant therapy (heparin &lt;4 hours preoperatively or warfarin &lt;3 days preoperatively). Consenting subjects were randomized to receive either Colgel or Surgicel.
RESULTS: Chest tube drainage in the first 24 hours was 373 +/- 143 mL in the Colgel group and 571 +/- 144 mL in the Surgicel group (P =.01). Total postoperative chest tube drainage was 423 +/- 154 mL (range, 280-1100 mL) in the Colgel group and 677 +/- 128 mL (range, 285-1350 mL) in the Surgicel group (P =.01). In addition, chest tube drainage was compared between the 2 groups every 3 hours after operation. Blood loss in the first 3 postoperative hours was significantly less in the Colgel group (132 +/- 41 vs 228 +/- 57 mL, P &lt;.001). In the following 3-hour interval, this significant difference persisted (67 +/- 24 vs 121 +/- 49 mL, P &lt;.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the easy application, low cost, and significant blood-loss reduction effect of microfibrillar collagen powder renders this agent attractive for cardiac operations associated with high risk of bleeding.

### PMID 14501897 (2003) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Advanced hemostatic dressing development program: animal model selection criteria and results of a study of nine hemostatic dressings in a model of severe large venous hemorrhage and hepatic injury in Swine.
DOI: 10.1097/01.TA.0000075336.92129.27 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An advanced hemostatic dressing is needed to augment current methods for the control of life-threatening hemorrhage. A systematic approach to the study of dressings is described. We studied the effects of nine hemostatic dressings on blood loss using a model of severe venous hemorrhage and hepatic injury in swine.
METHODS: Swine were treated using one of nine hemostatic dressings. Dressings used the following primary active ingredients: microfibrillar collagen, oxidized cellulose, thrombin, fibrinogen, propyl gallate, aluminum sulfate, and fully acetylated poly-N-acetyl glucosamine. Standardized liver injuries were induced, dressings were applied, and resuscitation was initiated. Blood loss, hemostasis, and 60-minute survival were quantified.
RESULTS: The American Red Cross hemostatic dressing (fibrinogen and thrombin) reduced (p &lt; 0.01) posttreatment blood loss (366 mL; 95% confidence interval, 175-762 mL) and increased (p &lt; 0.05) the percentage of animals in which hemostasis was attained (73%), compared with gauze controls (2,973 mL; 95% confidence interval, 1,414-6,102 mL and 0%, respectively). No other dressing was effective. The number of vessels lacerated was positively related to pretreatment blood loss and negatively related to hemostasis.
CONCLUSION: The hemorrhage model allowed differentiation among topical hemostatic agents for severe hemorrhage. The American Red Cross hemostatic dressing was effective and warrants further development.

### PMID 12656312 (2003) — Chang Gung medical journal
TITLE: Microfibrillar collagen for hemostasis in laryngomicrosurgery of hypopharyngeal hemangioma.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hypopharyngeal hemangiomas are uncommon neoplasms that can cause dysphagia, recurrent bleeding, and airway obstruction. These lesions are a therapeutic challenge, and surgical resection is the mainstay of therapy. The goal of therapy is directed at control of the tumor and relief of symptoms rather than total eradication of the lesion. Laser therapy is a very useful adjunct in the management of these vascular neoplasms. The neodymium: yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser (Nd:YAG laser) functions at a wavelength that provides deep thermal coagulation. This allows its use for these vascular lesions. With laser surgery, hemorrhage is the most frequent and dangerous complication, and its control is extremely important. Ligation and suture remain the traditional methods of hemostasis in most surgical situations. However, on certain occasions problems arise, particularly with large oozing surfaces or when surgical access is poor. Topical hemostatic agents are widely used in a variety of surgical procedures to successfully solve such problems. Microfibrillar collagen (Avitene) is one of the absorbable, topical, hemostatic agents, and is used effectively to control bleeding in many surgical situations. Since we began to use microfibrillar collagen (AviteneTM, MedchemProduct, Inc., Woburn, MA01801) to stop the massive oozing of the laser-induced surgical wound, no episodes of bleeding had ever occurred. It is concluded that Avitene is an effective agent for maintaining hemostasis in many surgical procedures, and we consider it a good remedy for management of laser-induced bleeding complications.

### PMID 11888460 (2002) — Archives of surgery (Chicago, Ill. : 1960)
TITLE: A polymeric sealant inhibits anastomotic suture hole bleeding more rapidly than gelfoam/thrombin: results of a randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1001/archsurg.137.3.326 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: HYPOTHESIS: An experimental polymeric sealant (CoSeal [Cohesion Technologies, Palo Alto, Calif]) provides equivalent anastomotic sealing to Gelfoam (Upjohn, Kalamazoo, Mich)/thrombin during surgical placement of prosthetic vascular grafts.
DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial.
SETTING: Nine university-affiliated medical centers.
PATIENTS: One hundred forty-eight patients scheduled for implantation of polytetrafluoroethylene grafts, mainly for infrainguinal revascularization procedures or the creation of dialysis access shunts, who were treated randomly with either an experimental intervention (n = 74) or control (n = 74).
INTERVENTION: Following polytetrafluoroethylene graft placement, anastomotic suture hole bleeding was treated intraoperatively in all control subjects with Gelfoam/thrombin. Subjects in the experimental group had the polymeric sealant applied directly to the suture lines without concomitant manual compression.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary treatment success was defined as the proportion of subjects in each group that achieved complete anastomotic sealing within 10 minutes. The proportion of subjects that achieved immediate sealing and the time required to fully inhibit suture hole bleeding also were compared between treatment groups.
RESULTS: Overall 10-minute sealing success was equivalent (86% vs 80%; P =.29) between experimental and control subjects, respectively. However, subjects treated with CoSeal achieved immediate anastomotic sealing at more than twice the rate of subjects treated with Gelfoam/thrombin (47% vs 20%; P&lt;.001). Consequently, the median time needed to inhibit bleeding in control subjects was more than 10 times longer than for experimental subjects (16.5 seconds vs 189.0 seconds; P =.01). Strikingly similar findings for all comparisons were observed separately for subgroups of subjects having infrainguinal bypass grafting and for those undergoing placement of dialysis access shunts.
CONCLUSIONS: The experimental sealant offers equivalent anastomotic sealing performance compared with Gelfoam/thrombin, but it provides this desired effect in a significantly more rapid time frame.

### PMID 12127814 (2002) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Comparative study of the efficacy of the common topical hemostatic agents with fibrin sealant in a rabbit aortic anastomosis model.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2002.6426 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to compare the hemostatic efficacy of the common surgical hemostatic agents with fibrin sealant (FS) and to assess their functional strength to secure hemostasis in lieu of placing additional sutures.
METHODS: End-to-end anastomosis of transected abdominal aorta was performed in moderately anticoagulated rabbits using 4 or 6 interrupted sutures. The suture line was covered either with gauze alone ("untreated") or with gauze plus Gelfoam, Avitene, Surgicel, FloSeal, or FS, following which blood flow was restored. Blood loss was absorbed by gauze and measured. The surviving rabbits were recovered and the repaired vessel was examined histologically 4 weeks after operation. The investigators were blinded to the treatment groups. Aortic anastomoses using 8 or 12 sutures (untreated) were also performed.
RESULTS: Untreated 4-suture anastomosis of aorta resulted in a profuse hemorrhage with an average 108.0 +/- 19.2 (mean +/- SD) ml blood loss and 100% mortality (n = 4). FS application sealed the anastomoses, prevented blood loss (P &lt; 0.01 vs untreated) and exsanguination of the rabbits (n = 4). Other hemostatic agents reduced the bleeding to varying degrees compared to the untreated animals (Gelfoam 66.4 +/- 17.6, Avitene 80.6 +/- 34, Surgicel 66.7 +/- 16.7, FloSeal 44.2 +/- 8.5 ml blood loss, n = 4/group), but the changes were not statistically significant. One to three rabbits in each group survived the operation. Six-suture aortic anastomoses, untreated, resulted in 67.7 +/- 21.8 ml blood loss and 100% survival (n = 6). Application of FS produced immediate and sustained hemostasis in all the animals (P &lt; 0.01 vs untreated). Other hemostatic agents also reduced the bleeding (Gelfoam 42.5 +/- 10, Avitene 50.9 +/- 12.4, Surgicel 32.1 +/- 14, FloSeal 33.9 +/- 5.4 ml blood loss, n = 6/group), but the changes were not statistically significant. The 8- and 12-suture aorta repairs resulted in a moderate blood loss (43.9 +/- 19 and 21.3 +/- 14.9 ml, respectively), followed by a stable hemostasis that precluded the need to use any hemostatic agent. The aortic cross-clamping time of the 12-suture and time to hemostasis for both the 8- and the 12-suture techniques were significantly longer than those of the 4-suture plus FS application (P &lt; 0.01, P &lt; 0.01 and P &lt; 0.05, respectively).
CONCLUSION: In a moderate coagulopathy, FS was proven to be the most efficacious hemostatic agent, producing immediate and sustained hemostasis at the arterial anastomotic site. This high efficacy is in part attributed to the strong tissue adhesive property of this agent. FS application may potentially ease the anastomosis and shorten the duration of timely critical vascular procedures.

### PMID 11283536 (2001) — Surgery
TITLE: A novel collagen-based composite offers effective hemostasis for multiple surgical indications: Results of a randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1067/msy.2001.112365 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intraoperative bleeding is ubiquitous during open surgical procedures and uniformly effective hemostasis remains elusive. We conducted a randomized controlled trial to determine the effectiveness of a novel collagen-based composite (CoStasis Surgical Hemostat) compared with standard methods of hemostasis during general, hepatic, cardiac, and orthopedic operations.
METHODS: Hemostatic treatment was assigned randomly to 347 subjects; 318 subjects (167 CoStasis, 151 controls) underwent operation, received treatment, and provided hemostatic success data. CoStasis was applied to the bleeding site without manual pressure as a sprayable liquid composite of bovine microfibrillar collagen, bovine thrombin, and autologous plasma. Manual compression was used as the control hemostat. Hemostatic success was achieved if bleeding had ceased completely within 10 minutes (3 minutes for cardiac subjects). The time to controlled bleeding (ie, slight oozing) and time to complete hemostasis were recorded for all subjects.
RESULTS: Hemostatic success was achieved in more than 90% (153/167) of CoStasis subjects compared with 58% (88/151) of control subjects (P =.01). Superior hemostatic effectiveness with CoStasis was realized in every surgical specialty: general (77/79 vs 49/75, P =.01), hepatic (38/39 vs 20/29, P =.01), cardiac (28/37 vs 17/37, P =.02), and orthopedic (10/12 vs 2/10, P =.01). The duration of bleeding was also significantly shorter with CoStasis. The median time to controlled bleeding (42 seconds vs 150 seconds, P =.0001) and time to complete hemostasis (75 seconds vs 252 seconds, P =.0001) were both markedly longer with the control intervention. There were no serious adverse events related to the use of CoStasis.
CONCLUSIONS: CoStasis is more effective at controlling and stopping diffuse intraoperative bleeding than standard methods of hemostasis in 4 distinct surgical indications representing a wide variety of operative interventions.

### PMID 11598530 (2001) — Spine
TITLE: Lumbar cauda equina syndrome associated with the use of gelfoam: case report.
DOI: 10.1097/00007632-200110150-00029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: A case of cauda equina syndrome is reported.
OBJECTIVE: To recognize a serious complication related to the use of Gelfoam in the lumbar spine.
SUMMARY AND BACKGROUND DATA: Absorbable hemostatic gelatin sponges have long been used to control bleeding around the spinal cord. Despite widespread use and a safe history with few reported adverse reactions, Gelfoam sponges have potential for complications that may be overlooked.
METHOD: A case of cauda equina syndrome is reported and discussed.
RESULTS: A retained Gelfoam sponge was found in the epidural space after lumbar decompression and fusion for spinal stenosis. The retained gelatin sponge had expanded and solidified, causing a mass affect. The resultant nerve compression led to progressive myelopathy. On removal of the Gelfoam, symptoms rapidly resolved.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the use of Gelfoam in spine surgery generally is considered safe, care must be taken to avoid placing a large mass of sponge in a potentially closed space. If Gelfoam is not handled properly, it can engorge and fail to be resorbed appropriately, thus causing a mass effect. If neurologic compromise develops, Gelfoam should be considered a potential cause and subsequently removed.

### PMID 11565875 (2001) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Foreign body reaction to hemostatic materials mimicking recurrent brain tumor. Report of three cases.
DOI: 10.3171/jns.2001.95.3.0503 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chemical agents routinely used in neurosurgery to achieve intraoperative hemostasis can cause a foreign body reaction, which appears on magnetic resonance (MR) images to be indistinguishable from recurrent tumor. Clinical and/or imaging evidence of progression of disease early after surgical resection or during aggressive treatment may actually be distinct features of granuloma in these circumstances. A series of three cases was retrospectively analyzed for clinical, imaging, surgical, and pathological findings, and the consequences they held for further disease management. All patients were boys (3, 3, and 6 years of age, respectively) and all harbored primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Two tumors were located in the posterior fossa and one was located in the right parietal lobe. Two boys exhibited clinical symptoms, which were unexpected under the circumstances and prompted new imaging studies. One patient was asymptomatic and imaging was performed at planned routine time intervals. The MR images revealed circumscribed, streaky enhancement in the resection cavity that was suggestive of recurrent disease. This occurred 2 to 7 months after the first surgery. At repeated surgery, the resected material had the macroscopic appearance of gelatin sponge in one case and firm scar tissue in the other cases. Histological analysis revealed foreign body granulomas in the resected material, with Gelfoam or Surgicel as the underlying cause. No recurrent tumor was found and the second surgery resulted in imaging-confirmed complete resection in all three patients. Because recurrent disease was absent, the patients continued to participate in their original treatment protocols. All patients remain free from disease 34, 32, and 19 months after the first operation, respectively. During or after treatment for a central nervous system neoplasm, if unexpected clinical or imaging evidence of recurrence is found, a second-look operation may be necessary to determine the true nature of the findings. If the resection yields recurrent tumor, additional appropriate oncological treatment is warranted, but if a foreign body reaction is found, potentially harmful therapy can be withheld or postponed.

### PMID 11027461 (2000) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Prevention of suture hole bleeding using fibrin sealant: benefits of factor XIII.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2000.5985 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Suture hole bleeding is a frequent complication in vascular surgery. The use of fibrin sealants (FSs) during surgery is reported to reduce blood loss by enhancing hemostasis.
OBJECTIVES: Using a pig vascular graft model we investigated: (1) the use of FSs in vascular surgery and measured blood loss with and without the use of FSs; (2) the effect of factor XIII in FSs on hemostasis and blood loss; and (3) the effect of increasing FS incubation time on hemostasis and blood loss.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: During surgery, a 3-cm incision was made in the carotid artery wall. Incisions were covered with a Gore-Tex (PTFE) patch sutured with Ethicon monofil 5/0 or 3/0. The resulting suture holes were treated according to study protocol. Study 1: Nine pigs received either FS treatment (n = 5) or no treatment (n = 4). Study 2: Twenty pigs underwent bilateral surgery; right (n = 20) and left (n = 20) patches received either FS with factor XIII (FS + FXIII) or FS depleted of factor XIII (FS - FXIII). Study 3: Bilateral surgery was carried out on 24 pigs; PFTE patches secured with Ethicon 3/0 were treated with FS and allowed to polymerize for 120 s (n = 12), 180 s (n = 12), or 240 s (n = 12) or with solid support/thrombin (n = 12).
RESULTS: Study 1: Mean blood loss was significantly lower in the FS-treated group compared with untreated controls (9.2 +/- 10.6 mL vs 178.8 +/- 125.5 mL, mean +/- SD, P = 0.016). Study 2: Significantly less blood was lost in the FS + FXIII group than in the FS - FXIII group (Delta = 9.6 mL, P = 0. 02). Study 3: Blood loss was significantly higher from patches treated with solid support/thrombin compared with those treated with FS (P &lt; 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: FSs containing factor XIII, such as Beriplast P, are effective in reducing suture hole bleeding and improving hemostasis during vascular graft procedures. The presence of factor XIII contributes to the efficacy of FSs and reduces the time to hemostasis. During vascular surgery, blood loss can be reduced significantly by the use of fibrin sealant compared with absorbable gelatin sponges coated with thrombin.

### PMID 10740652 (2000) — Cancer biotherapy &amp; radiopharmaceuticals
TITLE: Effect of hemostatics used during operations for digestive organ on cancer cells present in the peritoneal cavity.
DOI: 10.1089/cbr.2000.15.47 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We investigated effects of hemostatics used during operations for digestive organ on cancer cells present in the peritoneal cavity using BALB/c mice inoculated with Meth A tumor cells (fibrosarcoma) intraperitoneally (i.p.) and C3H/He mice inoculated with MH134 tumor cell (hepatic cell carcinoma) i.p. Microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene) or fibrinogen preparation (Beriplast P) did not affect survivals of those tumor-bearing mice. Gelatin sponge (Spongel)prolonged survivals of MH134 tumor-bearing mice. Liquid form gelatin used instead of Spongel displayed in vitro antitumor effect on MH134 tumor cells at the concentration of 15 mg/ml. Radioactive sodium chromate-labeled MH134 and Meth A tumor cells were not lysed when they were incubated with 15 mg/ml of liquid form gelatin for 24 hours. On the other hand, the tritium thymidine (3H-TdR) uptake by MH134 or RL male 1 tumor cells was suppressed when they were incubated with 15 mg/ml of liquid form gelatin for 24 hours. Proliferation of Meth A tumor cells were not affected by the treatment. Effect of liquid form gelatin on phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-stimulated spleen cells as a benign counter-part of RL male 1 tumor cells (T cell lymphoma) was examined. Liquid form gelatin (15 mg/ml) did not suppress 3H-TdR uptake by PHA-stimulated spleen cells.

### PMID 10953494 (2000) — Ceska gynekologie
TITLE: Hemostasis using tissue glue in laparoscopy: discussion and review.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To discuss the usefulness of tissue glue and TachoComb (TC), a new hemostyptic agent which combines the advantages of two reliable hemostyptic products-collagen fleece and fibrin glue in local hemostasis during laparoscopy.
SETTING: Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Endoscopic Training Centre, Hospital Kladno.
DESIGN: Review.
METHODS: Analysis of literary and clinical data.
RESULTS: In recent years, collagen fibers, gelatin sponges, oxidized cellulose and fibrin glue has been developed, which are now widely used in postoperative hemostasis in laparoscopy. An efficient use of these preparations shortens the duration of intervention procedures and reduces patient strain.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical studies demonstrate that hemorrhage from damage tissue important pelvic structures can be successfully arrested and controlled using the laparoscope to apply tissue glue. At Czech study, sixteen patients have been effective treated with collagen-fibrin agent during laparoscopic operations. The elimination of hemorrhages after primary laparoscopic electrosurgery and the effectiveness of this drug have been successfully tested.

### PMID 11030881 (2000) — Archives of surgery (Chicago, Ill. : 1960)
TITLE: Effective control of hepatic bleeding with a novel collagen-based composite combined with autologous plasma: results of a randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1001/archsurg.135.10.1200 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: HYPOTHESIS: A novel collagen-based composite of bovine microfibrillar collagen and bovine thrombin combined with autologous plasma is more effective than standard hemostasis (collagen sponge applied with pressure) in controlling diffuse hepatic bleeding after hemihepatectomy or segmental resection of the liver.
DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial.
SETTING: Seven university-affiliated medical centers.
PATIENTS: Sixty-seven adult patients scheduled for hemihepatectomy or segmental resection who received hemostatic intervention with an investigational treatment (n = 38) or control (n = 29).
INTERVENTION: Bleeding hepatic tissue was managed in all control subjects with a collagen sponge with manual pressure. Subjects in the experimental group had the sprayable liquid composite intraoperatively applied to the surgical site. The liquid immediately formed a collagen-fibrin gel that was used without concomitant tamponade.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Hemostatic success was defined as the proportion of subjects in each treatment group who achieved complete hemostasis within 10 minutes. Success rates and median times required to achieve controlled bleeding (ie, slight oozing) and complete hemostasis were compared between treatment groups.
RESULTS: All 38 subjects in the experimental group achieved complete hemostasis within 10 minutes compared with only 69% (20/29) of control subjects (P&lt;.001). The median time to controlled bleeding was approximately 4 times longer (250 vs 62 seconds) for control subjects than for experimental group subjects (P&lt;.001). The median time required to achieve complete hemostasis also favored the experimental group (150 vs 360 seconds; P&lt;.001). No adverse events related to the use of the experimental hemostatic agent were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: The experimental composite is more effective at controlling and stopping diffuse hepatic bleeding than a collagen sponge applied with pressure; it may be a useful hemostatic agent for patients undergoing hemihepatectomy, segmental resection, and related surgical procedures.

### PMID 11126918 (2000) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Transdural cauda equina incarceration after microsurgical lumbar discectomy: case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE AND IMPORTANCE: Complications usually occur when they are least expected. We present an unusual case of nerve entrapment after microsurgical discectomy.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A patient undergoing uneventful first lumbar microsurgical discectomy developed severe back and leg pain and a progressive neurological deficit during the first postoperative night. Herniation of cauda equina nerve roots had occurred through an unnoticed minimal defect in the dura, which had not caused cerebrospinal fluid leakage. The roots were incarcerated and swollen, and they filled the space of the resected nucleus pulposus. It was presumed that elevation of intra-abdominal pressure and consequent increased intraspinal pressure during extubation led to the herniation of arachnoid and cauda equina roots. The nerve roots were then trapped and incarcerated in the manner of bowel loops in an abdominal wall hernia.
INTERVENTION: During reoperation, the nerve roots were repositioned into the dural sac. The patient recovered without further complications and without long-term sequelae.
CONCLUSION: All dural tears that occur during intraspinal surgery, even if they are small and the arachnoid is intact, should be closed with stitches or at a minimum with a patch of muscle or gelatin sponge with fibrin glue. Care should be taken to avoid increased intra-abdominal pressure during extubation. Excessive pain and progressive neurological dysfunction occurring shortly after microsurgical lumbar discectomy or any intraspinal procedure is indicative of possible hemorrhage with subsequent compression of nerve roots. The case reported here provides anecdotal evidence that this situation can also be caused by a herniation of cauda equina nerve roots through a small dural defect that was not evident during the initial operation.

### PMID 10642778 (2000) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: Gelfoam embolization of a distal coronary artery guidewire perforation.
DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1522-726x(200002)49:2&lt;214::aid-ccd23&gt;3.0.co;2-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A guidewire-induced distal coronary artery perforation presenting with cardiac tamponade was occluded by distal Gelfoam embolization via an infusion catheter. This extends the treatment options for this rare complication of coronary interventional procedures. Cathet. Cardiovasc. Intervent. 49:214-217, 2000.

### PMID 10881808 (2000) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Controlled clinical trial of a novel hemostatic agent in cardiac surgery. The Fusion Matrix Study Group.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(00)01194-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: We performed a prospective randomized trial to compare FloSeal Matrix (Fusion Medical Technologies, Inc, Mountain View, CA), a gelatin-based hemostatic sealant, with Gelfoam-Thrombin (Gelfoam, Pharmacia and Upjohn, Kalamazoo, MI; Thrombin, Gentrac Inc, Middeton, WI) (control group) to control perioperative bleeding.
METHODS: A total of 93 patients undergoing cardiac operations were randomized into the FloSeal or control group after standard surgical means to control bleeding had failed. The bleeding site was evaluated at 1, 2, 3, 6, and 10 minutes after applying the hemostatic agent. If bleeding stopped within 10 minutes, the application was considered to be successful. In the case of a failure, the surgeon could use any means preferred (except FloSeal) to achieve hemostasis. All bleeding sites in a patient were treated with the hemostatic agent to which the patient was randomized. Follow-up evaluation was performed at 12 to 36 hours and 6 to 8 weeks after operation.
RESULTS: FloSeal stopped bleeding in 94% of the patients (first bleeding site only) within 10 minutes, compared to 60% in the control group (p = 0.001). At 3 minutes, successful hemostasis was achieved in 72% of the FloSeal group compared with 23% in the control group (p = 0.0001). There was no difference in the adverse event profile between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: FloSeal Matrix demonstrated efficacy superior to that of Gelfoam-Thrombin and had a safety profile similar to that of Gelfoam-Thrombin when used as a topical hemostatic agent during cardiac surgery procedures.

### PMID 10412165 (1999) — Nihon yakurigaku zasshi. Folia pharmacologica Japonica
TITLE: [Adhesive and sealing effects of TO-193 on tissues and organs in various experimental models].
DOI: 10.1254/fpj.113.269 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We studied the adhesive and sealing effects of sheet style fibrin adhesive, TO-193 (TachoComb), on some tissues and organs, comparing them with those of sheet style collagen agent, collagen sponge, Novacol, and Avitene and liquid fibrin adhesive agent, Beriplast P. TO-193 showed more a potent adhesive effect on liver than the sheet style collagen agents and was more potent on bone and skin than the liquid fibrin adhesive agent. Furthermore, TO-193 had a potent sealing effect at the site of incomplete suture immediately after application on a motile organ such as lung and stomach. These effects may be partly attributable to rapid expression of the effect due to the presence of a high concentration of fibrinogen on coverage. Enhancement of fibrin penetrability to the tissues by compression and inhibition of cleavage of coverage by the collagen sponge also may be participating in the effects of TO-193. These results suggest that TO-193 will be a valuable adhesive and sealing agent.

### PMID 10347842 (1999) — Nihon yakurigaku zasshi. Folia pharmacologica Japonica
TITLE: [Hemostatic effect of a novel sheeted fibrin adhesive agent, TO-193, on experimental incision models].
DOI: 10.1254/fpj.113.177 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: TO-193 (TachoComb) is a new fibrin adhesive agent that consists of a collagen sheet coated with fibrin glue. We compared the hemostatic effect of TO-193 in several experimental models with Beriplast P as a fibrin adhesive agent, Avitene and Novacol as a microfibrillar collagen hemostat, and a sponge-like collagen sheet as the constitutional parts of TO-193. In the in vitro bleeding model in which blood leaks out through cotton cloth, the pressure of TO-193 when blood leakage was observed was higher than those of Beriplast P, Avitene, Novacol and the collagen sheet, indicating that TO-193 possessed a strong adhesive effect on the bleeding surface. On the kidney resection surface, TO-193 showed a more potent adhesive effect than those of Beriplast P and the collagen sheet, suggesting that TO-193 has a potent hemostatic effect. In the liver resection, TO-193 significantly reduced the bleeding volume compared with that of Novacol in normal rats. Furthermore, the bleeding volume of TO-193 was about half that of Beriplast P and equivalent to that of Novacol even in anticoagulant-treated rats. From these data, it is expected that TO-193 would be a valuable hemostatic agent for clinical use since TO-193 possesses a potent adhesive ability on the bleeding resection surface and would certainly stop bleeding in both patients with normal coagulation and those with a low blood coagulation condition.

### PMID 10327079 (1999) — Journal of investigative surgery : the official journal of the Academy of Surgical Research
TITLE: Comparison of two topical collagen-based hemostatic sponges during cardiothoracic procedures.
DOI: 10.1080/089419399272656 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The need for topical hemostasis during cardiothoracic procedures continues to fuel the development of additional hemostatic products with a focus on minimizing cost and increasing efficacy. The efficacy of a recently approved collagen-based topical hemostatic agent (Hemostagene, Coletica, S.A., Lyon, France) was tested in a prospective randomized trial of 60 consecutive patients undergoing cardiothoracic surgical procedures. Comparisons to a control collagen sponge (Helistat, Integra Life Sciences, Inc., Plainsboro, NJ) were made and hemostasis was considered successful if bleeding was controlled in 10 min or less. We employed a unique hemorrhage grading scale to more closely assess the relative effectiveness of these different topical agents. Overall, Hemostagene and Helistat achieved a successful hemostasis rate of 75% and 77%, respectively, with no statistically significant difference. The Hemostagene sponge was deemed easier to handle when compared to control. During the study, neither of the products was associated with complications attributable to the topical sponge. In conclusion, Hemostagene had improved handling characteristics yet was equal to Helistat at topical hemostasis, adding an alternative to the topical hemostatic market.

### PMID 9468043 (1998) — Journal of biomedical materials research
TITLE: Polyethylene glycol/microfibrillar collagen composite as a new resorbable hemostatic bone wax.
DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4636(19980305)39:3&lt;358::aid-jbm3&gt;3.0.co;2-i | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Although bone wax is effective at achieving hemostasis, it is nonresorbable, causes a foreign body reaction, and inhibits osteogenesis. We report development of a polyethylene glycol/microfibrillar collagen composite (PEG/MFC) that has inherent hemostatic qualities, is biodegradable, and is compatible with bone repair. PEG/MFC composite (n = 42) was placed in 5 mm cranial defects in New Zealand white rabbits. Hemostasis and healing were compared to unfilled defects (n = 32) and defects filled with standard bone wax (n = 10). Both PEG/MFC and bone wax handled well and stopped bleeding. The polyethylene glycol component was resorbed by 8 h, and the microfibrillar collagen was resorbed over 2 months, eliciting only a minor inflammatory response during the first month. Defects filled with the PEG/MFC composite showed similar amounts of bony regeneration as did unfilled control defects. At 4 weeks, healing bone accounted for 43 +/- 13% in those treated with PEG/MFC and 47 +/- 19% defect area in untreated holes. In contrast, less than 1% of the area was bone in defects filled with bone wax (p &lt; 0.05). PEG/MFC composite provided excellent bony hemostasis and did not inhibit bone growth.

### PMID 9498506 (1998) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Endovascular treatment of intractable oronasal bleeding associated with severe craniofacial injury.
DOI: 10.1097/00005373-199802000-00017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Severe craniofacial injury may cause intractable oronasal bleeding, which is refractory to conventional treatments. This study will evaluate the efficacy of endovascular treatment for such oronasal bleeding.
METHODS: Nine males between the ages of 19 and 62 years who had intractable oronasal bleeding resulting from severe craniofacial injuries received treatments of transarterial embolization using Gelfoam pledgets, polyvinyl alcohol particles, or platinum coils. We then reviewed their clinical and neuroradiologic characteristics retrospectively.
RESULTS: In all but one case, angiography demonstrated bleeding points as extravasation. These bleeding points were multiple in seven cases. Except for bleeding from ethmoidal arteries, selective embolization was successful. In all cases, intractable oronasal bleeding was controlled. Patient survival was not directly related to oronasal bleeding, but rather was strongly correlated with associated brain injuries.
CONCLUSION: Endovascular treatment is an acceptable treatment for intractable oronasal bleeding associated with severe craniofacial injuries when conventional treatments have failed.

### PMID 9271731 (1997) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Microfibrillar collagen (Avitene) and antibiotic-containing fibrin-glue after median sternotomy.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.1997.tb00104.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A technique to control bleeding before closure of median sternotomy after cardiac procedures is described. This technique is useful in patients when conventional methods of hemostasis are ineffective because of hypocoaguability, sternal fracture, or friable sternum.

### PMID 9024819 (1996) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Comparative in vitro analysis of topical hemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.1996.0379 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Hemostatic agents are broadly utilized across the surgical specialties. While specific characteristics desirable for individual applications may vary, these agents generally are expected to aid the patient's coagulation system in the rapid development of an occlusive clot. Six commonly utilized hemostatic agents were quantitatively compared in terms of their ability to mediate platelet aggregation, deposition and activation, and initiate gross clot formation in a series of in vitro tests. Three types of collagen sponges (Actifoam, Helistat, Instat), microfibrillar collagen (Avitene), a gelatin sponge (Gelfoam), and oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel) were studied. Platelet aggregation: Citrated platelet rich plasma (PRP) was contacted with hemostatic agents both with and without thrombin in a stirred cuvette and the platelet count was measured over 5 min. Platelet deposition: To approximate arterial wounds, PRP was perfused in a controlled manner through hemostatic agents, and the effluent platelet count was measured over time. Platelet activation: ATP secretion from PRP contacted with hemostatic agents in a stirred cuvette was measured at 1 and 5 min. Clot formation: The clotting time of nonanticoagulated whole blood contacted with the hemostatic agents was measured. Materials which depleted platelets most rapidly and effectively in the perfusion system (Avitene, Helistat, and Actifoam) were also the most effective inducers of platelet aggregation and secretion. Clot formation (likely to be platelet dependent) was also more rapid in this group. An overall activity ranking combined the relative performance of each hemostatic agent on the various tests: Actifoam approximately Avitene &gt; Helistat &gt;&gt; Gelfoam &gt; Instat &gt; Surgicel. The activity ranking generally reflects the materials used in these agents (collagen &gt; gelatin &gt; oxidized regenerated cellulose), as well as their processing (chemical crosslinking in collagen sponges may lower activity). Such in vitro assessment of the relative platelet and coagulation activities of hemostatic agents might serve as a useful screening tool before investigating properties which require more expensive animal or clinical testing.

### PMID 7640472 (1995) — Surgery today
TITLE: How safe are the xenogeneic hemostats?--Report of a case of severe systemic allergic reaction.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00311821 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report herein the unusual case of a 55-year-old woman who developed a severe systemic allergy to Avitene (microfibrillar collagen hydrochloride), a xenogeneic agent sometimes used for topical hemostasis in laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The patient developed fever, general fatigue, mild liver dysfunction, and prominent eosinophilia postoperatively. A skin allergy test confirmed that these abnormal findings were attributable to an allergic reaction to Avitene.

### PMID 7497494 (1995) — Catheterization and cardiovascular diagnosis
TITLE: Repeat embolization of the side branch of the internal mammary artery graft by gelatin sponge particles and micro coils.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.1810340116 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The internal mammary artery (IMA) is increasingly used as a coronary bypass conduit because of better long-term patency and improved prognosis as compared with venous grafts. Previous investigators have suggested that the "steal" of blood flow of the IMA graft via the subclavian artery or a persistent large side branch of the graft may lead to its thinning. However, only a few reports have described the embolization of a large side branch using a transcatheter procedure. We present a case of repeated embolization of a large lateral costal side branch of the left internal mammary arterial graft applying gelatin sponge particles and micro coils, as well as angioplasty to the graft conduit, with resulting easing of chest pain.

### PMID 8528779 (1995) — European spine journal : official publication of the European Spine Society, the European Spinal Deformity Society, and the European Section of the Cervical Spine Research Society
TITLE: Epidural scar tissue formation after spinal surgery: an experimental study.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00303413 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Extensive epidural scar formation is a well-known complication after spine surgery. Fibrous adhesions around nerve roots are a major reason for recurrent neurological symptoms following lumbar discectomy. A large variety of materials, implanted onto the dura, have been used to prevent or reduce laminectomy membrane, with conflicting results. We therefore carried out an experimental study in dogs to compare those materials that seemed to be most suitable. In each of 30 adult beagles, three lumbar laminectomies were performed. Each level was covered with a different material--free autologous fat graft, cellulose mesh, Gelfoam or triamcinolone suspension. In a control group nothing was implanted. After 7 days or 1, 3 or 6 months the animals were killed. The lumbar vertebral columns were harvested and prepared for further histological examination. To compare the results, we designed a new classification scheme (scar index). The data were obtained without knowledge of implanted material or time since operation. We found that free autologous fat grafts are able to reduce epidural scar formation in a high proportion of cases, especially after 3 and 6 months; cellulose mesh showed the worst results. We conclude that free autologous fat grafts are superior to other materials because of simple operative handling, good compatibility and effective prevention of laminectomy membrane.

### PMID 7983888 (1994) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Use of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene) and thrombin to achieve hemostasis after median sternotomy.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 8166495 (1994) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Removal of Avitene microfibrillar collagen hemostat by use of suitable transfusion filters.
DOI: 10.1016/0003-4975(94)90224-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We assessed the ability of two commercial filters (Pall RC100 and Statlabs 20 microns) to filter out Avitene microfibrillar collagen hemostat from suspension. Quantitative determination of the collagen content as well as scanning electron and light microscopy, particle counting, and platelet aggregometry of filtrates revealed that these filters effectively remove potentially thrombogenic particles of Avitene microfibrillar collagen hemostat. The filters removed at least 97% of the total collagen, as determined by hydroxyproline analysis. The collagen that passed through the Pall filter did not pellet upon ultracentrifugation. Scanning electron and light microscopic analysis revealed no Avitene microfibrillar collagen hemostat particulates in the Pall filtrates but did reveal the presence of a significant number of approximately 1- to 8-microns particulates in the Statlabs filtrates. Concentrates of the filtrates from either of the two filters, however, did not promote platelet aggregation. Through ultracentrifugation and infrared analysis, the filtrates were found to consists of soluble, partially denatured collagen. The risk associated with the reintroduction of collagen particulates into the vasculature can be significantly reduced by use of appropriate, currently available blood-transfusion filters.

### PMID 8268517 (1993) — Journal of laparoendoscopic surgery
TITLE: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat during laparoscopically directed liver biopsy.
DOI: 10.1089/lps.1993.3.415 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Meticulous hemostasis is a necessity during laparoscopic procedures in maintaining a clear visual field and avoiding the need for an extended laparotomy to secure hemostasis. Methods of hemostasis available to laparoscopic surgeons include direct pressure, suture/clip ligation, conventional monopolar or argon-enhanced coagulation, and application of topical hemostatic agents. The effectiveness of topical hemostatic agents for open surgical procedures has been demonstrated; however, to date, laparoscopic utilization of topical hemostatic agents has been hampered by lack of compatible forms for laparoscopic instillation. Endo-Avitene is a 15 x 50 mm rolled sheet of microfibrillar collagen hemostat, available in an applicator capable of placement through standard laparoscopic trocar. The use of Endo-Avitene during laparoscopically-directed liver biopsies in a porcine model is reported. The effective hemostatic properties of microfibrillar collagen hemostat were reaffirmed and the clinical utility of Endo-Avitene for laparoscopic use is demonstrated.

### PMID 8416335 (1993) — Catheterization and cardiovascular diagnosis
TITLE: Platelet adhesion/aggregation in an in vitro model of coronary artery stenosis.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.1810280113 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: Platelet adhesion/aggregation (PAA) at a site of coronary artery stenosis is believed to be a process strongly modulated by local shear rates and the functional state of neighboring endothelium. One purpose of the present work, therefore, is to describe an in vitro model for the direct imaging of such PAA. Another is to apply the model to the question as to whether the use of nonionic vs. ionic contrast media (CM) in the presence of vascular endothelium contributes to PAA at the stenosis site. Toward these ends, we utilized a special flow chamber which incorporates a monolayer of endothelial cells (ECs), a step 66% flowpath constriction at a site preadsorbed with microfibrillar collagen, and arterial shear rates. By epifluorescence microscopy and digital image analysis of video recordings, PAA was found to be greater with dysfunctional ECs (pretreated with lysine acetylsalicyclate) than with normal ECs, thereby confirming a modulatory role in PAA of functionally intact ECs. When nonionic (iohexol) or ionic (ioxaglate, diatrizoate) CM was added to the flowing blood at a concentration of 20% by non-red cell volume, PAA was inhibited in the order diatrizoate &gt; ioxaglate &gt; iohexol &gt; saline control. No inhibition by any CM was seen, however, when chamber prefill culture medium containing 20% by volume CM was displaced by CM-free blood, in simulation of bolus administration of CM. In terms of inhibition of PAA during percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), therefore, our model provides a conceptual basis by which one may anticipate in flowing blood no clear benefit of ionic over nonionic CM.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 8377898 (1993) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Hemorrhagic vascular lesions in facial injuries treated by intravascular embolization: report of two cases].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We have encountered 2 cases of hemorrhagic vascular lesion in the external carotid artery system caused by facial injury. In case 1, treatment of epistaxis by nasal packing was unsuccessful. Good result was obtained by intravascular embolization in the internal maxillary artery using polyvinyl alcohol particles and gelatin sponge pieces. In case 2, massive subgaleal hemorrhage due to tearing of the middle meningeal artery caused by a skull base fracture appeared following surgery for open skull fracture. Hemostasis was performed successfully by intravascular embolization in the middle meningeal artery using microcoils and gelatin sponge pieces. In cases of facial injuries with hemorrhagic lesions in the external carotid artery system, hemostasis is generally difficult. Referring to these two cases, we think that the treatment of choice is angiography followed by intravascular embolization.

### PMID 8455758 (1993) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Subsequent bleeding from ruptured intracranial aneurysms treated by wrapping or coating: a review of the long-term results in 47 cases.
DOI: 10.1227/00006123-199303000-00002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Forty-seven patients, who underwent surgery over a 34-year period by the wrapping or coating of ruptured intracranial aneurysms, have been retrospectively evaluated. The following materials were used in the surgical procedures: muscle with gelatin sponge (7 cases), gauze (2 cases), oxidized cellulose with Biobond (28 cases), Histoacryl with gauze or fascia (10 cases). The patients were monitored for up to 37 years (mean, 13.7 +/- 8.2 yr). One or more subsequent bleedings occurred in eight patients (17%). Three patients had additional bleeding and died in the early postoperative phase (within 1 mo after surgery). In five patients, the subsequent bleeding occurred between 1 and 15 years postoperatively, with two fatalities. One patient experienced two recurrences. Therefore, the mortality rate for postoperative bleedings was 10.6% (five patients) in the whole series, and the incidence of early (within 1 mo after surgery) fatal bleedings was 6.4%. After the first month from the initial hemorrhage, the global risk of subsequent bleeding was 0.93%/yr. Among the nine patients whose aneurysms were wrapped with muscle, gelatin sponge, or gauze, four additional bleedings occurred, whereas four relapses were observed among the 38 cases treated by employing bioadhesive agents (P &lt; 0.04; Fisher's exact test). The rate of further bleeding was higher (25%) in patients undergoing surgery in the premicrosurgical era compared with that (8.7%) recorded in patients treated by microsurgery (difference statistically not significant).

### PMID 8295648 (1993) — Neuro-Chirurgie
TITLE: [Teflon wrapping in cerebral aneurysm surgery. A technical note].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Wrapping is a well-known alternative technique when clipping the aneurysm is by no means possible or when it seems necessary to complete an imperfect clip. In 22 operated cases of intracranial aneurysm, we recently experienced pledgets of Teflon arranged and then fixed by drops of fibrin sealant. We used this technique in the following operative circumstances: to reinforce the ectatic base of the clipped aneurysm (11 cases); to wrap a pre-aneurysmal ectasia distant from the ruptured aneurysm (5 cases); to minimize the compression due to the clip to an adjacent cranial nerve or artery (6 cases). So far no complication was noted in relation to this technique. We then propose this technique of wrapping or interposing Teflon as an alternative to the other well-known techniques using autogenous tissue, gelatin sponge, cotton or other synthetic coatings or glue. Up to now, no known material received a worldwide approval for its complete innocuity and/or efficiency. Nowadays, in neurosurgical microvascular decompression and in cardiovascular surgery Teflon is widely and satisfactorily used. Its biologic tolerance is known to be good. This may apply in this new indication, and we would like recommend its practical use. However, for reliability and safety, there is an obvious need for a long-term clinical follow-up and an experimental controlled study as well.

### PMID 1343220 (1992) — American journal of physiologic imaging
TITLE: A radioimaging technique for quantifying regional myocardial blood flow.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: We developed a radioimaging technique for measuring regional myocardial blood flow (rMBF) in 5 mm2 myocardial tissue using canine closed-chest models. RMBF was measured in three groups: (1) total occlusion of left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery with microfibrillar collagen, (2) fixed stenosis of LAD with angioplasty balloon, and (3) comparison of clinical dose response of adenosine (AD) and dipyridamole (DP) on rMBF. In these studies, rMBF in every 5 mm2 tissue was measured throughout the epicardium and endocardium. In groups 1 and 2, rMBF was also measured during adenosine-induced coronary hyperemia (ADICH). In group 1 (n = 7), rMBF measured at 6 hours post-LAD occlusion in epicardial infarct center (IC), peri-infarct (PI) and normal zone (NZ) were 17 +/- 7, 55 +/- 8, and 132 +/- 12 ml/min/100 tissue, respectively. The area and location of infarct seen in TTC staining matched with rMBF images. During ADICH, the corresponding rMBF were 16.2 +/- 13.9, 98.3 +/- 53.0, and 226.0 +/- 103.6 ml/min/100 g tissue, respectively. RMBF measured during ADICH in group 2 (n = 4) in areas of LAD stenosis (LS), surrounding stenosis (SS), and no stenosis (NS) were 120 +/- 58, 249 +/- 123, and 432 +/- 181 ml/min/100 gm tissue, respectively. In group 3, rMBF measured during 3 min into 0.14 mg/kg/min adenosine infusion in areas perfused by LAD, circumflex (CX) and right coronary artery (RCA) were 244 +/- 22, 238 +/- 19, and 215 +/- 19 ml/min/100 g tissue, respectively.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 1739179 (1992) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Comparative efficacy of topical hemostatic agents in a rat kidney model.
DOI: 10.1016/0002-9610(92)90108-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The efficacies of four topical hemostatic agents were compared in a rat model employing a standardized renal injury. The materials used to effect hemostasis were oxidized cellulose, microfibrillar collagen powder, positively charged modified collagen, and single donor heterologous fibrin glue. Animals that were treated only with surgical gauze served as controls. Hemostasis was achieved by application of one of the topical hemostatic agents plus moderate digital pressure. The time necessary to achieve complete hemostasis was recorded for each animal. Control animals bled profusely and suffered an increased postoperative mortality rate compared with the experimental animals. Microscopic studies demonstrated progressive healing of the injuries with varying degrees of inflammation and scar formation. Fibrin glue was by far the most effective agent in controlling hemostasis. The collagen materials, though effective, required a longer time to control bleeding and did not differ statistically in their activity from one another.

### PMID 1570057 (1992) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Preoperative embolization for meningiomas using PVA particles].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Preoperative embolization for highly vascularized and large meningiomas is an indispensable technique for facilitating their surgical removal by decreasing blood loss during the operation. This is a report of 4 large and highly vascularized meningiomas in the skull base, on which embolization of feeders was performed preoperatively by PVA (Polyvinyl alcohol foam) particles (150-250 micron produced by INGENOR CO, Paris) and small strips of gelfoam (0.5 x 0.5 x 3-5mm). Under EEG monitoring, Isosorbide dinitrate was used for prevention and relief of vascular spasm. Lidocaine injection tests (Xylocaine 2%: 50mg mixed in equal volumes with Iopamiron 300) were performed for checking before embolization. In the intracranial portion, standard taper steerable guide wire was changed to seeker flexible soft-tip guide wire. In two cases, the meningioma was located in the medial part of the sphenoidal ridge. In the other two cases, one meningioma was in the lateral part of the sphenoidal ridge and the other was in the olfactory groove. In all 4 cases, we successfully performed embolization without complication. In one case, we had to perform embolization twice, because of revascularization detected by angiography 3 weeks after the first embolization. In this latter case, we had performed central embolization only, by using PVA particles, having left feeder without occlusion (peripheral embolization) using gelfoam. The result suggested that it was also necessary to perform peripheral embolization especially if the tumor is fed by large tortuous and irregular abnormal vessels. Peripheral embolization may prevent PVA particles from washing out and causing progressive thrombosis by PVA particles.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 1632226 (1992) — Acta orthopaedica Belgica
TITLE: [Prevention of peridural fibrosis following laminectomy. Apropos of a case of monoradicular paralysis due to an intracanalar hematoma on Gelfoam].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Gelfoam has routinely been used, according to Larroca and Macnab, to prevent scar formation about the dura mater and the nerve roots after laminectomy. We report a case in which postoperative monoradicular paralysis resulted from compression of the thecal cul-de-sac by a hematoma held in place by the Gelfoam. A review of the literature on prevention of adhesions after laminectomy is included.

### PMID 1758598 (1991) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Intracranial infection after missile injuries to the brain: report of 30 cases from the Lebanese conflict.
DOI: 10.1097/00006123-199112000-00010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study reviews the features of 30 intracranial infections complicating 600 penetrating head injuries from missiles in patients treated at the American University of Beirut Medical Center between 1981 and 1988. The follow-up period ranged from 1 month to 7 years (mean, 2.5 years). Sixteen patients had a brain abscess, 9 had cerebritis, 2 had an infected intracerebral hematoma, and 5 had meningitis. Infection developed 4 days to 7 years after the initial debridement. The infecting organisms were Gram positive in 11 patients (36%), Gram negative in 12 (40%), and a combination of Gram positive and Gram negative in 2 (7%). Twenty-four patients (80%) had wound dehiscence or cerebrospinal fluid leakage at the time the infection appeared. There was a 76% correlation between the organisms cultured from the dehiscent scalp wound and the brain. Twenty-three patients had intracranial retention of bone. Infection developed in 16 of the 30 patients (70%) around bone fragments, in 4 around a metallic fragment, in 2 around absorbable gelatin sponge, and in 3 along the missile tract; 2 had an infected intracerebral hematoma, and 3 had meningitis. At least one of the following risk factors was present in each patient: extensive brain injury, coma, trajectory through an air sinus, cerebrospinal fluid fistula, inadequate initial debridement, or incomplete dural closure. The incidence of intracranial infection in patients with postoperative retention of bone was 4% in the absence of scalp wound dehiscence, compared with 84.6% when wound dehiscence was present. Ten patients (43%) still retained a bone fragment measuring less than 1 cm after excision of a brain abscess or treatment of cerebritis or meningitis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 2104767 (1990) — Blood
TITLE: Platelet aggregation in flowing blood at a site of injury to an endothelial cell monolayer: quantitation and real-time imaging with the TAB monoclonal antibody.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: Epifluorescence videomicroscopy permits real-time imaging of platelet adhesion/aggregation to a defined microinjury of a monolayer of endothelial cells exposed to flowing blood. The fluorescent label is the TAB murine monoclonal antibody directed against human platelet GP IIB, together with a fluorescein-conjugated goat F(ab')2 against murine immunoglobulin. The combination assures specificity for platelet membranes, yet leaves platelet function intact. TAB is first added to gently mixed, citrated human blood; the second antibody is added 1 hour after the first, mixing continuing for a second hour. Bovine aortic endothelial cell monolayers (ECMs), grown on rectangular cover glasses precoated with microfibrillar collagen, comprise one wall of a flow chamber mounted on a vertical microscope stage. A loop of 6-0 sterile suture is drawn across the ECM in order to create microinjuries of width 70 +/- 15 microns (mean +/- SD) oriented in a direction transverse to flow. Platelet adhesion/aggregation is virtually absent on intact and confluent regions of the monolayer. On micro-injury sites and at shear rates of 60 to 1,080 sec-1, however, computer-enhanced images obtained by means of videomicroscopy show arrival and adherence of single platelets resulting in the formation of platelet aggregates elongated in the flow direction. When the monolayers are pretreated with 1.0 mmol/L lysine acetylsalicylate, the mean aggregate thickness increases (2P less than .05) to 260 +/- 58% (mean +/- SE, N = 6) of control, aggregates are regularly shed downstream, and the surface area of the injury site covered by platelets is augmented (2P less than .05) from 14.8 +/- 3.9% to 49.2 +/- 4.7% (mean +/- SE, N = 6). Donor ingestion of aspirin, on the other hand, leads to an increase (2P less than .01) in percent surface coverage to 42.7 +/- 8.5 without a concomitant increase in mean aggregate thickness. In parallel with the above, outflow levels of serum thromboxane and prostacyclin are measured by radioimmunoassays (RIAs) for thromboxane B2 and 6-Keto-PGF1 alpha, respectively. Thromboxane B2 is increased (2P less than .01) by monolayer pretreatment with lysine acetylsalicylate from 5.08 +/- 1.47 to 9.35 +/- 2.42, but decreased (2P less than .05) after oral aspirin to 1.21 +/- 0.38 ng/mL (mean +/- SE, N = 6). Levels of 6-Keto-PGF1 alpha were reduced (2P less than .05) by monolayer pretreatment from 0.48 +/- 0.046 to 0.36 +/- 0.016 ng/mL. Platelet adhesion/aggregation at a site of injury to an endothelial cell monolayer, therefore, can be imaged in flowing blood in real time using a monoclonal antibody approach.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

### PMID 2402695 (1990) — Spine
TITLE: Effects of sodium hyaluronate on peridural fibrosis after lumbar laminotomy and discectomy.
DOI: 10.1097/00007632-199006000-00022 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Sodium hyaluronate, 1.9% solution, was evaluated for its ability to retard peridural fibrosis after unilateral lumbar hemilaminotomy, anular fenestration, and nuclectomy in dogs. Three materials: fat grafts, gelfoam, and sodium hyaluronate, were compared with empty controls for their ability to inhibit peridural fibrosis. Each dog served as his own internal control and the formation of fibrosis was evaluated at 2, 4, 12, and 26 weeks. Sodium hyaluronate was found to inhibit fibrosis more than the other materials on both a macroscopic and microscopic level. The area of fibrosis and tenacity of the adhesions on dissection were notably less in the sodium hyaluronate group. Microscopically, the thickness of collagen and number of fibroblasts were decreased with the use of 1.9% sodium hyaluronate. The peridural fibrosis occurred equally both anteriorly and posteriorly to the nerve roots and correlated with the area of surgical dissection. Fat grafts were not effective in preventing fibrosis anteriorly, especially in the region of the exiting nerve roots. Gelfoam did not inhibit but actually appeared to increase fibrosis formation. Interposition materials currently used in humans to prevent scar formation such as gelfoam and fat grafts have only addressed the posterior scar formation, which do little to alter the fibrosis anteriorly. The adhesions between the nerve root and the anulus fibrosus bind the nerve root down anteriorly, making it more vulnerable to recurrent disc herniation. Sodium hyaluronate, 1.9% solution, with its viscous semifluid properties, coats the nerve roots and dura anteriorly and posteriorly.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 2352602 (1990) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Inflammatory intracranial mass lesion: an unusual complication resulting from the use of Gelfoam.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: There are few reported complications associated with the use of Gelfoam. We report the case of a 29-year-old woman who developed signs and symptoms of meningeal inflammation and an expanding intracranial mass related to the intracranial use of Gelfoam. Findings were confirmed by surgical exploration. Signs and symptoms resolved promptly after therapy with intravenous dexamethasone, but complete resolution of radiological findings required 5 months. As the use of Gelfoam is essential to neurosurgical practice, it is important to be aware of significant complications related to its use.

### PMID 2325612 (1990) — Nihon Geka Gakkai zasshi
TITLE: [Experimental studies on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) perfusion for respiratory insufficiency associated with pulmonary hypertension].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Some types of neonatal respiratory insufficiency may be associated with severe pulmonary hypertension. This paper evaluates two methodologies of ECMO perfusion in the treatment of such serious respiratory insufficiency. Pulmonary hypertension was prepared in dogs by administering small pieces of gelatin sponge into the main pulmonary artery. The two methodologies of perfusion were venoarterial bypass (VAB) and venovenous bypass (VVB). Prior to ECMO perfusion, oxygen supplementation during perfusion and hemodynamics were examined. Oxygen supplementation was satisfactory in both VAB and VVB. With VAB, the mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) was significantly dropped from 33.8 +/- 3.1 mmHg to 28.4 +/- 6.2 mmHg, the pulmonary blood flow (PBF) being significantly declined from 1.39 +/- 0.21 L/min to 1.07 +/- 0.15 L/min. With VVB, mPAP was significantly dropped from 33.9 +/- 6.2 mmHg to 29.1 +/- 5.1 mmHg, the pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) being significantly decreased from 1983.1 +/- 656.0 dynes.sec.cm-5 to 1740.4 +/- 635.9 dynes.sec.cm-5. It is considered that VAB renders PBF decline, which induces a drop in PAP, while VVB accelerates a flow of well-oxygenated blood in the pulmonary artery, which results in a decline in PVR and then a drop in PAP. VVB as well as VAB is useful in the treatment of neonates with respiratory insufficiency who present with pulmonary hypertension.

### PMID 2711039 (1989) — Research in experimental medicine. Zeitschrift fur die gesamte experimentelle Medizin einschliesslich experimenteller Chirurgie
TITLE: The chick chorioallantoic membrane as test system for biocompatible materials.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01856032 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Biologic and non-biologic materials clinically used as hemostyptica, as vascular prostheses, or as temporary skin substitutes were implanted to the chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) during days 9-14 of incubation. The histological study revealed an intact CAM after application of cellulose gauze (Tabotamp). The fibrin tissue adhesive (Tissucol), the collagen sponge (Tachotop), or the gelatin sponge (Gelfoam) induced different amounts of connective tissue. Some fibroblasts were about to grow into the fibrin adhesive. Fibroblasts and capillaries filled the interstices of the collagen sponge poorly, and in the case of the gelatin sponge markedly. Neutrophils and giant cells of the foreign body type occurred more often in the gelatin sponge than in the collagen sponge. With regard to the non-biologic materials, expanded polytetrafluorethylene induced squamous metaplasia of the chorionic epithelium. Dacron caused ulceration with the onset of connective tissue ingrowth, based on a reaction of giant cells of the foreign body type. Polyurethane foam (SYSpur-derm) showed bleeding into the implant due to spikes of the material. Eosinophilic granulocytes were absent in all materials studied. The results are related to different clinical findings. The correlation allows consideration of the CAM as an in vivo model in screening materials for their biocompatibility and their connective tissue reaction.

### PMID 2687712 (1989) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Peculiar computed tomographic images after intracranial use of microfibrillar collagen hemostat: report of three cases].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: After the intracranial application of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene), CT revealed contrast enhancement suggestive of brain abscess or residual or recurrent tumor in three patients. The first case was a 22-year-old male with left ventricular oligodendroglioma. At operation Avitene was applied to the ventricular wall and incised frontal lobe. Two months after the operation CT revealed ring enhancement at the left frontal lobe and ventricular enlargement. Craniotomy was performed again. Histological examination, however, revealed no recurrent tumor but residual Avitene and granulation. The second case was a 57-year-old female with left parietal glioblastoma multiforme. At operation Avitene was applied to the tumor cavity. Two months after the operation CT showed ring enhancement and craniotomy was performed again. Histological examination revealed residual Avitene and necrotic tissue. Five months after the first operation, craniotomy was performed for the third time, because recurrence was suspected after a CT scan. Histological examination revealed recurrent tumor and residual Avitene. The third case was a 19-year-old male with left frontal astrocytoma. Two months after the operation when Avitene was used for hemostasis, marked ring enhancement was observed. Five months after the operation, however, enhancement in CT was weak. The CT findings in these patients were characterized by the abnormally long duration of enhancement (five months) and by enhancement more marked two to three months after the operation than immediately after it. Based on these findings brain abscess or residual or recurrent tumor rather than normal healing was more suspect as the cause of this phenomenon. Brain abscess was ruled out, because the peripheral leukocyte count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP, etc. were normal.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 2679465 (1989) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Simultaneous use of microfibrillar collagen hemostat and blood saving devices in a canine kidney perfusion model.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(10)66854-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative autotransfusion and topical microfibrillar collagen hemostats have been increasingly used, often simultaneously, in various surgical procedures to minimize intraoperative blood loss and thus reduce the inherent risks of homologous blood transfusion. As moderate amounts of small particles have been shown to pass through filtering devices during intraoperative autotransfusion, concern has been raised over the amount of heterologous collagen fibrils transfused and their effect on the host. We found that 2% of microfibrillar collagen hemostat particles pass through the 20-microns millipore filter contained in the tested autotransfusion device (William Harvey H-4700 cardiotomy reservoir). Using a canine kidney perfusion model, we found multifocal perivascular inflammatory reactions within the renal parenchyma five days after transfusion of filtered autologous blood containing minute amounts of microfibrillar collagen hemostat. The findings demonstrate a strong inflammatory foreign body response to heterologous collagen particles trapped in the microcirculation of the perfused kidneys. It is concluded that despite using filters with a pore size of 20 microns, using intraoperative autotransfusion and microfibrillar collagen hemostats simultaneously creates a potential risk because adverse reactions can be elicited especially within the microvasculature of tissues containing end-arterial circulation.

### PMID 3173629 (1988) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Clinical application of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene) in neurosurgical field].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene) is a new absorbable hemostatic agent, of which mechanisms are adhesion to the bleeding site and platelet aggregation. Histopathological examinations revealed that Avitene was biocompatible with cerebral cortex in an animal experiments. Our previous studies indicated that Avitene is very effective and safe to use as a topical hemostatic agent during craniotomy in an experimental animal. Avitene was used as a topical hemostatic agent during craniotomy in 36 patients with intracranial organic lesions. Its effectiveness of hemostasis was revealed in 95%. This agent was especially useful to prevent oozing during craniotomy. Side effect of this agent was not reported in this study. Therefore, Avitene is very effective and safe to use as a topical hemostatic agent in the neurosurgical field.

### PMID 3286706 (1988) — The Journal of dermatologic surgery and oncology
TITLE: Topical hemostatic agents for dermatologic surgery.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-4725.1988.tb03390.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic agents are very helpful in attaining capillary and small vessel hemostasis in dermatologic surgery. The commonly used topical hemostatic agents, including oxidized cellulose, absorbable gelatin, and thrombin are reviewed, along with newer agents such as microfibrillar collagen, fibrin sealants, and acrylates. Agents best suited for certain situations are recommended.

### PMID 3360576 (1988) — International surgery
TITLE: The use of absorbable microfibrillation collagen to control sternal bone marrow bleeding.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Because of the fact that bone wax plays a significant role in delayed healing of the sternum an alternative technique for the control of sternal bone marrow bleeding has been devised. It consists of the application of fashioned strips of absorbable microfibrillar collagen to the cut surface of the sternal marrow after the sternum is divided and/or prior to its closure. This initial clinical experience has been excellent.

### PMID 3395009 (1988) — American journal of veterinary research
TITLE: Influence of nonbiologic implants on laminectomy membrane formation in dogs.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The effects of various surgical implants, spinal cord hypothermia, and glucocorticoid administration on formation of the laminectomy membrane were evaluated in 32 preconditioned chondrodystrophoid dogs. Modified dorsal laminectomies and full-length durotomies, from T12 to L1, were performed on all dogs. Dogs were allotted to 2 groups. Group-1 dogs (n = 20) were further allocated to 4 subgroups (a, b, c, and d) consisting of 5 dogs each. Group-1a dogs received no implant, group-1b dogs had absorbable gelatin sponges implanted, group-1c dogs had absorbable gelatin films implanted, and group-1d dogs had absorbable gelatin sponges and absorbable gelatin films implanted. Daily neurologic examinations permitted correlation of neurologic dysfunction with secondary spinal cord compression in those dogs in which it developed. The influence of these implants on laminectomy membrane formation and dural healing was assessed by gross and microscopic evaluation of transverse sections of the vertebrae and spinal cord after euthanasia of one member of each subgroup at 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 weeks after surgery. Group-2 dogs (n = 12) were further allotted to 3 subgroups (a, b, and c) consisting of 4 dogs each. One dog in each group-2 subgroup underwent the same surgical procedures described for the group-1 subgroups (ie, 4 procedures/group-2 subgroup). The additional effects of 3 conventional supportive techniques (selective regional spinal cord hypothermia, glucocorticoid administration, or spinal cord hypothermia and glucocorticoid administration) on laminectomy membrane formation and on immediate postoperative recovery were examined in groups 2a, 2b, and 2c, respectively. Neurologic examinations were performed daily until this time. All dogs in group 2 were euthanatized 1 week after surgery for gross and microscopic examination of transverse sections of the vertebrae and spinal cord. Qualitative histopathologic effects of the different implants and supportive techniques on formation of the laminectomy membrane were determined. Statistical analysis of the degrees of secondary spinal cord compression was performed in group-1 dogs by measuring and comparing ratios of the vertical to the horizontal diameters of the transverse spinal cord sections from locations within (T12 to L1) and out of (T11, T11-12, L1-2, and L2) the region of surgical intervention. The vertical/horizontal diameter ratios measured from transverse sections from T11 to L2 in size-matched, untreated control dogs formed the standards for a mean roundness index of the spinal cord in the various anatomic locations of the vertebral column.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

### PMID 3124582 (1988) — AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology
TITLE: A mimicker of a postoperative spinal mass: gelfoam in a laminectomy site.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 3428722 (1987) — Haemostasis
TITLE: In vitro effect of a microfibrillar collagen hemostat on platelets.
DOI: 10.1159/000215769 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Microscopic particles of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (MCH) have been shown to pass through a 40-micron blood transfusion filter. This study indicates that MCH passing through the filter retains a significant portion of its ability to aggregate platelets in vitro and the aggregating ability is dose related. The extent of platelet aggregation in the presence of the MCH filtrate or an ADP standard was measured photometrically and log dose-response curves constructed from the data. An ED50 of 3.6 micrograms protein/ml platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was calculated at a protein concentration of 7.6 mg/ml in the MCH filtrate and an ED50 of 5.9 micrograms protein/ml PRP at 12 mg/ml protein in the MCH filtrate. The platelet aggregating ability of the MCH filtrates corresponded to 18.8 and 39.6% of the maximum response produced by adenosine-5'-diphosphate. These findings support the view that blood contaminated with MCH should not be returned to a patient's circulation.

### PMID 3437968 (1987) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Peritumoral and intratumoral hemorrhage after gelatin sponge embolization of malignant meningioma: case report.
DOI: 10.1227/00006123-198712000-00031 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors report a case of peritumoral and intratumoral hemorrhage during therapeutic embolization with gelatin sponge powder for malignant meningioma. One should be wary of this severe, unexpected complication when performing preoperative embolization.

### PMID 3808191 (1986) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Experimental study on brain tissue of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene)].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene) is a new absorbable topical hemostatic agent, of which hemostatic mechanisms are adhesion to the bleeding site and platelet aggregation. Avitene was used to obtain hemostasis and compared with Gelfoam or Oxycel in the injured cerebral cortex in a rabbit. The animals were killed and the lesions were examined grossly and microscopically to evaluate its biocompatibility in the cerebral cortex. Histopathological examinations revealed that Avitene was biocompatible with cerebral cortex in a rabbit. Electroencephalographies did not show the epileptogenic focus when Avitene was applied on the cerebral cortex in a rabbit. It has been applied for the bleeding during surgery for several years. Its effectiveness of hemostasis has been well known. This study indicated that Avitene is very effective and safe to use as a topical hemostatic agent during craniotomy in a rabbit. Therefore, this agent may be useful in a patient with minor and diffuse bleeding in the neurosurgical field.

### PMID 3762206 (1986) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Inherent dangers of simultaneous application of microfibrillar collagen hemostat and blood-saving devices.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat is a topically applicable hemostatic agent that has been introduced relatively recently. Because of the possibility that this substance may pass through different blood-collecting circuits and cause organ damage if reintroduced into the patient's circulation, we performed a series of in vitro and in vivo experiments. The results of these experiments suggest that such a passage may indeed occur and could cause organ damage, either by direct or by induced embolization that cannot be completely prevented even with the application of commercially used filters. We therefore recommend that the substance should not be used if the shed blood is intended to be collected and returned into the patient's circulation.

### PMID 3520941 (1986) — Thrombosis research
TITLE: Hemostatic effects of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (MCH) in experimental coagulopathy model and its mechanism of hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/0049-3848(86)90269-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 3704914 (1986) — Surgery
TITLE: Pigskin as a topical hemostat in arterial, liver, and splenic injuries.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Pigskin made commercially available as porcine-derived dermal collagen (PDC) contains a macrofibrillar collagen surface that initiates platelet aggregation and the intrinsic pathway clotting mechanism. Sterile-irradiated PDC, nonirradiated PDC, and lyophilized PDC were tested for hemostatic effectiveness and cost for hemostasis against each other and Avitene powder, Avitene web, Collastat, Gelfoam, Superstat, and Thrombostat. Canine arterial, liver, and splenic bleeding models were used. In arterial wounds PDC was more effective than Avitene powder, Avitene web, and Gelfoam (p less than 0.05) and also Superstat and Thrombostat (p less than 0.01). First application success rates revealed that PDC agents were more successful overall (85%) than the next three most successful agents: Avitene powder, Avitene web, and Collastat (56%) (p less than 0.01). Differences in success rates of hepatic and splenic wounds were less marked but still significant. Cost of hemostasis was relatively low for PDC agents in comparison to the other agents. PDC is an effective topical hemostatic agent in experimental canine arterial, liver, and splenic wounds when compared with several currently used agents and can also result in cost savings.

### PMID 4078239 (1985) — The Journal of foot surgery
TITLE: Application and assessment of microfibrillar collagen hemostat in heel spur surgery: a preliminary study.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen is described. The method of application and use on the exposed surface of cancellous bone encountered in heel spur surgery, herein defined as a resection of the inferior calcaneal exostosis with plantar fasciotomy, is discussed. Microfibrillar collagen's chief effect on cancellous bone is rapid, dramatic cessation of bone bleeding. It was assessed in terms of its effect on postoperative pain, quantitative subcutaneous hematoma formation, and edema. Although patients initially experienced increased discomfort during the first 24 hr. postoperatively, their edema, subcutaneous hematoma formation, and, more dramatically, need for narcotic analgesics was significantly reduced in the microfibrillar patient group when compared to patients having the same surgical procedures without the microfibrillar collagen intraoperatively. There were no postoperative complications encountered after the use of microfibrillar collagen in any of the 23 cases.

### PMID 3856007 (1985) — Journal of periodontology
TITLE: Collagen sponge as a topical hemostatic agent in mucogingival surgery.
DOI: 10.1902/jop.1985.56.1.35 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage from palatal donor sites during periodontal mucogingival surgery was controlled by application of Collastat absorbable hemostatic sponges. The use of collagen sponges was evaluated in 20 free-graft cases. In contrast to microfibrillar collagen, which is normally delivered as clumps of material, a Collastat sponge was applied as a single piece that maintained structural integrity even when wet and was easy to maneuver into place. The highly porous sponges conformed to the wound, absorbed fluid and produced consistently reliable hemostasis with no secondary bleeding. By stemming the seepage of blood into the throat, patient safety and comfort were improved. The sponges were left on the wounds and removed at the 1-week postoperative visit, revealing well-formed granulation tissue. Healing proceeded normally with no evidence of infection, tissue reaction, or other adverse effects.

### PMID 6739589 (1984) — Plastic and reconstructive surgery
TITLE: Applicator for intranasal avitene.
DOI: 10.1097/00006534-198407000-00025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene) is a readily available, effective method of controlling bleeding following turbinate resection. The granular form, when introduced by syringe, allows the Avitene to conform to the irregularities of the cavity into which it is introduced. This method has simplified management of difficult bleeding problems found in the deep recesses of the nasal cavity.

### PMID 6204410 (1984) — The Thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon
TITLE: The control of bleeding after cardiopulmonary bypass by the intrapericardial instillation of fresh frozen plasma and platelets with microfibrillar collagen.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-1023368 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A technique of, and the results obtained with, the intraoperative and postoperative intrapericardial instillation of microfibrillar collagen and fresh frozen plasma and platelet mixture are presented. Intraoperatively, the mixture was instilled into the exposed mediastinum in the course of open-heart operations in 31 patients in whom diffuse oozing of blood persisted following the termination of cardiopulmonary bypass and the neutralization of circulating heparin. Immediate clot formation and decrease of blood loss were observed in all instances. This method was also found effective in 9 of 20 patients who had continuing blood loss during the hours following open-heart surgery and in whom the mixture was instilled through the mediastinal drainage tubes.

### PMID 6731191 (1984) — Hinyokika kiyo. Acta urologica Japonica
TITLE: [Clinical studies on topical hemostat Avitene in urological surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Avitene (Microfibrillar Collagen Hemostat) is a new absorbable topical hemostatic agent, of which action mechanisms are platelet entrapment and activation of platelet clotting factors. It was used clinically on 11 patients for bleeding during urological surgery; bleeding from renal beds, resectional surfaces of kidney, urethras and floor of the pelvis, prostatic capsule and renal pelvis. The patients were 9 males and 2 females aged from 30 to 71 years old. Avitene was applied directly to the source of bleeding in a dry condition after the treatment of large vessel hemostasis. Pressure was applied to the area, and after 3 to 5 minutes, the excess of this material was removed. Avitene was successful in rapidly controlling bleeding in all the patients. No patient had secondary bleeding and complications attributed to the use of this material. This study indicates that Avitene is very effective as a topical hemostatic agent, particularly in urological surgery.

### PMID 6472597 (1984) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Ischemic necrosis of the scalp after preoperative embolization of meningeal tumors.
DOI: 10.1227/00006123-198407000-00014 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors report two patients who suffered ischemic necrosis of their scalps after preoperative therapeutic embolic occlusion of the external carotid artery and its terminal branches for highly vascular meningeal tumors. Local anesthesia, selective catheterization of the external carotid artery, and radiopaque polyvinyl alcohol and Gelfoam as embolic agents were used. The various complications of external carotid artery embolization are reviewed. The importance of preserving normal branches of the external carotid artery (especially the superficial temporal artery) during embolization and of careful design of the scalp flap to avoid ischemic necrosis is emphasized.

### PMID 6228653 (1983) — The Journal of reproductive medicine
TITLE: Translaparoscopic hemostasis with microfibrillar collagen in lieu of laparotomy. A report of two cases.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Laparoscopy has become an integral part of the gynecologist's armamentarium in the diagnosis and treatment of abdominopelvic conditions. Although it was originally designed only for diagnostic purposes, experienced laparoscopists are performing an increasing amount of surgery translaparoscopically, thereby avoiding the need for major surgical procedures, such as laparotomy. Evaluation of a source of active bleeding is a common indication for diagnostic laparoscopy. A suspected uterine perforation during dilatation and curettage requires such an investigation in most instances when active bleeding is suspected. We report two instances in which laparoscopic visualization identified a source of continuous bleeding at the uterine serosal surface following perforation during curettage. Translaparoscopic application of a microcrystalline collagen hemostatic substance (Avitene) was used to control bleeding at the hemorrhagic site and thus avoid a major abdominal surgical procedure.

### PMID 6190604 (1983) — Clinical science (London, England : 1979)
TITLE: Inhibitory effects of ZK 36374, a stable prostacyclin analogue, on adhesion of rabbit platelets to damaged aorta and serotonin release by adherent platelets.
DOI: 10.1042/cs0650149 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The effects of ZK 36374, a prostacyclin analogue, were studied on adhesion of rabbit platelets to damaged rabbit aorta and on activation of platelets (judged by release of serotonin and formation of thromboxane-B2) in response to the processes of adhesion to the vessel surface and aggregation in response to microfibrillar collagen in suspension. In the presence of ZK 36374 (10-100 nmol/l), platelet adhesion and thromboxane-B2 formation were progressively reduced. The extent of serotonin release from adherent platelets was similar to that found for platelets aggregated with collagen. However, higher concentrations of ZK 36374 were required to inhibit serotonin release from adherent platelets than from aggregated platelets. The results indicate that ZK 36374 acts similarly to native prostacyclin on adhesion and collagen-induced aggregation and unlike previously described analogues is equipotent. The mechanism of release of serotonin induced by adhesion of platelets is less sensitive to the action of ZK 36374 than that of release induced by aggregation in response to microfibrillar collagen in suspension.

### PMID 6956707 (1982) — Journal of periodontology
TITLE: Free soft tissue autografts. Hemostasis and protection of the palatal donor site with a microfibrillar collagen preparation.
DOI: 10.1902/jop.1982.53.7.425 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The use of free soft tissue autograft procedures has been well established and documented. However, little attention has been devoted to the care of the donor site which most frequently consists of palatal mucosa. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the hemostasis and protection of the palatal donor site of free soft tissue autografts using a microfibrillar collagen hemostat preparation. Twenty healthy adult subjects were selected. Ten patients in the experimental group received the microfibrillar collagen hemostat as a dressing while the control group received a conventional dressing. The results demonstrated that 10 minutes after the split thickness mucosal grafts were removed, the mean volume of blood absorbed by the sampling technique was 0.96 ml in the treated wounds vs. 1.85 ml in the control. There were no apparent differences in the quality of healing or the pain perceived by the patients in the experimental and control groups. It was concluded that the microfibrillar collagen hemostat produced rapid and effective hemostasis and protected the denuded palatal donor sites obviating the need for a conventional periodontal dressing.

### PMID 6803551 (1982) — AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology
TITLE: Preoperative embolization of hypervascular head and neck neoplasms using microfibrillar collagen.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen is a bovine collagen material that promotes hemostasis. When mixed with contrast material it makes a fine slurry that is easily injected through small catheters. Experience with preoperative embolization of head and neck neoplasms in six patients indicates that microfibrillar collagen slurry is a highly effective, easy to use embolic material for occlusion of highly vascular neoplasms.

### PMID 7035459 (1982) — Journal of biomedical materials research
TITLE: Hemostatic and healing studies of sodium amylose succinate (IP760).
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.820160108 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Acute and chronic studies were performed in the canine model to evaluate a new topical hemostatic agent in terms of initial hemostatic capability and tissue/material interaction during the healing process. IP760, a porous amylose succinate material, was applied to large splenic surface wounds in six acute and twelve chronic animals. Microfibrillar collagen (Avitene) was used in twelve chronic animals for comparison. While the hemostatic capabilities of the two agents were comparable, marked differences were noted in the healing response. In the IP760-treated wound sites the acute inflammatory response, granulation tissue infiltration with fibrosis and healing occurred earlier and in a more homogeneous manner than in the Avitene-treated wound sites. Healing of the IP760-treated wounds occurred concomitantly with the development of granulation tissue and fibrosis and the rapid resorption of the IP760.

### PMID 6897733 (1982) — Journal of microsurgery
TITLE: A comparison of hemostatic agents in microvascular surgery.
DOI: 10.1002/micr.1920030410 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The hemostatic abilities of oxidized cellulose, gelatin powder, microfibrillar collagen, and expanded polytetrafluoroethylene cuffs were compared on anastomoses of the femoral vessels in rats. The intraoperative hemostatic time and patency were recorded. Vessels that were patent intraoperatively were examined at various intervals postoperatively to determine patency and to detect the development of abnormalities, and specimens for examination under a scanning electron microscope were obtained. Microfibrillar collagen was found to be superior in maintaining patency and in ease of use. The PTFE cuffs demonstrated the shortest hemostatic times, but they produced distortion of the vessels several weeks after surgery. The authors conclude that microfibrillar collagen is the best overall hemostatic agent and have continued to use it experimentally and clinically with no complications.

### PMID 7469781 (1981) — Archives of surgery (Chicago, Ill. : 1960)
TITLE: Microfibrillar collagen hemostatic pledgets.
DOI: 10.1001/archsurg.1981.01380150077021 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The use of topical microfibrillar collagen hemostatic agents is increasing in many areas of clinical surgery. We have developed a method of preparing the hemostatic agent by which a pledget is formed in a syringe. This gives it a firm consistency and allows easier handling and application and can be done at the operating room table.

### PMID 7376056 (1980) — Surgery, gynecology &amp; obstetrics
TITLE: A simple method for application of microfibrillar collagen.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 7394661 (1980) — Spine
TITLE: Control of postlaminectomy scar formation: an experimental and clinical study.
DOI: 10.1097/00007632-198005000-00004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Scar formation after laminectomy was evaluated in dogs treated with hemostatic agents, antiinflammatory drugs, or mechanical barriers. Microfibrillar collagen was found to be superior to gelatin foam. The antiinflammatory drugs delayed healing and frequently resulted in abscess formation, and eventually scar filled the defect. The fat grafts formed a viable mechanical barrier. Gelatin foam sponge was compared with microfibrillar collagen for hemostasis with free fat grafts in a clinical series of 50 patients. The latter technique was clearly superior.

### PMID 7361237 (1980) — Surgery, gynecology &amp; obstetrics
TITLE: Anatomy and techniques in segmental splenectomy.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Accumulating clinical experience indicates the desirability of retention of splenic tissue and function. Results of angiographic studies in human and canine spleens demonstrate that intrasplenic vessels are lobar, segmental and, generally, without intersegmental communication. In the dog, bleeding from peripheral region vessels--penicilli, venules and sinuses--is well controlled by either microfibrillar collagen or the neodymium yttrium aluminum garnet laser. However, larger segmental vessels in the intermediate or hilar regions cannot be controlled by microfibrillar collagen or the neodymium yttrium aluminum garnet laser and require ligation. Identification of these vessels is greatly facilitated by laser or microfibrillar collagen coagulation of the surrounding splenic tissue. Results of histologic studies at ten, 20 and 30 day healing intervals disclosed no delayed sloughs, hemorrhage or cyst formation. With knowledge of segmental vascular anatomy and the techniques of microfibrillar collagen, neodymium yttrium aluminum garnet laser incision and coagulation plus aspiration and vessel ligation, segmental or subtotal splenic resection can be readily accomplished in dogs with minimal blood loss.

### PMID 7361199 (1980) — Spine
TITLE: Prevention of nerve root adhesions after laminectomy.
DOI: 10.1097/00007632-198001000-00011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In repeat lumbar surgery for failure of the original operation to provide lasting relief, well-organized fibrous tissue is often noted binding together the dura, nerve roots, and erector spinae muscles. Lumbar laminectomy was carried out in 46 dogs and seven groups of animals studied. Gelfoam failed to prevent fibrosis. Free fat grafts prevented fibrosis whether the graft was placed at the laminectomy site or around the nerve roots. Vascularization of the grafts was demonstrated by injection of India ink before sacrifice. Ligamentum nuchae, which is similar to ligamentum flavum in its high elastic content, was also effective in preventing scar formation. The operative biopsy findings at reexploration in four patients who had free fat grafts following laminectomy are presented.

### PMID 426196 (1979) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Preservation of splenic function in adults and children with injured spleens.
DOI: 10.1016/0002-9610(79)90118-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Mounting evidence supports efforts to preserve splenic function. This evidence indicates (1) that the problem of postsplenectomy sepsis warrants splenic preservation whenever possible, and (2) that the spleen, as a whole or in part, and its function, can be preserved in cirmustances which formerly seemed to necessitate removal of the entire spleen. Nine patients with splenic injuries in whom splenic function was preserved successfully are presented. Approaches to management of the splenic injuries included (1) nonoperative management, (2) hemostasis by application of microfibrillar collagen (Avitene), (3) partial splenic resection, and (4) preservation of accessory spleen. Since reliable prevention and treatment of postsplenectomy sepsis do not seem attainable in the near future, continuing efforts to preserve function of the spleen whenever possible, in patients with injured spleens, seem justified and desirable.

### PMID 104220 (1979) — Oral surgery, oral medicine, and oral pathology
TITLE: Glanzmann's thrombasthenia. Report of two oral surgical cases using a new microfibrillar collagen preparation and EACA for hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/0030-4220(79)90098-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: Glanzmann's thromboasthenia is a rare congenital platelet disorder characterized by a prolonged bleeding time, a qualitative platelet defect, and severe hemorrhagic episodes. Patients with this disorder have been managed by administration of blood and blood components (most recently, platelet-rich plasma and platelet concentrates) to control hemorrhage resulting from trauma or surgical procedures. The two case reports presented here illustrate the use of a local hemostatic agent (microfibrillar bovine collagen, Avitene) and a systemic fibrinolytic inhibitor (epsilon aminocaproic acid, Amicar) to control postoperative hemorrhage secondary to elective extraction of teeth. The clinical results demonstrate excellent postoperative hemostasis and support recent in vitro observation of platelet adherence to the collagen preparation. This provides an alternate therapeutic modality in the management of patients with Glanzmann's disease and possibly other disorders of platelet function.

### PMID 272452 (1978) — Journal of oral surgery (American Dental Association : 1965)
TITLE: Microfibrillar collagen (Avitene) as a hemostatic agent in experimental oral wounds.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In dogs with experimentally created oral wounds, Avitene proved to be superior to Gelfoam or Surgicel as a topical hemostatic agent. No postoperative problems were encountered. All sites healed equally well and there was no discernible histological difference between results with Avitene and with the other agents.

### PMID 619331 (1978) — Obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: A new topical hemostatic agent in gynecologic surgery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Experiences with a topical hemostatic agent, microfibrillar collagen (MFC), material made from beef hide dermis are recounted. Topical hemostasis is facilitated by virtue of its fibrillar structure forming a sticky matrix for platelet aggregation. The material was used in women undergoing cervical conization to determine its absorption at hysterectomy 6 weeks later. In another group, it was used as the sole hemostatic agent at conization and compared with a control group in which conventional sutures were used. A larger group who underwent abdominal hysterectomy allowed comparison between MFC on the bladder muscularis and conventional suture ligature in terms of blood loss, operating time success of method used, and complications.

### PMID 683493 (1978) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: The lumbar shield: a preliminary report.
DOI: 10.1227/00006123-197807000-00005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Postoperative perineural adhesions between the lumbar nerve root and the partially removed intervertebral disc are thought to be a cause of failure of the standard operative procedure for the removal of a ruptured lumbar intervertebral disc. Attempts have been made to reduce postoperative perineural adhesions by the use of epidural muscle, fat, gelatin sponge, silicone, and steroids. The present communication introduces a new implantable silicone device, a lumbar shield, designed to: (a) provide a radiopaque marker on the dorsal perimeter of the excavated lumbar disc so that the presence or absence of a recurrent disc herniation can easily be determined on plain postoperative x-ray films, (b) provide ready access to the operative site in the event of a recurrent disc herniation, (c) prevent postoperative perineural adhesions between the lumbar dura and the nerve root and the partially removed intervertebral disc, and (d) prevent postoperative adhesions between the lumbar dura and the nerve root and the paraspinal muscles. Satisfactory results of lumbar disc surgery over the past 44 years have occurred in about 90% of routine patients. The value of the lumbar shield in 82 patients (59 routine and 23 workmen's compensation/medicolegal patients) followed for 6 months is described. A satisfactory result, i.e., relief of pain or the presence of occasional postoperative pain, occurred in 85% of routine patients at 1 month, 97% at 3 months, and 95% at 6 months.

### PMID 711395 (1978) — Investigative radiology
TITLE: Transcatheter embolization with microfibrillar collagen in swine.
DOI: 10.1097/00004424-197805000-00005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Transcatheter embolization of the gastrosplenic and renal arteries was performed in 7 domestic swine with suspensions of microfibrillar collagen (MFC), a recently developed topical hemostatic agent. Embolized vessels remained occluded 2 days following embolization. Recanalization occurred by 14 days, although some occlusion in distal vessel persisted at 3 months. Pathologically a marked granulomatous arteritis was noted at 14 days which resolved by 3 months. Gastric ulcers or infarcts were present in two animals. The severe vasculitis and gastric pathology observed with MFC in this study would seem to preclude its use as a general embolic agent. It may be useful, however, in the preoperative embolization of neoplasms, especially in pediatric patients since its physical characteristics allow it to be easily injected through small diameter catheters.

### PMID 902618 (1977) — Ear, nose, &amp; throat journal
TITLE: Control of jugular bulb hemorrhage with microfibrillar collagen.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 897973 (1977) — Surgery, gynecology &amp; obstetrics
TITLE: The avoidable complications of splenectomy.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Operative injury to the spleen and consequent accidental splenectomy is neither an infrequent nor an inconsequential occurrence. It still accounts for 25 per cent of all splenectomies performed. The morbidity rate resulting from this accident is well above 50 per cent, and the mortality may be as high as 15 per cent. Appreciation of the peritoneal anatomy of the spleen with prophylactic division of the splenoperitoneal folds will lessen the incidence of capsular avulsion injuries. When capsular avulsion injuries do occur, they may be effectively treated with topical hemostatic agents, such as microfibrillar collagen, Avitene. Twenty-one instances in which splenectomy for capsular avulsion injury was averted have been reported. In the last 15 of these, the topical hemostatic agent used was Avitene.

### PMID 845633 (1977) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Use of microfibrillar collagen as a topical hemostatic agent in brain tissue.
DOI: 10.3171/jns.1977.46.4.0501 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen, a recently introduced topical hemostatic agent, was used to obtain hemostasis in suction-evacuation lesions of canine cortex. Gelatin foam was used as a control in identical lesions on the opposite side. Microfibrillar collagen was found to be faster acting and more effective than gelatin foam. Histological evaluation of the lesions at 2,4, and 6 months postoperatively showed no significant difference in the amount or type of tissue reaction to the two agents.

### PMID 4855862 (1974) — The Journal of clinical investigation
TITLE: Evidence for a structural requirement for the aggregation of platelets by collagen.
DOI: 10.1172/JCI107628 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study investigates whether soluble collagen can initiate platelet aggregation or whether a higher degree of polymerization is required. Purified rat skin collagen was prepared in four states. Soluble monomeric collagen, containing 2 muM calcium chloride, was maintained at 4 degrees C until use. A previously uncharacterized form of collagen, soluble microfibrillar collagen, was prepared from monomeric collagen containing calcium chloride by allowing it to polymerize at 23 degrees C. Viscometric and electron microscopic characterization of microfibrillar collagen indicated polymerization to ordered native filaments. Particulate native macrofibrillar collagen was prepared from monomeric collagen by allowing it to polymerize at 37 degrees C in the absence of calcium. Particulate collagen, in which the fibers were randomly associated, was prepared by salt precipitation of calcium-free monomeric collagen. Microfibrillar and native macrofibrillar collagen initiated platelet aggregation, with a lag phase of approximately 60 s. Monomeric collagen initiated aggregation with a lag phase of approximately 180 s. The duration of the lag phase for platelet aggregation initiated by monomeric collagen was independent of the dose. Salt-precipitated particulate collagen did not initiate platelet aggregation. Agents which prolong the transition from monomeric collagen to fibrillar collagen (urea, arginine) retarded or prevented the aggregation of platelets by monomeric collagen. Sodium borohydride, which stabilizes the intraand intermolecular cross-links of collagen did not affect platelet aggregation. Penicillamine, which displaces the intermolecular cross-links and binds the intramolecular cross-links of collagen, did not prevent platelet aggregation. The data suggest that an architectural requirement exists for the initiation of self-perpetuating platelet aggregation; that tropocollagen units do not fulfill this requirement; that a soluble collagen preparation, microfibrillar collagen, contains the minimal structural unit; and that cross-linkages within collagen do not play a critical role in platelet aggregation.

