# SLICE: complication_other  (852 records)

### PMID 41783188 (2026) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Delayed cauda equina compression caused by BioGlue&#xae;-induced granulomatous reaction following spinal dural repair: A case report.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_22_2026 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Adjunctive dural sealants such as BioGlue&#xae; are widely used to reinforce dural closure in cranial and spinal surgery. While generally effective, BioGlue&#xae; has been associated with inflammatory foreign-body reactions that may lead to delayed mass formation and neural compression. These delayed complications can mimic the original pathology. Here, a 66-year-old male underwent primary dural closure that included the use of BioGlue, which, 6 months later, caused the delayed onset of a cauda equina syndrome.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 66-year-old male presented with sciatica secondary to focal L4-5 lumbar spinal canal stenosis and an intradural schwannoma at the L3 level. He underwent an L3-L5 laminectomy for resection of the tumor and decompression of the stenosis. At surgery, primary dural closure was reinforced with a muscle graft, combined with the utilization of BioGlue&#xae; and Gel-Foam&#xae;. Six months later, he developed a partial cauda equina syndrome attributed to an magnetic resonance imaging-documented heterogeneous extradural mass at the prior durotomy site. Surgical re-exploration allowed for resection of a newly occurring granulomatous mass at the prior operative site, comprised largely of residual BioGlue&#xae;. Histopathology confirmed that this represented a foreign-body granulomatous reaction to the BioGlue. Postoperatively, the patient demonstrated rapid neurological improvement.
CONCLUSION: BioGlue&#xae;-induced granuloma represents an important delayed complication of spinal dural repair that can closely mimic recurrent pathology (i.e., in this case, stenosis and/or tumor).

### PMID 41667471 (2026) — Nature communications
TITLE: Hypersensitive detection of single millimeter vascular emboli from adhesive in vivo.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-026-68534-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgical adhesives are widely used in clinical practice but pose a significant risk of severe vascular embolism complications. Nevertheless, there are currently no non-invasive direct methods for precise detection of detached emboli. Herein, we show a CT-visualized method for hypersensitive detection of single millimeter vascular emboli from adhesive in vivo by simply doping BiOCl into surgical adhesives. As proof of concept, BiOCl-BioGlue with excellent CT imaging capability is fabricated and applied to repair ruptured vessels and liver in male rats. The location, morphology, and degradation process of BiOCl-BioGlue can be dynamically monitored by CT imaging for 42 days, and pulmonary emboli caused by BiOCl-BioGlue, with sizes as small as 1.2&#x2009;mm, are successfully detected. Additionally, the high K-edge of Bi enables precise detection of pulmonary emboli in spectral CT imaging, unaffected by confounding calcifications. The proposed non-invasive detection strategy for adhesive emboli significantly enhances the biosafety of surgical adhesives.

### PMID 41647288 (2026) — Regenerative biomaterials
TITLE: Fabrication of an NIR-II fluorescence-visible indocyanine green-BioGlue for precision surgical adhesion with intraoperative leakage prevention.
DOI: 10.1093/rb/rbaf131 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bioadhesives are being increasingly used in clinical practice, but pose significant health risks due to their uncontrollable intraoperative leakage. Nevertheless, there is currently a critical lack of effective solutions. Herein, we propose a second near-infrared window (NIR-II) fluorescence-visible indocyanine green (ICG)-BioGlue adhesive for precision surgical adhesion with intraoperative leakage prevention. The fabricated ICG-BioGlue adhesive based on the non-covalent interaction exhibits nearly 100% fluorescence labeling efficiency and maintains long-term stable NIR-II fluorescence for up to 3&#x2009;months. During surgery, ICG-BioGlue adhesive enables real-time visualization of wound adhesion in various fields such as aortic dissection adhesion and liver or kidney wound hemostasis, preventing leakage into surrounding tissues. Moreover, the stable fluorescence of ICG-BioGlue adhesive allows effective imaging-guided removal of long-term adhesive fragments in the body when they cause compression symptoms after surgery. Considering it consists solely of Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs ICG and BioGlue, with a straightforward synthesis method and versatile applicability, ICG-BioGlue adhesive holds excellent potential for clinical translation. Our study provides a leakage-preventing strategy to enhance biosafety and promote the widespread application of bioadhesives in clinical settings.

### PMID 41317162 (2026) — JACC. Case reports
TITLE: Glue-Related Left Main Coronary Stenosis After a Modified Bentall Procedure: IVUS-Guided PCI.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2025.106245 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Extrinsic left main coronary artery (LMCA) stenosis is a rare but potentially life-threatening complication that may occur after modified Bentall surgery because of BioGlue use.
CASE SUMMARY: We present a case of LMCA stenosis thought to be secondary to BioGlue application after modified Bentall surgery, diagnosed through multimodal imaging and successfully treated with intravascular ultrasound (IVUS)-guided percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).
DISCUSSION: In conjunction with a review of the existing literature, this case adds to the limited number of reports on the diagnosis and management of BioGlue-related LMCA stenosis. It emphasizes the feasibility of multimodality imaging and IVUS-guided PCI, and outlines factors to consider in stent selection for this context.
TAKE-HOME MESSAGE: IVUS-guided PCI may be an important therapeutic option in patients with a recent history of cardiac surgery.

### PMID 40844280 (2026) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Brain Imaging Findings Show Efficacy of Fetal Endoscopic Third Ventriculostomy as Prenatal Treatment for Induced Congenital Hydrocephalus in Fetal Lambs.
DOI: 10.1227/neu.0000000000003707 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Congenital obstructive hydrocephalus (HCP) causes progressive, irreversible fetal brain damage through ventricular enlargement and increasing fetal cerebral tissue compression. Postnatal treatments of choice include ventriculoperitoneal shunting or endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV). Intrauterine treatments, such as ventriculoamniotic shunting, were attempted unsuccessfully 4 decades ago and failed to improve postnatal outcomes, likely due to inadequate fetal patient selection. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of prenatal ETV for early ventricular decompression and potential prevention of fetal brain damage in hydrocephalic fetal lambs.
METHODS: HCP was induced in 24 fetal lambs by injecting BioGlue into the cisterna magna at E85. Three weeks later (E105-110), fetal ETV was successfully performed on 8 fetuses using a small rigid cystoscope. Fetal brain lateral ventricular diameters and cerebral mantle thicknesses were monitored by prenatal and postnatal ultrasounds and fetal MRI.
RESULTS: According to the Cincinnati HCP Severity Scale, moderate and severe HCP subgroups responded positively to fetal ETV with reduced cerebral ventricular diameters. Ten days post-ETV, severe HCP fetal lambs improved to moderate levels, whereas those with moderate HCP normalized by birth. A similar improvement pattern was seen for the mechanical compression threshold (ventricular diameters/biparietal diameter). Biparietal diameter values did not significantly differ among nontreated, treated, and normal control groups during pregnancy. MRI revealed a significant increase in brain mantle thickness in the prenatally treated fetuses.
CONCLUSION: Prenatal ETV is feasible in hydrocephalic fetal lambs and effectively reverses ventriculomegaly and brain compression in cases of severe or moderate fetal HCP in this ovine model.

### PMID 41823721 (2026) — Journal of neurosurgical sciences
TITLE: Post-market safety patterns of hydrogel dural sealants: a comparative manufacturer and user facility device experience analysis.
DOI: 10.23736/S0390-5616.26.06744-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel dural sealants (DuraSeal, Adherus) reinforce dural closure, but case reports describe cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak, infection, and swelling-related neurologic injury. We characterized post-market safety in the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) database, comparing structured problem codes with negation-aware narrative review.
METHODS: MAUDE reports from January 1, 2015, to June 30, 2024, mentioning either device were extracted and deduplicated by unique identifiers (MDR_REPORT_KEY, REPORT_NUMBER). Structured FDA patient and device problem codes were mapped to clinical categories (CSF leak, infection, wound dehiscence, neurologic deficit, swelling/mass effect, polymerization/application issue, adhesion, reoperation/hospitalization). Narratives underwent deterministic, negation-aware screening for the same categories, and for each device we calculated event proportions.
RESULTS: After deduplication, 279 reports were analyzed (256 DuraSeal, 23 Adherus). Most were coded as injury or malfunction; deaths were rare. CSF leak was the most frequent signal (DuraSeal 26.2% structured vs. 27.0% narrative; Adherus 52.2% vs. 47.8%). For DuraSeal, narrative review nearly doubled infection reports (8.2% vs. 19.9%) and identified swelling/mass effect (9.4%), neurologic deficit (4.3%), and reoperation/hospitalization (7.8%) largely absent from structured codes. For Adherus, narrative review identified isolated reports of infection, swelling/mass effect, and reoperation.
CONCLUSIONS: PEG hydrogel dural sealants show post-market safety patterns dominated by CSF leak, suspected infection, and swelling-related neurologic events. Exclusive reliance on structured MAUDE codes underestimates key complications. Integrating structured fields with negation-aware narrative review yields a more complete safety profile and supports cautious use in constrained intracranial spaces.

### PMID 42403647 (2026) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Transcatheter embolization of an endoleak through a vascular plug implanted in the left common iliac artery during aortouni-iliac endovascular aortic repair: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2026.06.034 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 90-year-old woman underwent aortouni-iliac endovascular aortic repair and simultaneous embolization of the left common iliac artery using a vascular plug for an impending rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm. The aortic aneurysm diameter gradually increased after the procedure, and an endoleak through the vascular plug in the left common iliac artery was observed by contrast-enhanced computed tomography. Using a highly penetrating microsystem to penetrate the mesh of the vascular plug, metallic coils were placed inside and around the vascular plug. Using a triple coaxial system, the proximal portion of the left common iliac artery and the endoleak cavity of the aneurysm were embolized with 20% n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate&#x2012;Lipiodol mixture via collateral arteries. The endoleak disappeared after transcatheter embolization. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case in which transcatheter embolization with metallic coils using a highly penetrating microsystem was performed to treat an endoleak through a vascular plug following endovascular aortic repair with an aortouni-iliac device and simultaneous embolization of the contralateral common iliac artery.

### PMID 42362980 (2026) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: Periaortic inflammation after endoleak repair: a risk to watch.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-026-00718-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the occurrence of periaortic inflammation, including abscess formation, as a complication following endoleak repair after endovascular aortic repair.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This retrospective single-center study analyzed 88 EVAR revisions for endoleak treatment performed in 59 patients between 2015 and 2025. Patients underwent one to three revision procedures. Endoleaks were classified by type, and treatment was performed via transarterial access or direct sac puncture with a posterior/translumbar access route. Embolization materials for type II endoleaks included n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate, ethylene vinyl alcohol, and coils, while stent-graft extensions and transmural fixation were used for type I and III endoleaks.
RESULTS: Of the 59 patients, 38 (64.4%) underwent one revision, 13 (22.0%) two revisions, and 8 (13.6%) three revisions. Treated endoleaks included type I (19.3%), type II (77.3%), type III (2.3%), and combined type II/III (1.1%). A total of 73 procedures (83.0%) were performed via transarterial access and 15 (17.0%) via direct sac puncture. Follow-up CT identified 6 cases of periaortic inflammation after type II endoleak repair, presenting with soft tissue mantle, fat stranding, or abscess formation. Symptom onset ranged from 33 to 108&#xa0;days after the most recent intervention. No significant association was found between periaortic inflammation and access route or embolic material.
CONCLUSION: Periaortic inflammation and abscess formation are possible severe complications after endoleak repair following endovascular aortic repair. To date, these inflammatory changes have not been described systematically in the literature and warrant further investigation.

### PMID 42355742 (2026) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Open-Window Thoracostomy Closure Using a Free Musculocutaneous Flap, Fascia Patch Graft, and Postoperative Compression Guided by Near-Infrared Spectroscopy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm15124574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchopleural fistula is a rare but severe complication of lung resection, associated with significant morbidity and mortality, especially when an open-window thoracostomy is required. The clinical and surgical management is complex and becomes even more challenging in the presence of underlying conditions such as recurrent infections or malignancy. Postoperative management is equally demanding, as local compression may help prevent fistula recurrence but can compromise flap perfusion. A 65-year-old male with a history of right upper lobectomy and subsequent sublobar resection for lung adenocarcinoma presented with an 8 &#xd7; 4 cm open-window thoracostomy complicated by chronic bronchopleural fistula and empyema. Extensive fibrosis of the surrounding tissues, including the ipsilateral latissimus dorsi muscle, limited the available reconstructive locoregional options. Reconstruction was performed using primary fistula closure reinforced with a contralateral free latissimus dorsi musculocutaneous flap and a fascia patch graft secured with cyanoacrylate-based bioadhesive. Postoperatively, continuous near-infrared spectroscopy monitoring enabled safe application of compressive bandage while minimizing the risk of flap perfusion compromise. Complete fistula closure was achieved. Apart from a surgical site abscess requiring debridement on postoperative day 7, no further complications occurred. At the 2-year follow-up, the patient remains free of fistula recurrence, wound dehiscence, or oncological relapse. We describe a novel approach for open-window thoracostomy closure combining a free musculocutaneous flap with a fascia patch graft reinforced by bioadhesive, together with postoperative perfusion monitoring using near-infrared spectroscopy. This strategy may help address both the reconstructive and postoperative challenges associated with complex bronchopleural fistulas.

### PMID 42339277 (2026) — Plastic and reconstructive surgery. Global open
TITLE: Pectoralis Major Muscle Necrosis After Selective Arterial Embolization: A Case Report With Reconstructive Considerations.
DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000007863 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The pectoralis major (PM) muscle is commonly used in reconstruction because of its robust vascular supply from the thoracoacromial artery, although vascular dominance varies among individuals. Transcatheter arterial embolization is effective for hemostasis but may risk ischemia when a dominant pedicle is compromised. We describe a case of delayed PM muscle necrosis after selective arterial embolization for traumatic chest wall hemorrhage. A 76-year-old man with diabetes mellitus, pancreatic head carcinoma under chemotherapy, and polymyalgia rheumatica treated with prednisolone for a prolonged period (7&#x2009;mg/d) developed acute right chest pain after lifting approximately 30&#x2009;kg of hay. Computed tomography showed a large subcutaneous and subpectoral hematoma (123.9&#x2005;&#xd7;&#x2005;115.7&#x2005;&#xd7;&#x2005;66.0&#x2009;mm) without extravasation. On day 10, computed tomography demonstrated active bleeding from branches of the thoracoacromial artery and lateral thoracic artery. Selective embolization of 1 branch of each artery was performed using a 1:3 mixture of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (Histoacryl, B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany) and Lipiodol (Lipiodol, Guerbet, Villepinte, France), without coil embolization. Several weeks later, wound breakdown occurred; operative exploration revealed extensive PM muscle necrosis. Debridement and negative-pressure wound therapy were followed by delayed primary closure on day 113, with complete healing at 6 months. Selective embolization of branches supplying the PM muscle can rarely result in severe muscle necrosis, particularly in patients with reduced ischemic tolerance. Awareness, surveillance for delayed deep ischemia, and staged reconstruction are essential.

### PMID 42232964 (2026) — Frontiers in medicine
TITLE: Case Report: Multifocal cerebral infarctions caused by cyanoacrylate glue embolization after gastric variceal injection.
DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2026.1825258 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Endoscopic injection of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (Histoacryl) is a first-line treatment for bleeding gastric varices. Although generally safe, rare systemic complications including paradoxical cerebral embolization can occur, carrying devastating neurological consequences.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a 62-year-old man with probable alcohol-related cirrhosis who presented with acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding secondary to gastroesophageal gastric varices and underwent urgent endoscopic cyanoacrylate injection with a total volume of 8&#x202f;mL, achieving immediate hemostasis. Post-procedure, the patient failed to regain consciousness. Neuroimaging revealed extensive multifocal cerebral embolization with radiopaque glue material involving both anterior and posterior circulation territories, consistent with systemic cyanoacrylate embolization. Transesophageal echocardiography with agitated saline contrast confirmed the absence of a patent foramen ovale or intracardiac right-to-left shunt, supporting an extracardiac mechanism of embolization, most probably via portopulmonary venous anastomoses related to portal hypertension. Despite intensive neurocritical care, the patient developed progressive cerebral edema with herniation and died 48&#x202f;h later.
CONCLUSION: Cerebral embolization is a rare but catastrophic complication of endoscopic cyanoacrylate injection. This case highlights the role of unrecognized portosystemic collateral pathways in facilitating paradoxical embolization even in the absence of a cardiac shunt. Failure to awaken or acute neurological deterioration post-variceal therapy should prompt immediate neuroimaging. Greater emphasis on pre-procedural imaging, careful injection technique, and risk-reduction strategies is essential.

### PMID 42144462 (2026) — European spine journal : official publication of the European Spine Society, the European Spinal Deformity Society, and the European Section of the Cervical Spine Research Society
TITLE: Endovascular-microsurgical treatment of hypervascular spinal tumors: influence of cervical, thoracic, and lumbar vascular anatomy on embolization decisions and primary clinical outcomes (25-case series).
DOI: 10.1007/s00586-026-09981-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To assess whether preoperative spinal angiography with endovascular embolization followed by microsurgical resection is technically feasible and safe for hypervascular spinal tumors, and to examine how cervical, thoracic, and lumbar vascular anatomy influences feasibility.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 25 patients treated from 2017 to 2025 at two centers (14 men, 11 women; mean age 53 years) with hypervascular tumors involving the cervical (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3), thoracic (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;15), lumbar and sacral (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;7) spine. All underwent preoperative angiography (DSA)-embolization (within the same procedure if technically possible). We recorded whether embolization could be safely performed and any embolization-related complications; we also graded angiographic devascularization (devascularization grade, DG) and operative estimated blood loss (EBL). Selective or super-selective embolization was performed when arterial anatomy allowed safe catheterization, and surgery followed within 24-48&#xa0;h.
RESULTS: Embolization was feasible in 23/25 patients (92%): thoracic 15/15 (100%), lumbar 6/6 (100%), sacral 1/1 (100%), and cervical 1/3 (33%). Two cervical RCC (renal cell carcinoma) metastases were not embolized because multiple short feeders shared trunks with radiculomedullary (spinal cord-supplying) arteries, precluding safe super-selective access. Among embolized cases, super-selective feeder occlusion was performed in 5/23 (21.7%) and segmental-vessel embolization in 18/23 (78.3%) using precipitating hydrophobic injectable liquid (PHIL), coils, and n-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA). High-grade devascularization (DG2-3) was achieved in all embolized cases, and completion angiography showed no or minimal residual tumor blush. There were no permanent embolization-related neurological deficits (0/23); one transient ischemic event occurred (1/23, 4.3%; vertebrobasilar ischemia in a C2 aneurysmal bone cyst) with full recovery. Mean estimated blood loss was 650 mL (median 600; range 400-800 mL. Differences in mean EBL between subsets of RCC and non-RCC tumors were statistically unsignificant, Correlations between DG and EBL was not identified.
CONCLUSION: A coordinated endovascular-surgical pathway achieved high embolization feasibility with no permanent embolization-related neurological complications, and no postoperative neurological deterioration in this cohort. Feasibility limitations were concentrated in the cervical spine, where short, shared feeders involving spinal cord-supplying arteries can preclude safe embolization. Limitations include retrospective design, small cohort with few cervical cases, and heterogeneous tumors/embolic agents; prospective studies with standardized devascularization and functional outcome metrics are warranted.

### PMID 42066901 (2026) — Journal of vascular surgery. Venous and lymphatic disorders
TITLE: Clinical outcomes and feasibility of nonthermal, nontumescent ablation for isolated below-the-knee great saphenous vein incompetence.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvsv.2026.102509 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess feasibility, clinical outcomes, and safety of nonthermal, nontumescent (NTNT) ablation for symptomatic isolated below-the-knee (BTK) great saphenous vein (GSV) incompetence with competent saphenofemoral junction and above-knee GSV.
METHODS: This multicenter retrospective study included 73 treated BTK-GSV limbs in 50 patients who underwent NTNT ablation (mechanochemical ablation or cyanoacrylate adhesive closure) between October 2020 and April 2025. Isolated BTK-GSV incompetence was defined as reflux &#x2265;1.0 second confined to the BTK segment on duplex mapping without junctional or above-knee truncal reflux. Follow-up duplex ultrasound and Venous Clinical Severity Score assessments were performed at 1 week and 1, 3, 6, and 12 months.
RESULTS: Immediate postprocedural duplex ultrasound confirmed complete occlusion of the treated BTK-GSV segment in all limbs. No partial or complete recanalization was observed during follow-up. The median Venous Clinical Severity Score improved significantly from 4 (interquartile range [IQR], 3-4) at baseline (n = 73) to 0 (IQR, 0-1) at 1 week (n = 51), 0 (IQR, 0-1) at 1 month (n = 73), 0 (IQR, 0-1) at 3 months (n = 73), 0 (IQR, 0-0) at 6 months (n = 73), and 0 (IQR, 0-0) at 12 months (n = 43) (all P &lt; .001 vs baseline; Wilcoxon signed-rank test). No major adverse events occurred, including deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, or permanent paresthesia suggestive of saphenous nerve injury. Minor events included superficial phlebitis (8%), ecchymosis (7%), and skin rash related to bandages or compression stockings (7%), all resolving with conservative management.
CONCLUSIONS: NTNT ablation appears to be a safe and effective option for symptomatic isolated BTK-GSV reflux, providing significant clinical improvement with durable occlusion and without thermal-related nerve injury.

### PMID 41902350 (2026) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: Endovascular Management of Moyamoya Type II Endoleak Utilizing a CO2-Assisted Protection Strategy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1177/15266028261436277 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To describe the successful treatment of a Moyamoya type II endoleak (T2EL) using n-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) assisted by intra-arterial carbon dioxide (CO2) flow modulation in a patient with post-endovascular abdominal aortic repair (EVAR) aneurysm sac enlargement.
CASE REPORT: An 84-year-old woman developed progressive aneurysm enlargement due to a refractory Moyamoya T2EL 5 years after EVAR with an AFX II stent graft. Angiography demonstrated persistent retrograde perfusion through the inferior mesenteric artery via complex vasa vasorum-dominant collaterals. Because of unfavorable flow dynamics for embolization, CO2 was intentionally injected to transiently suppress antegrade flow from the sigmoid artery, generating a controlled "to-and-fro" pattern. Under these hemodynamic conditions, NBCA was carefully administered, resulting in complete occlusion of the endoleak without reflux or non-target embolization. Follow-up computed tomography (CT) at 1 year confirmed stable sac size with no re-dilation.Clinical ImpactMoyamoya type II ELs are associated with microcollateral networks that complicate embolization and increase the risk of sac enlargement. Although NBCA can penetrate complex channels, reflux poses a significant hazard. In this case, targeted CO2 injection effectively displaced competing flow, enabling safe, selective NBCA deposition. This CO2-assisted strategy represents a feasible option for treating anatomically complex, refractory type II endoleaks.

### PMID 41793077 (2026) — The journal of obstetrics and gynaecology research
TITLE: Severe Lymphorrhea Mimicking Hypovolemic Shock Following Retroperitoneal Lymphadenectomy for Endometrial Cancer: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1111/jog.70229 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a rare case of severe lymphatic leakage resembling hypovolemic shock following retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy for endometrial cancer. A 62-year-old female developed massive lymphorrhea and chylous ascites following total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy. Immediately postoperatively, massive lymphatic leakage caused hypotension and oliguria necessitating vasopressor support. Conservative management, including fasting and octreotide, was unsuccessful. Lymphangiography with Lipiodol and subsequent embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate were performed but did not achieve hemodynamic stabilization. Re-laparotomy was undertaken, and indocyanine green injection into the bilateral inguinal lymph nodes, along with oral milk ingestion, enabled precise intraoperative identification of leakage sites. These were successfully ligated with adjunctive fibrin glue and oxidized cellulose. Hemodynamics rapidly improved following repair. Although most lymphatic leakages resolve conservatively, severe cases can cause life-threatening circulatory failure. This case highlights the importance of a multidisciplinary approach, including interventional radiology and surgical repair, to achieve successful outcomes.

### PMID 41716651 (2026) — Annals of vascular diseases
TITLE: Treatment of a Type II Endoleak from an Atypical Mediastinal Collateral Branch Following Total Arch Replacement with Frozen Elephant Trunk.
DOI: 10.3400/avd.cr.25-00124 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a rare case of type II endoleak (T2EL) from an atypical mediastinal artery following total arch replacement with a frozen elephant trunk (FET) for chronic aortic dissection. A 63-year-old male with a history of multiple thoracic aortic surgeries, including FET, developed enlargement of an aortic arch aneurysm on follow-up. Computed tomography and diagnostic angiography revealed a T2EL due to a newly developed mediastinal collateral artery arising from the left subclavian artery feeding the sac. Selective transcatheter embolization with N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate successfully eliminated the endoleak. Recognizing such atypical T2EL sources is crucial for managing post-FET aneurysm expansion.

### PMID 41112819 (2026) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Super-Selective Embolization Using Flow-Directed Microcatheter and 0.010-inch Microwire for Type II Endoleak Following Thoracic Endovascular Aortic Repair: A Three-Case Report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2025.09.040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Type II endoleak (T2EL) following thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) may lead to progressive aneurysm enlargement, necessitating further intervention. This report presents 3 cases of persistent T2EL with aneurysm growth after TEVAR, and managed through endovascular embolization using flow-directed microcatheters and 0.010-inch guidewires, employing N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) either alone or in combination with coils. Aneurysmal sac embolization was successfully performed in all cases, despite significant vascular tortuosity, resulting in favorable immediate outcomes without complications. A key advantage observed was the ability of flow-directed microcatheters to navigate into distal, tortuous feeding vessels that are typically inaccessible using conventional methods. While NBCA alone was effective for embolizing small sacs, a combination of coils and NBCA provided more controlled and stable embolization in larger sacs. However, follow-up computed tomography revealed new endoleaks in 2 cases, emphasizing the need for continued monitoring. While short-term results are promising, further studies are needed to assess long-term recurrence risks. This case series highlights the effectiveness of flow-directed microcatheters, 0.010-inch microwires, and targeted embolization techniques in managing T2EL following TEVAR.

### PMID 42351446 (2026) — Diagnostics (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Safe Prostatic Artery Embolization with Cyanoacrylate: Representative Cases Demonstrating Non-Target Artery Preservation.
DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics16121785 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study describes five case of prostatic artery embolization (PAE) using n-butyl cyanoacrylate methylsulfone (NBCA; Glubran 2, GEM; Viareggio, Italy) to evaluate its technical advantages, against standard particulate embolization, in managing complex pelvic vascular anatomy while preserving non-target arteries, with particular focus on penile artery protection. NBCA was mixed with iodized oil (Lipiodol Ultra Fluid; Guerbet, Aulnay-sous-Bois, France) at 1:5 dilution and injected in small aliquots (0.1-0.3 mL) under fluoroscopy using a blocked-flow technique, with injection stopped at reflux into the horizontal PA segment. After a few seconds, before the complete polymerization of the glue, the microcatheter is quickly withdrawn, flushed, and reused for the contralateral side. NBCA allowed precise embolic control through distinct mechanisms (direct distal, indirect distal, proximal, reflux and controlateral control), avoiding the need for protective coiling. Glue-based PAE seems a reproducible, safe, and efficient alternative to particulate embolization, offering enhanced embolization control and non-target artery preservation in anatomically complex patients.

### PMID 42201644 (2026) — La Radiologia medica
TITLE: Safety and efficacy of Glubran-2&#xae; endovascular embolization in acute bleeding patients with coagulopathies: a multicenter experience.
DOI: 10.1007/s11547-026-02221-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This study aims to analyze safety and effectiveness of glue (Glubran-2) embolization in acute bleeding patients with coagulopathies; data were analyzed according to two bleeding risk categories based on coagulation status.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This retrospective study included patients treated with glue endovascular embolization for acute bleedings in high-volume centers experienced with liquid embolics. Coagulopathy was defined as almost one of the following elements: international normalized ratio (INR)&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;1.5; platelet count&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;80.000/mm3; and anticoagulant and/or antiplatelet therapies at the time of embolization. If multiple conditions overlapped, patients were classified as high-risk category; otherwise, they were considered as standard risk.
RESULTS: Sixty-seven subjects were considered for this analysis. The underlying causes of bleeding were traumatic in 67.2% and spontaneous in 32.8%. At hospital admission, most patients were hemodynamically stable (86.6%). All patients took anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapies at the time of the intervention; 11.9% presented with INR&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;1.5 and 14.9% had platelet counts&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;80.000/mm3; 58.2% were classified as standard risk and 41.8% as high risk. Technical success was achieved in all cases while clinical success was obtained in 85%. In-hospital mortality was 6.0%. Procedure-related complications occurred in 4.5%. Comparing patients at high risk with those at standard risk, technical and clinical success rates were similar.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study Glubran-2 appeared to be an effective embolic glue in bleeding patients with coagulopathy, even in those subjects with multiple coagulopathic conditions increasing the risk of bleeding; future studies, including more patients and less trained operators, are required to confirm these outcomes.

### PMID 41311727 (2026) — Journal of vascular surgery cases and innovative techniques
TITLE: Successful ultrasound-guided percutaneous embolization of splenic artery pseudoaneurysm with Glubran 2 cyanoacrylate glue: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvscit.2025.102023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The current report presents a case of a 50-year-old female who developed worsening abdominal pain following the initiation of dual antiplatelet therapy for a recent diagnosis of non-ST elevation myocardial infarction. Clinical suspicion of intra-abdominal hemorrhage prompted computed tomography imaging, which revealed a splenic artery pseudoaneurysm at the splenic hilum, accompanied by hemoperitoneum. Subsequent angiography showed no active extravasation. The patient was treated successfully with transabdominal ultrasound-guided percutaneous embolization using a mixture of N-butyl cyanoacrylate and Lipiodol. The procedure was completed without complications and resulted in significant symptomatic improvement.

### PMID 42121228 (2026) — Journal of nanobiotechnology
TITLE: Cycloastragalol nanoparticle-loaded composite hydrogel as an injectable embolic agent for vascular repair in a mouse model of abdominal aortic aneurysm.
DOI: 10.1186/s12951-026-04433-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a progressive degenerative vascular disease with a high risk of rupture and mortality. Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is a widely used minimally invasive treatment option for anatomically suitable AAA. However, postoperative endoleaks associated with EVAR can precipitate secondary aneurysm rupture. We developed an injectable nanocomposite hydrogel for embolization and local delivery of cycloastragalol (CAG). CAG-loaded aldehyde-functionalized polyurethane nanoparticles (DFPU@CAG) showed uniform morphology, favorable biocompatibility, and enhanced CAG delivery efficiency, and were incorporated into a chitosan (CS)-based dynamically crosslinked hydrogel to form CS-DFPU@CAG. The hydrogel showed suitable injectability and rheological properties for embolization with sustained local drug release. In vivo studies in animal AAA models showed that in situ administration significantly attenuated AAA expansion and reduced matrix metalloproteinase9 (MMP9) expression and enzymatic activity. CS-DFPU@CAG also demonstrated robust embolization performance in vitro and in vivo, maintaining stability under high pressure and achieving blood-flow occlusion in rabbit femoral arteries comparable to a clinical porcine fibrin sealant. These findings provide a preclinical proof-of-concept for CS-DFPU@CAG as a dual-function embolic and local therapeutic platform for AAA management.

### PMID 42370181 (2026) — Theranostics
TITLE: A robust asymmetric bioadhesive patch for sutureless intestinal repair to prevent anastomotic leakage and postoperative adhesion.
DOI: 10.7150/thno.135611 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: RATIONALE: Anastomotic leakage (AL) remains a major surgical challenge that is difficult to address using hand-sewn closure alone. Robust, rapidly acting bioadhesive patches offer a promising alternative to conventional sutures and staples. However, the development of bioadhesive patches that achieve instantaneous wet-tissue adhesion while minimizing postoperative adhesion remains challenging. Innovative material designs and interdisciplinary translational strategies are therefore needed to advance bioadhesion technologies toward clinical application.
METHODS: Herein, we developed a translational asymmetric bioadhesive patch (ABP) that integrates a blood-repelling, hydrophobic, HBP oil-infused anti-adhesive top surface with a bioadhesive bottom surface capable of absorbing interfacial water. The physicochemical properties, mechanical performance, wet-tissue adhesion, and hemostatic capacity of the ABP were systematically evaluated through in vitro and in vivo assays. Its therapeutic efficacy for sutureless intestinal repair was further assessed in a rat colon defect model.
RESULTS: The ABP exhibited instantaneous and robust adhesion to various biological wet tissues (~10 times stronger than FDA-approved sealant Tisseel). The patch also showed excellent stretchability, sustaining more than 1000% strain without loss of elasticity. Moreover, ABP enables rapid hemostasis in injured tissues and achieved sutureless sealing and repair of intestinal defects in a rat colon injury model. Importantly, the asymmetric design reduced postoperative adhesions and attenuated foreign body reactions.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed ABP patch provides an effective solution for intestinal defects repair by enabling immediate wet-tissue attachment, non-invasive defect closure, and durable tissue sealing without the need for device removal. By combining strong bioadhesion with an anti-adhesive outer surface, this patch offers a promising translational platform for preventing anastomotic leakage while reducing postoperative adhesions and foreign body responses.

### PMID 42365352 (2026) — BMC research notes
TITLE: Comparative hemostatic efficacy of oxidized regenerated cellulose powder and fibrin glue in a rat model of induced liver parenchymal hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1186/s13104-026-07929-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: The objective of this study is to compare the hemostatic efficacy of oxidised regenerated cellulose powder (Surgicel&#xae; Powder) and fibrin glue (Tisseel&#xae;) in a rat model of liver parenchymal haemorrhage, and to evaluate their effects on tissue healing.
RESULTS: Preoperative haemoglobin and haematocrit values were comparable among the groups (p&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.05). At 24&#xa0;h, postoperative haemoglobin and haematocrit values differed significantly among the three groups (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.045 and p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.042, respectively), with lower values in the saline-compression control group and relatively preserved values in the Surgicel&#xae; Powder and Tisseel&#xae; groups. However, no statistically significant difference was identified between the two active treatment groups. Histopathological evaluation revealed no statistically significant between-group differences in necrosis, inflammation, fibrosis, haemorrhage, or granulation tissue formation (p&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.05).

### PMID 41684978 (2026) — Cureus
TITLE: Massive Recurrent Chylous Ascites Following Laparoscopic Inguinal Hernia Mesh Repair.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.101306 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chylous ascites is a rare condition characterized by the accumulation of lipid-rich lymph within the peritoneal cavity. While typically secondary to malignancy or trauma, its occurrence following laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair is exceptional. While clinical findings are usually sufficient to diagnose an inguinal hernia and justify surgical intervention, this case demonstrates that rare lymphatic malformations can closely mimic common pathology. A high index of clinical suspicion and further imaging should be employed when diagnostic ambiguity exists to avoid such devastating iatrogenic complications. This case contributes a novel presentation and management approach to the literature. A 35-year-old female, initially misdiagnosed with a right inguinal hernia, underwent elective laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) repair with mesh placement. Three weeks postoperatively, she developed progressive abdominal distension and weight loss. CT imaging revealed massive free fluid consistent with ascites, and paracentesis yielded 9 L of chylous fluid with elevated triglyceride levels. Conservative management, including a medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) diet and somatostatin analogues, failed to achieve resolution. Lymphography subsequently identified multiple leak sites in the right groin; however, an attempt at percutaneous embolization was unsuccessful. Definitive surgical exploration was performed, during which the mesh was removed, revealing injured lymphatic vessels at the femoral ring. These vessels were ligated, and Tisseel&#xae; (Baxter) fibrin sealant was applied. The patient recovered uneventfully, with no recurrence at the three-year follow-up. This case highlights that lymphatic malformations can mimic inguinal hernias and lead to severe iatrogenic complications if not considered in the differential diagnosis when clinical findings or imaging are ambiguous. When conservative measures fail, surgical intervention, specifically mesh removal and direct ligation, is essential. In this patient, the presence of the mesh likely perpetuated the lymphatic leak. This complex scenario required multidisciplinary management; ultimately, prevention relies on accurate preoperative diagnosis.

### PMID 41832382 (2026) — Techniques in coloproctology
TITLE: Novel adjunctive technologies for the prevention of colorectal anastomotic leakage: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1007/s10151-026-03311-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Anastomotic leakage (AL) remains one of the most serious complications following colorectal surgery, particularly after low anterior resection. In recent years, several adjunctive technologies have been introduced to reinforce anastomotic integrity during the early phases of healing. This systematic review aimed to evaluate the safety, feasibility, and clinical effectiveness of novel mechanical and biological devices designed to prevent AL in colorectal surgery.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was conducted in PubMed, Embase, and Scopus. Human studies evaluating innovative adjunctive devices for AL prevention in patients undergoing low anterior resection were included. Studies focusing on transanal tubes, omental wrapping, or suture reinforcement were excluded. The primary outcome was the rate of anastomotic leakage.
RESULTS: Eighteen studies published between 2005 and 2021 met the inclusion criteria. The evaluated technologies were grouped into six categories: bioabsorbable staple-line reinforcements, nitinol-based compression rings, biodegradable intraluminal sheaths, vacuum-anchored diversion systems, fi brin-based sealants, and collagen patches (Seamguard&#x2122;, C-Seal&#x2122;, ColonRing&#x2122;, Colovac&#x2122;, Tissucol&#x2122;/Greenplast&#x2122;, TachoSil&#x2122;, and Hemopatch&#x2122;). Considerable heterogeneity in study design and methodological quality was observed. Although several devices demonstrated acceptable technical feasibility and safety, their eff ect on AL prevention was inconsistent. Only a limited number of studies included control groups or were designed as randomized controlled trials. Device-related complications, including migration, technical difficulties, and local tissue reactions, were reported in some series.
CONCLUSIONS: Current adjunctive technologies have not consistently demonstrated a reduction in AL rates after colorectal surgery. While selected devices may provide potential benefit in high-risk patients, their clinical applicability remains limited by technical constraints and heterogeneous evidence. Further large, high-quality studies incorporating standardized definitions of AL and patient-specific risk stratification are warranted.

### PMID 42342943 (2026) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: How I do it: Implant-free transposition technique for microvascular decompression in hemifacial spasm.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-026-06942-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: &#xa0;Hemifacial spasm (HFS) is most often caused by arterial compression of the facial nerve (CNVII). Microvascular decompression (MVD) of CNVII has excellent outcomes, achieving spasm freedom in approximately 90% of patients, and can be accomplished by inter positional or transpositional techniques.
METHOD: We present a step-by-step description of an experienced surgeon's technique for MVD in HFS using vessel transposition with TachoSil&#xae;, supported by an illustrative video.
CONCLUSION: In our experience, transposition using TachoSil&#xae; during MVD for HFS, in appropriately selected patients, is a safe and effective approach offering potential advantages over traditional materials and techniques.

### PMID 42320863 (2026) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Management of Minor Superior Sagittal Sinus Laceration in Parasagittal Meningioma Surgery: Operative Video.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2026.125145 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: Superior sagittal sinus (SSS) injury represents a potentially serious intraoperative complication during parasagittal meningioma surgery. Although primary venous repair with direct suturing remains the preferred reconstructive strategy when technically feasible, selected minor sinus wall injuries may require less manipulative hemostatic strategies aimed at preserving venous patency while minimizing sinus manipulation. We report the case of a 44-year-old male with multiple intracranial meningiomas who underwent resection of a right frontal parasagittal lesion located at the junction between the anterior and middle thirds of the SSS. Preoperative imaging demonstrated tumor adherence without intraluminal invasion (Sindou grade I) and preserved sinus patency. During coagulation of the dura attachment using a thulium laser, a minor sinus wall laceration occurred. Given the small defect size, preserved sinus morphology, and limited wall disruption, the injury was managed using a collagen-based fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil&#xae;), achieving rapid and stable hemostasis without requiring direct suturing or additional repair maneuvers. Gross total resection (Simpson grade I) was achieved. Postoperative MRI with venography confirmed complete tumor removal and preserved sinus patency without thrombosis, stenosis, or hemorrhagic complications. The patient had an uneventful recovery and remained neurologically intact at 3-month follow-up. Histology confirmed WHO grade I fibroblastic meningioma. This case highlights the importance of tailoring the management of minor SSS injuries according to defect size, sinus patency, and anatomical context. In highly selected situations, collagen-based sealant patches may represent a reasonable adjunct for achieving rapid hemostasis while preserving venous flow. An operative video illustrating the complication and its management is provided.

### PMID 42306951 (2026) — Journal of biomaterials applications
TITLE: Epidural thickness of the dura sealants HEMOPATCH&#xae; and TACHOSIL&#xae; after elective supratentorial craniotomy: A comparative retrospective monocentric cohort study.
DOI: 10.1177/08853282261462277 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study compares the in vivo behavior (epidural thickness and complication rate including the development of cerebrospinal fluid fistula, CSF-fistula) of the newer dura sealant HEMOPATCH&#xae; (HP) with that of the well-established patch TACHOSIL&#xae; (TS) in early postoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and during the clinical course after supratentorial cranial surgery. This retrospective cohort study included 58 patients with complete datasets (HP group n = 39, TS group n = 19). Inclusion criteria were supratentorial surgery, use of one dura sealant (HP or TS), re-implantation of the bone flap, and MRI within 3&#xa0;months after surgery. We measured the thickness of the used dura sealant in axial T1-weighted sequences of postoperative MRI on the area of suture (central) and on two peripheral spots. Additionally, we examined the incidence of surgical revisions due to hemorrhage, infection, and wound healing disorders. The mean central thickness of HP and TS were 0.49&#xa0;cm and 0.55&#xa0;cm, respectively. This difference in size was not statistically significant (p = 0.066). The peripheral epidural thickness of HP (d = 0.36&#xa0;cm) was significantly smaller than of TS (d = 0.42&#xa0;cm; p = 0.014) in one of two points of peripheral measurement. Similarly, the two groups did not differ significantly in the complication rate needing surgical revision, including CSF fistula (HP 3/39 vs TS 3/19; p = 0.34). The biological behavior in terms of growth, swelling, induction of wound healing disorders, hemorrhage, and development of CSF-fistula showed no statistically significant difference within this small descriptive cohort.

### PMID 42188409 (2026) — Journal of functional biomaterials
TITLE: In Vitro Evaluation of Anti-Inflammatory and Antioxidant Properties of a Novel Calcium Alginate-Zinc Hemostatic Biomaterial.
DOI: 10.3390/jfb17050242 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Achieving hemostasis is crucial in neurosurgery, yet conventional methods are not always feasible, making topical hemostatic agents necessary. Current resorbable hemostatic agents allow effective hemostasis but must remain in situ to prevent rebleeding. This can provoke foreign body reactions leading to prolonged microglia-mediated neuroinflammation, which may exacerbate damage and delay recovery. It highlights the need for new hemostatic materials that can be removed after controlling bleeding while being safe for neurons and microglia. One candidate is Hemo-Ionic, a non-resorbable hemostatic compress composed of calcium alginate and zinc (Zn2+). Hemo-Ionic previously demonstrated effective in vitro and in vivo hemostasis, comparable to Surgicel and TachoSil, and pro-repair properties. In this study, Hemo-Ionic's effect on neuronal and microglial cells was investigated in vitro. Results showed that Hemo-Ionic preserved cell viability and had an antioxidant capacity through protection from lipid peroxidation. Hemo-Ionic also reduced nitric oxide and pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-1&#x3b2; and TNF-&#x3b1;) expression and release by lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated microglial cells. Finally, neuronal viability was restored when exposed to supernatants of Hemo-Ionic-treated microglia. These findings indicate that Hemo-Ionic's safety and capacity to reduce neuroinflammation, combined with its hemostatic efficacy and non-resorbable nature, make it a promising alternative to resorbable hemostatic agents used in neurosurgery.

### PMID 42047404 (2026) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Acute respiratory failure due to intercostal artery rupture and bilateral thoracic meningoceles in a patient with neurofibromatosis type 1: a case report.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2026.2664122 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Thoracic meningoceles (tMCs) are extremely rare, yet the majority occur in patients with Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). Optimal treatment remains to be determined.
METHODS: A 50-year-old female was admitted with acute dyspnea. Workup showed bilateral thoracic masses, suspicious for tMCs, given a history of NF1. External lumbar drainage (ELD) was placed, which relieved the symptoms, yet after two days, the patient went into cardiac arrest due to a ruptured intercostal artery. After successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation and embolization, the patient was stabilized, and a thoracic-neurosurgical procedure was planned. Via a posterior thoracotomy, the larger of the two meningoceles was resected using a linear stapler and removed en bloc. Dura was reinforced with TachoSil&#xae;, and the thoracic wall was reinforced with expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (e-PTFE).
RESULTS: The patient developed postoperative pneumonia and was extubated on the 12th postoperative day. She was re-intubated after developing sepsis, re-extubated on the 61st postoperative day, then transferred to the pulmonology ward, and ultimately discharged to rehabilitation. At six months postoperatively, she remains clinically stable, with no new neurological deficits.
DISCUSSION: Thoracic MCs remain challenging in diagnosis and treatment, and should be kept in mind as a differential diagnosis of acute respiratory failure in patients with NF1.

### PMID 41550888 (2026) — European heart journal. Case reports
TITLE: Spontaneous cardiac rupture as the initial presentation of acute myeloid leukaemia complicated by malignant lactic acidosis: a case report.
DOI: 10.1093/ehjcr/ytaf666 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) without coronary artery occlusion in the setting of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) is exceedingly rare. We report a rare case of spontaneous cardiac rupture in a patient ultimately diagnosed with acute myeloid leukaemia.
CASE SUMMARY: A 77-year-old woman presented with acute chest pain and haemodynamic collapse. Coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis, whereas left ventriculography demonstrated contrast extravasation from the apical region, consistent with LVFWR. The patient underwent emergent surgery; however, no discrete rupture site was identified. Following temporary weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass and re-inspection, no obvious rupture site was observed. Since it appeared that the blow-out-type rupture had transitioned to an oozing type, suture less repair with TachoSil&#xae; was chosen, achieving initial haemodynamic stabilization. Postoperatively, the patient remained haemodynamically stable without persistent bleeding. However, on Postoperative Day 3, the patient was diagnosed with AML, followed by rapidly progressive malignant lactic acidosis and multiorgan failure, leading to death despite intensive care.
CONCLUSION: This case underscores three key clinical considerations:(1)&#x2003;In instances of LVFWR without culprit coronary artery occlusion, the possibility of leukaemia-associated myocardial pathology should be actively evaluated.(2)&#x2003;For oozing-type LVFWR lacking a clearly identifiable rupture site, sutureless repair may represent a feasible and effective surgical option.(3)&#x2003;The onset or progression of lactic acidosis in the setting of marked leucocytosis constitutes a medical emergency, warranting prompt initiation of cytoreductive therapy and empiric thiamine supplementation.

### PMID 41836977 (2026) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Delayed hypersensitivity reaction to Floseal after anterior cervical discectomy and fusion surgery: a case report and review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1097/RC9.0000000000000167 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Allergic reactions against the hemostatic agent Floseal during or after spine surgery are very rare, with six cases reported in the literature so far. We present a case of type IV hypersensitivity reaction against Floseal after an anterior cervical discectomy and fusion surgery. We also review the literature of reactions against Floseal for patients who have undergone spinal surgeries.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 25-year-old male patient was admitted to our center with images revealing a C5 teardrop fracture and rupture of the upper and lower discs. C5 corpectomy was performed successfully without any intraoperative adverse events. On the morning of the third day post-op, the patient developed respiratory distress accompanied by swelling beneath the surgical wound. We performed an urgent exploration of the wound and evacuation of the collection. The collection was watery and clear with Floseal remnants visible. Histopathological analysis of the fluid revealed no evidence of infection but showed inflammatory changes with leukocytosis. Symptoms resolved after the second surgery and the patient recovered with no further complications.
DISCUSSION: The delayed onset of localized swelling following surgery and rapid resolution after irrigation and removal of Floseal remnant particles is highly suggestive of a delayed-hypersensitivity reaction to Floseal. Delayed-hypersensitivity reaction should be considered in the differential diagnosis of delayed post-op swelling where Floseal was used.
CONCLUSION: We believe this is the first reported case of delayed-hypersensitivity reaction to Floseal, which occurred after anterior cervical discectomy and fusion surgery.

### PMID 41816546 (2026) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: Complete Resection of a Giant Hypervascular Pelvic Floor Solitary Fibrous Tumor Using Intraoperative Balloon Occlusion and Staged Open Abdomen Management: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.70352/scrj.cr.25-0717 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Solitary fibrous tumors (SFTs) are rare fibroblastic neoplasms that can occur at various anatomical sites, including the pleura, retroperitoneum, and pelvis. Although surgical resection remains the mainstay of curative treatment, pelvic SFTs often present as giant hypervascular tumors, making intraoperative bleeding control particularly challenging.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 66-year-old man presented with progressive abdominal distension, constipation, and dysuria. CT revealed a large pelvic mass measuring 200 &#xd7; 176 &#xd7; 140 mm, with multiple intratumoral vessels and areas of necrosis accompanied by bilateral hydronephrosis. MRI revealed a heterogeneously hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images. Preoperative angiography revealed multiple feeding arteries from the bilateral internal iliac, inferior mesenteric, and median sacral arteries. Preoperative embolization was deemed technically difficult because of the extensive vascular network. Intraoperative balloon occlusion catheters were therefore placed in both internal iliac arteries to control pelvic blood flow. The tumor was resected via open surgery, along with partial cystectomy and ureteral resection, followed by reconstruction. Persistent venous oozing required temporary open abdomen management using Abthera, and definitive closure was achieved the following day after confirmation of hemostasis and application of Surgiflo. The resected specimen measured 210 &#xd7; 200 &#xd7; 140 mm and weighed 2865 g. Histologically, the tumor consisted of spindle cells with low mitotic activity. Immunohistochemistry revealed positivity for signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) and negativity for cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34), confirming the diagnosis of SFT. The postoperative course was complicated by pulmonary embolism, which was successfully managed with anticoagulation therapy. The patient remains disease-free 1 month after surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: This case of a giant pelvic floor SFT with CD34 negativity and STAT6 positivity demonstrates that intraoperative balloon occlusion and staged open abdominal management can be effective strategies for controlling intraoperative bleeding in hypervascular pelvic tumors. Individualized planning and staged approaches are crucial for facilitating tumor resection in such highly challenging cases.

### PMID 41449491 (2026) — The Journal of laryngology and otology
TITLE: Tracheal resection anastomosis in neurologically compromised patients: no longer a contra-indication, with promising outcomes.
DOI: 10.1017/S0022215125104192 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To highlight our experience in the management of patients with severe subglottic and/or upper tracheal stenosis associated with neurological co-morbidities. Effective tips and tricks in the surgical technique were emphasised.
METHODS: This study included 33 patients with neurological co-morbidities who underwent tracheal and/or cricotracheal resection anastomosis. To decrease the anastomotic tension, suprahyoid release was performed and trachea-hyoid detensioning stitches were placed. Surgiflo&#xae; was applied over the anastomosis to enhance healing. Surgical and functional outcomes were evaluated.
RESULTS: The decannulation rate was 90.9 per cent. Regarding the functional outcomes, significant improvement of voice and swallowing was noticed after surgery. None of the patients experienced deterioration in their pre-existing neurological conditions following surgery.
CONCLUSION: Patients with severe subglottic and/or upper tracheal stenosis associated with neurological co-morbidities are challenging. Certain refinements in the surgical technique such as tailored suprahyoid release, tracheo-hyoid detensioning stitches and the application of Surgiflo are crucial to enhance healing, decrease anastomotic tension and improve outcomes.

### PMID 42185998 (2026) — BMC endocrine disorders
TITLE: Persistent oxidized regenerated cellulose mimicking locoregional recurrence after thyroidectomy: diagnostic challenges and associated risk factors.
DOI: 10.1186/s12902-026-02325-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) is widely used as a local hemostatic agent during thyroid surgery. Although manufacturers report complete absorption within 7-14 days, persistent ORC is frequently observed in postoperative follow-up, often mimicking residual or recurrent thyroid tissue. This misinterpretation can result in unnecessary investigations or biopsies. The present study aimed (1) to define the ultrasonographic features of persistent ORC to prevent misleading radiological interpretations and (2) to identify the risk factors associated with delayed ORC resorption.
METHODS: A retrospective review was conducted on 145 consecutive patients who underwent thyroid surgery between May 2022 and April 2024. Ultrasonographic follow-up findings were analyzed to identify persistent ORC. Potential clinical and hematological predictors of delayed absorption were evaluated. Statistical analyses included chi-square tests, t-tests, and Cox regression models to determine independent risk factors influencing ORC persistence.
RESULTS: Persistence of ORC was significantly associated with a history of reoperation (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.002), presence of coronary artery disease (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.006), low neutrophil count (&lt;&#x2009;3.785&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10&#x2079;/L; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.003), and the use of the Pahacel&#xae; brand of ORC. In contrast, ORC from the Surgicel&#xae; brand showed significantly faster absorption. These findings suggest that both patient-related and product-related factors contribute to the delayed resorption of ORC.
CONCLUSIONS: Persistent ORC may mimic recurrent thyroid tissue on postoperative imaging. Awareness of its ultrasonographic appearance and understanding of related risk factors are essential to avoid unnecessary diagnostic procedures. Surgeons, endocrinologists, and radiologists should exercise caution during postoperative assessment, especially in patients with risk factors for delayed absorption.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study is a retrospective analysis and was not prospectively registered.

### PMID 42076721 (2026) — Veterinary sciences
TITLE: Considerations About the Antimicrobial Activity of Oxidized Cellulose and Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose and Their Potential Application in Veterinary Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/vetsci13040349 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Oxidized cellulose (OC) and oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) are bioabsorbable polysaccharide-based materials widely used in surgery for topical hemostasis. Beyond their established hemostatic role, increasing attention has been directed toward their potential antimicrobial activity, primarily attributed to local acidification following carboxyl group dissociation. Discussing the possible implications of the antibacterial properties of OC/ORC in veterinary surgical practice, this review critically examines the existing evidence. In vitro studies show that viable bacterial counts are significantly reduced in both Gram-positive and Gram-negative pathogens, including antibiotic-resistant strains. Historical in vivo animal models further support a reduction in bacterial recovery in contaminated tissues treated with OC. However, contemporary veterinary clinical trials specifically evaluating surgical site infection (SSI) outcomes remain limited. Documented limitations include variability in formulation, quantity-dependent degradation kinetics, and the potential for foreign body reactions when excessive material is retained. Current evidence suggests that OC may provide adjunctive antimicrobial effects under controlled experimental conditions, primarily in vitro and in standardized animal models, but these properties should be interpreted with caution, and its role should be integrated within comprehensive infection prevention strategies rather than considered a substitute for established perioperative protocols.

### PMID 41952115 (2026) — International journal of emergency medicine
TITLE: Pseudoaneurysm of the thoracoacromial artery associated with habitual shoulder dislocation: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s12245-026-01202-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Shoulder dislocation is one of the most common joint dislocations encountered in emergency departments, but vascular complications are rare and often underrecognized. Pseudoaneurysms of the thoracoacromial artery, a branch of the axillary artery, are extremely uncommon and may present with subtle symptoms, delaying diagnosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 82-year-old woman with a history of habitual anterior shoulder dislocation presented with a 10-day history of progressive pain and swelling in the left shoulder. She was on edoxaban for atrial fibrillation. Examination revealed localized tenderness and swelling without neurological deficits. Computed tomography angiography showed a 30&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;35&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;35&#xa0;mm pseudoaneurysm arising from the acromial branch of the thoracoacromial artery. Endovascular embolization was performed using a proximal oxidized regenerated cellulose sheet placement followed by injection of N-butyl cyanoacrylate and Lipiodol due to the risk of coil migration into the joint space. The procedure achieved complete exclusion of the lesion. At three-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic with preserved left upper limb function. Computed tomography angiography demonstrated the pseudoaneurysm remains excluded.
CONCLUSION: Although rare, pseudoaneurysms of the thoracoacromial artery can occur after repeated shoulder dislocation and reduction, especially in elderly patients on anticoagulation therapy. Early recognition through imaging and prompt endovascular intervention can prevent serious vascular and neurological complications.

### PMID 41798513 (2026) — Cureus
TITLE: A Comprehensive Review of SURGICEL&#xae;: Efficacy, Applications, and Radiological Insights in Surgery.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.103048 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: SURGICEL&#xae; is a widely used hemostatic material designed to control capillary, venous, and small arterial bleeding. Introduced in 1960, it functions by producing cellulosic acid, which promotes platelet aggregation and activation of the coagulation pathway. This bioabsorbable material has been utilized in various surgical procedures to manage perioperative bleeding. The objective of this article is to review the mechanism of action, clinical applications, and imaging characteristics of SURGICEL&#xae;, as well as its role in differential diagnosis in surgical contexts. This article serves as a comprehensive review of SURGICEL&#xae; in various surgical fields, including neurosurgery, urology, orthopedics, and maxillofacial surgery, while also examining SURGICEL&#xae;'s hemostatic mechanism, clinical efficacy, and bioabsorbable properties. The review also evaluates its radiological appearance in ultrasound, CT, and MRI, and addresses its role in differential diagnosis and potential complications, such as granuloma formation and infections, based on existing literature. SURGICEL&#xae; has proven effective in achieving hemostasis in a wide range of surgical procedures, including maxillofacial and neurosurgical operations. As a bioabsorbable material, it induces minimal tissue reactions and is gradually absorbed over time. On imaging, it appears as echogenic masses, radiopaque bands, or alterations in signal intensity, particularly on MRI. MRI can differentiate SURGICEL&#xae; from adjacent tissues, aiding in the identification of hematoma-like masses or complications such as granulomas and infections. Overall, SURGICEL&#xae; offers significant utility in surgical hemostasis with minimal side effects. However, careful monitoring is required to avoid complications, and knowledge of its radiological appearance is essential for accurate differential diagnosis. This review highlights its coagulation-promoting properties, imaging features, and potential complications to guide its effective clinical use.

### PMID 41718291 (2026) — Reports (MDPI)
TITLE: Non-Woven Haemostatic Agent Mimicking Perigraft Abscess Following Thoracic Aortic Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/reports9010040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Clinical Significance: Absorbable haemostatic agents such as Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar are useful adjuncts to control post-surgical bleeding in cardiac surgery. The material is purposefully left in situ and it slowly degrades over time. Previous publications, mainly in general and gynaecological surgery, have demonstrated that these materials can mimic gangrenous infection, abscesses, anastomotic leak, and early tumour recurrence in imaging studies. These findings can often lead to unnecessary re-interventions or re-operations. The number of reports in the cardiothoracic surgical field is limited. Case Presentation: We report a 45-year-old man who underwent aortic valve replacement and ascending aorta and hemiarch replacement. In this case, Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar was used to optimise graft contouring, contributing to postoperative imaging appearances that initially raised concern for infection. The patient was conservatively managed given his stable clinical picture and focused review of CT images with the knowledge of location of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar. Repeat CT scan after 2 weeks showed a significant reduction in collection size and complete resolution of air bubbles within the collection. Conclusions: It is important for cardiothoracic surgeons and radiologists to be aware of the early CT appearances of haemostatic agents to minimise erroneous diagnosis of postoperative complications leading to unnecessary interventions. This case highlights a diagnostic pitfall in postoperative imaging, where retained absorbable haemostatic material may mimic serious infective complications and lead to unnecessary re-intervention if operative and radiological findings are not carefully correlated.

### PMID 41514490 (2026) — ACS applied bio materials
TITLE: A Biodegradable, Self-Gelling Protease-Grafted Alginate Dressing for Efficient Control of Non-Compressible Hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1021/acsabm.5c01756 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Uncontrollable noncompressible bleeding has always been a major cause of death and disability among civilians and military personnel. Herein, a biodegradable, self-gelling protease-grafted alginate dressing was developed for efficient noncompressible bleeding control. The hemostatic dressing was fabricated through a high-degree sodium ion exchange of calcium alginate fibers, followed by covalent grafting of trypsin via carbodiimide chemistry. This design confers exceptional swelling capacity and rapid gelation within seconds upon blood contact, forming a physical barrier. The grafted trypsin establishes an artificial coagulation pathway independent of endogenous factors, significantly shortening in vitro clotting times. Moreover, it promotes adhesion and aggregation of red blood cells and platelets, accelerating clot formation and increasing the clot strength. In a rabbit liver injury model, the dressing achieved hemostasis within 70 s, significantly reducing blood loss and promoting wound healing compared to commercial SURGICEL while demonstrating excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability. The protease-grafted alginate dressing exhibited high robustness against high-temperature treatment, maintaining its high procoagulant activity in vitro for over 55 days at 47 &#xb0;C.

### PMID 41485823 (2026) — American journal of obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Hemostatic resuscitation: blood product replacement during cesarean delivery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2025.07.007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Despite efforts to improve accurate prediction, early detection, and optimal medical and surgical treatments, obstetrical hemorrhage remains the leading cause of maternal mortality worldwide. The development and application of clinical bundles incorporating risk assessment tools focused on earlier detection and prompt intervention have demonstrated improved clinical outcomes. Many clinical bundles and obstetrical hemorrhage institutional protocols have incorporated different methods attempting to quantify intraoperative blood loss during cesarean. The addition of blood loss quantification, when incorporated into structured bundles, appears to improve outcomes. Although evidence specific to obstetrics is limited, the practice of hemostatic resuscitation and the use of massive transfusion protocols have been adapted from the trauma literature. Following identification of excessive hemorrhage, resuscitation with excessive crystalloid or colloid solutions should be avoided as it increases morbidity and mortality. Instead, hemostatic resuscitation including early administration of blood products should be instituted without delays. Early blood product and clotting factor administration, when indicated, with avoidance of hypothermia, excessive crystalloid or colloid solutions, hypocalcemia, and acidemia are key to achieve rapid hemostasis and avoid dilutional coagulopathy. At the same time, faster hemostasis results in decreased end-organ hypoperfusion/damage leading to inflammation-induced disseminated intravascular coagulation. Together with classical blood products (red blood cells, plasma, platelets, and cryoprecipitate), different adjuvants have been used to achieve faster hemostasis including tranexamic acid, fibrinogen concentrates, activated factor VII, and prothrombin complex concentrates. The efficacy of group O low titer whole blood is currently being studied in civilian trauma victims with hemorrhagic shock; its role in obstetrical hemorrhage is promising but will require validation in clinical trials. Point-of-care viscoelastic testing enables the identification of specific clotting anomalies, potentially reducing unnecessary transfusions through an individualized approach to transfusion. Viscoelastic testing may be used to guide transfusions after the acute phase of resuscitation when severe intraoperative active bleeding has been controlled. Persistence of nonsurgical bleeding following cesarean delivery may require the use of topical hemostatic agents or, in extreme cases, damage control surgery with abdominal packing and temporary abdominal closure followed by medical stabilization in the intensive care unit. Patients who receive large amounts of blood products should be followed closely for the development of abdominal compartment syndrome, a rare but potentially deadly complication. Abdominal compartment syndrome should be suspected in patients who received large-volume resuscitation with persistent hypotension and oliguria not responsive to further fluid administration together with ventilatory compromise secondary to decreased respiratory compliance. Diagnosis requires measurement of intravesical pressure. Immediate treatment includes surgical abdominal decompression.

### PMID 41344477 (2026) — International journal of biological macromolecules
TITLE: Sandwiched ceftriaxone-impregnated oxidized regenerated cellulose within electrospun gelatin/polylactic acid fibers for enhanced wound management.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2025.149457 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study introduces a novel sandwich-structured wound dressing composed of ceftriaxone-loaded oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) integrated within electrospun gelatin (Gel) and polylactic acid (PLA) nanofibers to enhance hemostasis, antibacterial activity, and wound healing efficiency. ORC, derived from cotton cellulose, was chemically modified and validated by FTIR and XRD analyses, revealing increased carboxyl content (1637&#xa0;cm-1), reduced crystallinity, and an 18&#xa0;% enhancement in hemostatic functionality. Optimized electrospinning conditions produced uniform, bead-free Gel, PLA, and Gel/PLA fibers, as confirmed by SEM images showing continuous fibers with embedded ORC microfibrils in an organized sandwich structure. Contact angle and water absorption studies demonstrated the composites' hydrophilic nature and excellent swelling capacity (1655&#xa0;%). The water vapor transmission rate (190&#xa0;g/m2/day) indicated adequate breathability and protection for wound environments. Mechanical testing revealed significant improvements in tensile strength (~3.2&#xa0;MPa) and modulus (~32&#xa0;MPa), maintaining flexibility favorable for wound applications. Drug release evaluation followed Fickian diffusion behavior, fitting the Korsmeyer-Peppas model (R2&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.97), ensuring controlled and sustained ceftriaxone release. Antibacterial tests showed strong inhibition against Staphylococcus aureus (96&#xa0;%) and Escherichia coli (85&#xa0;%). Overall, the ceftriaxone-embedded Gel/PLA nanofibrous composite demonstrated high biocompatibility (&gt;90&#xa0;%) and multifunctional performance. By integrating effective hemostasis, sustained antibacterial delivery, and structural support for tissue regeneration, this advanced wound dressing offers a promising approach for accelerating wound healing and preventing infection in biomedical applications.

### PMID 41218831 (2026) — The Journal of small animal practice
TITLE: Encapsulated granuloma (surgiceloma) caused by retained Surgicel&#xae; following liver lobectomy in a dog: a case report.
DOI: 10.1111/jsap.70051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: A 12-year-old dog underwent liver lobectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma, and Surgicel&#xae; was used intraoperatively for haemostasis. Three months after surgery, computed tomography revealed a solitary abdominal mass, which was surgically removed. Histopathology identified the mass as retained Surgicel&#xae; surrounded by granulomatous inflammation. Although Surgicel&#xae; is generally considered safe, retained material may mimic abscess, haematoma or tumour recurrence on imaging. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first veterinary case describing an encapsulated granuloma caused by retained Surgicel&#xae; in a dog. This case highlights that Surgicel&#xae; may persist and induce granulomatous inflammation, mimicking significant postoperative complications on imaging. Accurate intraoperative documentation and awareness of this potential pitfall are essential to prevent misdiagnosis and avoid unnecessary procedures.

### PMID 40835013 (2026) — The Journal of arthroplasty
TITLE: The Effect of Intraoperative Administration of Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose on Blood Loss and Thigh Swelling After Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Single-Blind Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.arth.2025.08.019 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) in reducing perioperative blood loss and postoperative thigh swelling in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty (TKA).
METHODS: A single-blind randomized controlled trial was conducted, including 100 patients undergoing primary TKA, randomized into the ORC group (n = 50) or placebo group (n = 50). Estimated blood loss (EBL) was calculated using hemoglobin, and thigh swelling was assessed using computed tomography by measuring femoral cross-sectional area and Hounsfield Unit values both preoperatively and one week postoperatively. The secondary outcomes included functional mobility, laboratory data, pain scores, length of hospital stay, and complications. To evaluate the effectiveness of ORC in controlling venous bleeding, EBL was assessed in a subgroup excluding the top 10% of patients who have the highest blood loss, as well as in all patients.
RESULTS: In the ORC and placebo groups, the EBL in the subgroup was 690 &#xb1; 316 versus 820 &#xb1; 285 mL (P = 0.04), the changes in femoral area were 1,606 &#xb1; 933 versus 2,178 &#xb1; 1,190 mm2 (P = 0.01), and the changes in Hounsfield Unit values were 8.8 &#xb1; 7.8 versus 13.3 &#xb1; 10.3 (P = 0.018), respectively. Multivariate regression analysis identified ORC use as a significant factor for EBL reduction (partial regression coefficient: -127.9, 95% confidence interval: -230.9 to -24.9, P = 0.015). No significant differences were observed in secondary outcomes. No adverse events related to surgeries were reported in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: Perioperative EBL and postoperative thigh swelling were significantly suppressed in the ORC group compared to the placebo group. In contrast, clinical parameters assessed two weeks postoperatively, including functional mobility, laboratory data, and pain scores, showed no significant differences between the two groups.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: &#x2160;.

### PMID 41806614 (2026) — Biomaterials advances
TITLE: Emerging haemostatic sprays: From material design to clinical translation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bioadv.2026.214796 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Haemostatic sprays have emerged as a transformative class of topical agents for the rapid control of bleeding in surgery, trauma, and endoscopy, particularly in settings where conventional approaches such as suturing, cauterisation, or mechanical compression are impractical. Delivered in a non-contact and conformal manner, these systems enable efficient coverage of irregular, deep, and non-compressible bleeding sites. Their haemostatic action arises from synergistic biochemical and physical mechanisms, including activation of the coagulation cascade, plasma absorption driven concentration of clotting factors, and formation of adhesive or barrier-type matrices at the wound surface. Commercial and non-commercial products such as Hemospray&#xae;, PuraStat&#xae;, Raplixa&#x2122;, Ankaferd Blood-Stopper&#xae;, EndoClot&#xae;, OOZFIX&#x2122;, and CMCS-COHA have demonstrated clinically meaningful reductions in bleeding, improved procedural visibility, and favourable patient outcomes across gastrointestinal, surgical, and trauma indications. Alongside these, a rapidly expanding portfolio of pre-clinical sprayable biomaterials spanning mineral, polysaccharide, protein, peptide, hydrogel, and nano-engineered platforms offers new opportunities to address unmet needs in non-compressible and complex haemorrhage. This review provides a comprehensive and integrated analysis of haemostatic sprays, covering material classes, mechanisms of action, clinical applications, and translational performance. Key challenges, including tissue irritation, thromboembolic risk, impaired visualisation, and limitations in adhesion or durability, are critically examined, together with emerging strategies to improve biocompatibility, targeting accuracy, and suitability for pre-hospital or low-resource settings. By synthesizing current clinical evidence with advances in biomaterial design and spray-delivery technologies, this review defines the present capabilities of haemostatic sprays and outlines a roadmap for their next-generation development. These innovations are poised to further enhance the safety, speed, and effectiveness of bleeding control in modern surgical and emergency care.

### PMID 41957762 (2026) — BMC musculoskeletal disorders
TITLE: Delayed myelopathy caused by cerebrospinal fluid pseudocyst following decompression for thoracic ossification of the ligamentum flavum: a case report and literature review.
DOI: 10.1186/s12891-026-09786-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Delayed neurological deterioration caused by a postoperative high-pressure cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection is an uncommon but clinically recognized complication after thoracic decompression complicated by incidental durotomy. We report a case of delayed thoracic myelopathy due to a tension subfascial CSF collection and summarize relevant literature.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 55-year-old woman with thoracic myelopathy due to ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament at T2-4 and ossification of the ligamentum flavum at T5-6 underwent posterior decompression and instrumented fusion (T2-6 laminectomy with T1-6 instrumentation). An incidental dural tear occurred at T5-6 and was managed with an onlay artificial dural patch reinforced with fibrin glue and gelatin sponge. The wound drain was removed on postoperative day 7. On postoperative day 9, she developed acute left lower-extremity weakness. MRI demonstrated a large subfascial CSF collection causing significant spinal cord compression, consistent with a tension pseudomeningocele. Bedside subfascial incision and continuous closed low-level drainage (with the drainage bag kept at bed level) resulted in rapid neurological improvement. After recurrence following drain removal, ultrasound-guided drainage was performed, leading to sustained symptom relief. At 3-month follow-up, she had full motor recovery and follow-up MRI confirmed resolution of the collection with adequate decompression.
CONCLUSIONS: A tension subfascial CSF collection after incidental durotomy can mimic recurrent stenosis and cause delayed thoracic myelopathy. When imaging confirms a compressive CSF collection, continuous closed low-level subfascial drainage may be considered before revision surgery.

### PMID 41878192 (2026) — Annals of vascular diseases
TITLE: A Case of Chronic Expanding Hematoma in the Thoracic Cavity Treated with Transcatheter Arterial Embolization.
DOI: 10.3400/avd.cr.25-00148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chronic expanding hematoma (CEH) is a rare late complication of thoracic trauma or surgery, and favorable outcomes with transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) have rarely been reported. An 80-year-old male presented with recurrent hemoptysis and was diagnosed with intrathoracic CEH. Owing to advanced age and high surgical risk, TAE was performed via bronchial, intercostal, and inferior phrenic arteries using tris-acryl microspheres (700-900 &#x3bc;m) and gelatin sponge. Hemoptysis resolved, and follow-up imaging showed hematoma shrinkage without recurrence for 2 years. This case demonstrates TAE with 700-900 &#x3bc;m microspheres as a safe, minimally invasive alternative to surgery for CEH.

### PMID 41673833 (2026) — BMC surgery
TITLE: Life-threatening spinal cord injury and occult intercostal artery rupture following low-energy trauma in a patient with ankylosing spondylitis: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-026-03594-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) significantly increases vulnerability to severe spinal injuries from minor trauma due to rigid "bamboo spine" morphology and secondary osteoporosis. Isolated intercostal artery rupture without rib fractures is extremely rare in general trauma populations. The concurrent occurrence of multilevel spinal fractures with complete spinal cord injury and occult intercostal artery hemorrhage following low-energy blunt trauma in AS patients has rarely been documented, and the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms remain unclear.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 43-year-old male with previously undiagnosed AS sustained a low-velocity bicycle collision, resulting in cervical and thoracic fracture-dislocation (C6-C7 and T11 bilateral laminae fractures) with complete spinal cord injury (ASIA Grade A, complete paraplegia), massive hemothorax, and active intercostal artery bleeding without significant rib fractures. Due to the patient's hemodynamic instability and altered consciousness on admission (hemorrhagic shock with SBP 63/40 mmHg), formal assessment of the bulbocavernosus reflex was not performed initially. The ASIA Grade A classification was based on complete absence of motor function (lower limbs 0/5) and sensory function below the T3 level, including absence of sacral sparing. Computed tomography angiography revealed active contrast extravasation from the right T10-level intercostal artery. Emergency transcatheter arterial angiography and embolization using coils and gelatin sponge particles successfully controlled the hemorrhage and stabilized the patient's hemodynamics. Following stabilization, staged posterior cervical (C5-C7) and thoracolumbar (T9-T12, L3-S1) pedicle screw-rod internal fixation with anterior cervical discectomy and fusion were performed. Despite postoperative complications including hospital-acquired pneumonia, pulmonary fungal infection (Candida albicans isolated from bronchoalveolar lavage, treated with intravenous fluconazole), and deep vein thrombosis, the patient demonstrated partial neurological recovery, with ASIA grade improving from Grade A (complete paraplegia) on admission to Grade C (incomplete paraplegia) at discharge on day 59. Serial neurological examinations documented the evolution from complete to incomplete injury (Table&#xa0;1). The patient was subsequently transferred to a specialized rehabilitation center for long-term functional training.
CONCLUSIONS: This case illustrates the heightened and often unrecognized risk of complex, multisystem injuries in AS patients following seemingly minor trauma. Early recognition of hemothorax without rib fractures should raise high suspicion for intercostal artery injury, necessitating a lowered diagnostic threshold for computed tomography angiography. Transcatheter arterial embolization should be considered the first-line treatment for confirmed intercostal artery bleeding rather than a last resort. Prompt diagnosis, individualized multidisciplinary management, and early referral to specialized centers with interventional and spine surgical capabilities are essential for optimizing outcomes in these high-risk patients.

### PMID 42288399 (2026) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Pro: Point-of-care Viscoelastic Testing Should Be Routinely Used in All Cardiac Surgery Patients.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2026.05.044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This "Pro" argument supports the routine incorporation of point-of-care viscoelastic testing (VET) into perioperative bleeding management algorithms for all cardiac surgery patients. This group of patients remains among the highest consumers of allogeneic blood products, and transfusion is independently associated with increased morbidity, mortality, and cost. Standard laboratory tests have significant limitations in diagnosing coagulopathy and are not designed to guide intraoperative bleeding management. VET enables rapid identification of specific coagulation abnormalities and supports targeted hemostatic therapy. Current evidence demonstrates reductions in transfusion requirements, postoperative bleeding, acute kidney injury, and healthcare costs when VET is integrated into structured transfusion algorithms. Although limitations exist, the available evidence and contemporary guidelines support the routine implementation of VET in cardiac surgical programs.

### PMID 42145275 (2026) — The Cochrane database of systematic reviews
TITLE: Thromboelastography (TEG) or thromboelastometry (ROTEM) to monitor haemostatic treatment versus usual care in adults or children with bleeding.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007871.pub4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Severe bleeding and coagulopathy are serious clinical conditions that are associated with high mortality. Thromboelastography (TEG) and thromboelastometry (ROTEM) are increasingly used to guide transfusion strategy, but their roles remain disputed. This is an update of a review that was first published in 2011 and updated in January 2016.
OBJECTIVES: The objective was to evaluate the benefits and harms of TEG-/ROTEM-guided transfusion strategies for bleeding in adults and children by comparing TEG-ROTEM-guided transfusion with standard treatment.
SEARCH METHODS: In this updated review, we identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) from the following electronic databases: Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL); Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL; Embase; Web of Science Core Collection and Biosis Previews via Clarivate; CINAHL EBSCO; and the WHO Global Index Medicus incl. LILACS (from 2015 up to 5 January 2025). We searched for ongoing clinical trials and unpublished studies in the following registries during the aforementioned period: ISRCTN, ClinicalTrials.gov, CentreWatch, and UMIN-CTR. We contacted trial authors, authors of previous reviews, and manufacturers in the field. The original searches were run in October 2010 and January 2016.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included all RCTs, irrespective of blinding or language, that compared transfusion guided by TEG or ROTEM to transfusion guided by clinical judgement, guided by standard laboratory tests, or a combination. We also included interventional algorithms including both TEG and ROTEM in combination with standard laboratory tests or other devices. The primary analysis included trials on TEG or ROTEM versus any comparator.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently abstracted data; we resolved any disagreements by discussion. We presented pooled estimates of the intervention effects on dichotomous outcomes as risk ratios (RRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Due to skewed data, meta-analysis was not provided for continuous outcome data. Our primary outcome measure was all-cause mortality. We performed subgroup and sensitivity analyses to assess the effect of a TEG- or ROTEM-guided algorithm in adults and children on various clinical and physiological outcomes. We evaluated potential bias by examining trial methodological components using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 1 and assessed the risk of random error through Trial Sequential Analysis (TSA).
MAIN RESULTS: This systematic review included 35 randomised trials (n = 3096), with most involving patients undergoing elective cardiac surgery. Hence, 18 trials and 1603 participants were added since the previous update of this review. TEG-/ROTEM-guided transfusion algorithms may be associated with a reduction in mortality (RR 0.76, 95% CI 0.63 to 0.92; 19 trials; 1865 participants, I2= 0%; random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), but the evidence is very uncertain. This aligns with results from a previous update of this review. Additionally, TEG-/ROTEM-guided transfusion algorithms may reduce bleeding volume (standardised mean difference -0.31, 95% CI -0.51 to -0.11; 19 trials; 1523 participants, I&#xb2; = 72%, random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), but the evidence is very uncertain. No effects on the need for packed red blood cells were seen; RR 0.94 (95% CI 0.87 to 1.01; 21 trials, 2003 participants; I2 = 91%; random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), but the evidence is very uncertain. Furthermore, reductions may be observed in the use of fresh frozen plasma (RR 0.52, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.76; 18 trials; 1536 participants; I2 = 94%, random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), platelet transfusions (RR 0.69, 95% CI: 0.55 to 0.87; 20 trials; 1607 participants; I2 = 60%; random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), and in the risk of surgical re-intervention (RR 0.63, 95% CI 0.45 to 0.88; 13 trials; 1204 participants; I&#xb2; = 0%; fixed-effect model; very low-certainty evidence), but the evidence is very uncertain. Using the GRADE framework, the certainty of the evidence was judged to be very low across all outcomes. TSA for mortality indicated that 64% of the required information size had been reached, with the monitoring boundary for benefit crossed.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: TEG-/ROTEM-guided transfusion algorithms may reduce the risk of mortality, bleeding volume, and the need for fresh frozen plasma, platelets, and surgical re-intervention, but the evidence is very uncertain. Furthermore, the results were primarily based on the adult population undergoing elective cardiac surgery. Hence, the conclusion remains unchanged from the previous update of this review. There is a need for large, low risk of bias randomised controlled trials evaluating TEG/ROTEM across diverse clinical settings, including paediatric and neonatal populations, sepsis, trauma, obstetrics, and high-risk surgical and critically ill cohorts requiring major transfusion. Future studies should be adequately powered and prioritise patient-centred outcomes such as long-term survival, adverse events, cost-effectiveness, and the role of TEG/ROTEM in coagulopathy and severe haemorrhage.

### PMID 42367271 (2026) — Indian journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Endovascular embolization of a ruptured bronchial artery pseudoaneurysm in an elderly female.
DOI: 10.1007/s12055-025-02165-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchial artery pseudoaneurysm (BAP), pathologically defined as a contained hematoma, is a rare pathology with few reported cases (approximately 60) in the literature. In circumstances where patients are critically ill, prompt diagnosis and treatment are required. A 73-year-old woman with a history of coronary artery disease and interstitial lung disease presented with chest pain and dyspnea. She was hypotensive and anemic on arrival. Computed tomography (CT) angiography revealed a ruptured bronchial artery pseudoaneurysm with a large mediastinal hematoma. Endovascular embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue and Lipiodol achieved successful occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm. Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) is the investigation of choice to screen for the disease, with digital subtraction angiography (DSA) being the gold standard for confirmation and guiding management. With recent advances in interventional procedures and vascular access techniques, transcatheter embolization has become the first-line management option for managing these cases. In this case report, the pertinent anatomy, work-up, imaging findings, and&#xa0;overview of the interventional procedure technique are discussed.

### PMID 41723098 (2026) — European annals of otorhinolaryngology, head and neck diseases
TITLE: When routine turns rare: Massive hematemesis unveiling hypopharyngeal perforation caused by a redon suction drain.
DOI: 10.1016/j.anorl.2026.02.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Hypopharyngeal perforation is a rare but potentially life-threatening complication that can follow cervical or aerodigestive procedures. Its deep anatomical location and often subtle symptoms make early recognition difficult, increasing the risk of mediastinitis and sepsis. Massive hematemesis as the initial manifestation is exceptionally uncommon and diagnostically challenging.
CASE SUMMARY: A 49-year-old man underwent elective C4-C5 anterior cervical discectomy for degenerative canal stenosis. Shortly after extubation, he developed massive hematemesis. Endoscopy revealed a perforation of the right pyriform sinus, with a Redon suction drain traversing the hypopharyngeal wall into the laryngeal lumen. Emergency direct pharyngolaryngoscopy was performed; the drain was carefully removed and the defect closed endoscopically with interrupted sutures reinforced by biological fibrin sealant. The postoperative course was uneventful, and at three-month follow-up the patient showed complete recovery without stenosis or fistula.
DISCUSSION: This case describes an exceptionally rare iatrogenic hypopharyngeal perforation caused by a Redon suction drain after anterior cervical discectomy, presenting atypically with massive hematemesis. It highlights the diagnostic challenge and potentially dramatic presentation of hypopharyngeal perforation following anterior cervical spine surgery. The report underscores the importance of meticulous drain placement, intraoperative vigilance, and postoperative airway and swallowing surveillance in preventing aerodigestive complications after cervical or transoral procedures.

### PMID 41654768 (2026) — BMC nephrology
TITLE: Acquired factor V deficiency in an elderly hemodialysis patient: a case report and literature review.
DOI: 10.1186/s12882-026-04782-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Acquired factor V deficiency (AFVD) is a rare hemorrhagic disorder caused by autoantibodies against coagulation factor V. Clinical manifestations vary widely, ranging from asymptomatic cases to severe hemorrhage or even thrombosis, and diagnosis is often challenging due to its rarity and nonspecific presentation. Reported triggers include bovine thrombin, antibiotics, surgery, autoimmune diseases, infections, and malignancy, although up to 20% of cases are idiopathic. We report a case of AFVD in an elderly hemodialysis patient, in whom corticosteroid therapy was effective but ultimately complicated by fatal gastrointestinal bleeding. CASE PRESENTATION: An 87-year-old woman on hemodialysis for diabetic nephropathy was admitted with acute cholecystitis and treated with ceftriaxone. On day 16, she developed bleeding from a gastrostomy site with markedly prolonged prothrombin time (69.3&#xa0;s) and activated partial thromboplastin time (260.4&#xa0;s). Cross-mixing studies showed inhibitor patterns, and factor V activity was reduced to 1.3%, with an inhibitor titer of 33.3 Bethesda units/mL, confirming AFVD. Despite no bleeding from vascular access sites, she developed progressive anemia and gingival bleeding. Intravenous prednisolone (40&#xa0;mg/day) was initiated, resulting in normalization of coagulation parameters and recovery of factor V activity to 111.7% within 30 days. However, on day 57, she developed massive melena. Endoscopy revealed hemorrhagic duodenal ulcers with exposed vessels, requiring endoscopic hemostasis. Recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding occurred on day 61, and she died of hemorrhagic shock. CONCLUSIONS: This case illustrates the diagnostic process and therapeutic challenges of AFVD in a hemodialysis patient. Corticosteroid therapy was effective in eradicating the inhibitor and restoring factor V activity, but fatal gastrointestinal bleeding occurred as a severe treatment-related complication. Clinicians should be aware of AFVD as a rare but important cause of acquired coagulopathy, and careful monitoring for corticosteroid-associated adverse effects is crucial, especially in elderly and critically ill individuals.

### PMID 42127996 (2026) — Endoscopy
TITLE: Endoscopic diagnosis and management of peptic ulcer bleeding: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline - Update 2026.
DOI: 10.1055/a-2863-8314 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: ABSTRACT: This guideline is an update of the 2021 ESGE Guideline on Endoscopic diagnosis and management of nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage. The following are the new and/or revised recommendations.
PRE-ENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 1: ESGE does not recommend the routine use of video capsule endoscopy or telemetric blood-sensing capsules in the management of patients with suspected upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage (UGIH).
PRE-ENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 2: ESGE suggests, if intravenous erythromycin is unavailable, pre-endoscopy administration of intravenous metoclopramide in selected patients with clinically severe or ongoing active UGIH.
PRE-ENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 3: ESGE suggests that pre-endoscopy high dose intravenous proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy be considered in patients presenting with acute UGIH; however, this should not delay early endoscopy.
PRE-ENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 4: ESGE does not recommend emergent (&#x2264;6 hours) or urgent (&#x2264;12 hours) upper GI endoscopy unless the patient remains hemodynamically unstable despite adequate resuscitation.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 5: ESGE suggests that patients with peptic ulcers presenting with an adherent clot (Forrest IIb) should undergo endoscopic therapy, with clot removal and subsequent endoscopic hemostasis if indicated, provided that the endoscopist has the technical competence to safely remove the clot and manage potential conversion to a higher risk bleeding lesion.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 6: ESGE could not reach a consensus for or against the routine use of a Doppler endoscopic probe in treatment decisions of high risk endoscopic stigmata of peptic ulcer bleeding.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 7: ESGE suggests the use of over-the-scope (OTS) clips as monotherapy as an alternative to combination therapy as first-line therapy for peptic ulcer bleeding with high risk stigmata (FIa, FIb) owing to a lower risk of further bleeding compared with standard endoscopic hemostatic therapy.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 8: ESGE recommends, for patients with an ulcer with a nonbleeding visible vessel (FIIa), contact or noncontact thermal therapy, mechanical therapy (e.g. through-the-scope or OTS clips), or injection of a sclerosing agent, each as monotherapy or in combination with epinephrine injection.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 9: ESGE suggests, for patients with an ulcer with a nonbleeding visible vessel (FIIa), OTS clips may be used as alternative monotherapy.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 10: ESGE suggests hemostatic forceps with soft coagulation may be used as monotherapy in the treatment of peptic ulcer bleeding with high risk stigmata (FIa, FIb, and FIIa).
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 11: ESGE suggests that hemostatic agents should not be used as monotherapy in the first-line treatment of patients with high risk stigmata of peptic ulcer bleeding.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 12: ESGE suggests that, in patients with persistent bleeding refractory to standard hemostasis modalities, the use of a topical hemostatic agent or OTS clips should be considered.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 13: ESGE recommends that, in patients with persistent bleeding refractory to all modalities of endoscopic hemostasis, including topical hemostatic agents and OTS clips, transcatheter angiographic embolization (TAE) should be considered. Surgery is indicated when TAE is not locally available or after unsuccessful TAE.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 14: ESGE suggests that prophylactic TAE be considered in selected high risk cases of peptic ulcer bleeding (e.g. patients with hemodynamic instability at presentation, posterior duodenal wall ulcer location, large ulcer size [&gt;2 cm], or when durable endoscopic hemostasis is considered uncertain).
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 15: ESGE could not reach a consensus for or against the routine use of potassium-competitive acid blockers for patients who have undergone endoscopic hemostasis.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 16: ESGE recommends that, for patients with clinical evidence of recurrent peptic ulcer bleeding, use of an OTS clip should be considered. Should this second attempt at endoscopic hemostasis also be unsuccessful, TAE should be considered. Surgery is indicated when TAE is either locally unavailable or after unsuccessful TAE.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 17: ESGE recommends that, in patients with peptic ulcer hemorrhage who require ongoing anticoagulation therapy, anticoagulation should be resumed as soon as clinically indicated based on thromboembolic risk.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 18: ESGE suggests that iron therapy be initiated prior to hospital discharge in patients with peptic ulcer bleeding and iron deficiency and/or anemia.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 19: ESGE suggests that early oral nutrition, within 24 hours following endoscopic hemostasis, be initiated in patients with peptic ulcer bleeding in whom durable hemostasis has been achieved.

### PMID 42379712 (2026) — BMJ open
TITLE: Comparison of effectiveness and safety of different haemostatic materials in patients undergoing transradial coronary intervention and diagnosis: a protocol for systematic review and network meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2026-119976 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Effective compression haemostasis is essential after transradial coronary procedures. However, evidence directly comparing different haemostatic materials remains limited. This study aims to compare and rank the efficacy and safety of different haemostatic materials used as adjuncts to compression after transradial coronary angiography and/or percutaneous coronary intervention, and to explore whether compression modality modifies their relative effects.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We will systematically search nine databases (Cochrane Library, Embase, PubMed, Web of Science, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, Chinese Biomedical Literature Database, Wanfang Data, VIP Database and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature) for randomized controlled trials on post-transradial access (TRA) compression haemostasis with different haemostatic materials, from database inception to December 2025. Supplementary searches will be conducted in ClinicalTrials.gov, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, academic search engines and reference lists of included studies. Two reviewers will independently perform study selection, data extraction and risk of bias assessment using the Cochrane Risk of Bias V.2 tool. A network meta-analysis will be conducted within a frequentist framework using Stata V.16.0. Heterogeneity, inconsistency, small-study effects, evidence quality, sensitivity and the assumption of transitivity will be assessed. Subgroup analyses will be performed according to compression modality (manual vs mechanical) and, where data permit, other prespecified study-level characteristics that may modify treatment effects.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: As this study is a systematic review and network meta-analysis based on published data, ethical approval is not required. The results will be disseminated through publication in a peer-reviewed journal and presentation at academic conferences.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD420251250499.

### PMID 42257026 (2026) — Frontiers in cardiovascular medicine
TITLE: Cardiac intimal sarcoma presenting as basilar artery occlusion treated with tenecteplase and thrombectomy: a case report.
DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2026.1797980 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cardiac intimal sarcoma is a rare and aggressive malignancy, often presenting with embolic complications such as stroke. Basilar artery occlusion (BAO) is a life-threatening neurological emergency caused by several mechanisms, most commonly embolism (including cardioembolism) and intracranial atherosclerotic disease (with thrombotic occlusion).
CASE PRESENTATION: A 77-year-old man with a history of coronary heart disease, cerebral infarction, and hypertension presented with acute speech impairment and progressive consciousness disturbance. NIHSS score was 28. The electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation. Non-contrast head computed tomography ruled out hemorrhage. Intravenous tenecteplase (22.5&#x2005;mg) was administered before platelet count results were available, which later revealed thrombocytopenia (54&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10&#x2079;/L). Emergency mechanical thrombectomy retrieved a 4-cm thrombus from the basilar apex. Histopathology and immunohistochemistry confirmed a diagnosis of intimal sarcoma. Post-procedure, the patient developed multi-organ bleeding and coagulopathy, requiring continuous renal replacement therapy. Despite successful revascularization (NIHSS improved to 10), the patient succumbed to complications of advanced malignancy and hematologic dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: This case highlights that cardiac intimal sarcoma can present as acute BAO. Histopathological analysis of thrombectomy-retrieved embolic material can establish the diagnosis, obviating the need for invasive cardiac biopsy. Intravenous thrombolysis in the setting of unrecognized thrombocytopenia or malignancy-associated hemostatic dysfunction may carry substantial bleeding risk and warrants careful patient selection, urgent laboratory confirmation when feasible, and multidisciplinary management.

### PMID 42124867 (2026) — Medical devices (Auckland, N.Z.)
TITLE: Preclinical Feasibility of the ELANA End-to-End Anastomotic Technique in a Porcine Pilot Study.
DOI: 10.2147/MDER.S520029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To advance minimally invasive surgical techniques, we developed the sutureless ELANA&#xae; End-to-End anastomotic technique. This preclinical study aimed to evaluate the technical feasibility, hemostatic performance, and short-term patency of the new approach in a porcine model.
METHODS: Six pigs underwent implantation of the ELANA End-to-End device in a divided in situ right internal mammary artery (RIMA) via partial sternotomy. The pigs were followed-up for either 35 days (N=3) or 90 (N=3) days. Feasibility was evaluated based on technical success, achievement of hemostasis, and anastomotic construction time. Patency was assessed at the end of follow-up through angiography and histological analysis.
RESULTS: The anastomosis was successfully constructed in four of six animals. Among these, hemostasis was achieved in three cases without additional intervention; one required a single hemostatic stitch. The median anastomotic construction time was 18 (15-45) minutes. Technical failure in two animals was due to difficulty maintaining vessel alignment during deployment. All four successfully constructed anastomoses were patent at the end of follow-up (N=2, 35 days; N=2, 90 days), with no evidence of stenosis on angiography or histology.
CONCLUSION: The ELANA End-to-End technique demonstrated promising patency outcomes. However, the current procedure is technically demanding. Design improvements aimed at stabilizing vessel positioning are warranted to enhance feasibility and reduce construction time.

### PMID 42025492 (2026) — Cardiovascular revascularization medicine : including molecular interventions
TITLE: Safe implementation of an expedited radial hemostatic compression device removal protocol in the cardiac catheterization lab.
DOI: 10.1016/j.carrev.2026.04.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemostatic compression devices (HCDs) are routinely used following transradial catheterization to reduce bleeding risk. However, prolonged compression times can increase the likelihood of radial artery occlusion (RAO) and delay patient throughput in the cardiac catheterization laboratory (CCL).
METHODS: At a single tertiary care center, we implemented an expedited HCD weaning protocol that halved the time to initial deflation for diagnostic procedures (from 120 to 60&#xa0;min) and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) (from 240 to 120&#xa0;min). This was a prospective, sequential pre-post implementation study in which patients were enrolled consecutively during each study phase. The protocol utilized expedited serial partial deflations to achieve faster hemostasis while maintaining safety. We recorded timestamps, HCD deflation details, and complications, defined as bleeding, severe hematomas, need for blood transfusion, surgical consultation, or unplanned admission. Rates of complications and times to HCD removal and CCL discharge were compared before and after protocol implementation.
RESULTS: A total of 397 patients were included (original protocol n&#xa0;=&#xa0;200; expedited protocol n&#xa0;=&#xa0;197). In the entire cohort, mean time to HCD removal decreased from 192&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;60 to 150&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;48&#xa0;min (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001), and mean time to CCL discharge decreased from 198&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;54 to 162&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;60&#xa0;min (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001) with the expedited protocol. Rates of serious complications (0.5% vs. 0.0%; p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.320) and overall bleeding or hematoma (16.5% vs. 18.3%; p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.692) were similar between groups. In the PCI subgroup (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;58), time to HCD removal (270&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;30 vs. 210&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;42&#xa0;min; p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001) and time to discharge (288&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;30 vs. 234&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;60&#xa0;min; p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001) were also significantly shortened with no serious complications reported. While bleeding events in PCI patients trended higher in the expedited group (8.3% vs. 23.5%; p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.171), the difference was not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: An expedited HCD weaning protocol safely reduced CCL length of stay in transradial catheterization without increasing bleeding or serious complications. This approach may improve procedural efficiency and patient throughput.

### PMID 41968006 (2026) — Cardiovascular revascularization medicine : including molecular interventions
TITLE: Transulnar access in patients with ipsilateral radial artery occlusion undergoing coronary angiography or angioplasty: Rationale and design of the ULNART study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.carrev.2026.04.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: In patients with radial artery occlusion (RAO), contralateral transradial access (TRA) may be infeasible or strategically undesirable. Transulnar access (TUA) ipsilateral to RAO is anatomically plausible; however, contemporary evidence on vascular safety and hand function is limited and methodologically heterogeneous. ULNART is a prospective, multicenter cohort designed to evaluate the short- and long-term safety and functional outcomes of TUA ipsilateral to RAO using standardized imaging, quantitative testing, and patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs).
METHODS: Adults with documented RAO undergoing elective invasive coronary angiography or percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) are enrolled when contralateral TRA is not feasible or when preservation of the contralateral radial artery is clinically desirable. Baseline assessment includes color duplex ultrasonography (CDUS) to confirm RAO and evaluate ulnar artery suitability. A focused bilateral neurologic examination in the ulnar nerve distribution is performed to identify pre-existing motor or sensory deficits. Bilateral quantitative assessment of hand function and sensation includes handgrip strength, key pinch strength, and tactile thresholds, measured using validated instruments (JAMAR dynamometer, pinch gauge, and WEST monofilaments). Patient-reported outcomes are collected using the Quick Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (QuickDASH) and Cold Intolerance Symptom Severity (CISS) questionnaires. Procedures are performed via TUA ipsilateral to RAO with per-protocol anticoagulation and hemostasis is achieved with a compression device adapted at the access-site point. Patent hemostasis is initially confirmed by CDUS and then monitored by plethysmography on the fifth digit. Follow-up assessments, including CDUS, neurologic examination, and bilateral functional testing, are conducted within 24&#xa0;h after hemostatic band removal and at 30 and 180&#xa0;days. The primary endpoint is a composite of serious access-related vascular and clinical neuromuscular complications at 30&#xa0;days. Secondary endpoints include access-site crossover rate, early (&#x2264;24&#xa0;h) and delayed (6-month) access-related complications, and longitudinal changes in handgrip strength, key pinch strength, tactile sensibility, and PROMs. The study targets 127 participants, providing a two-sided 95% confidence interval with a&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;4% half-width around an expected 5% primary event rate.
CONCLUSIONS: ULNART will provide prospective evidence on the safety of TUA ipsilateral to RAO and its effect on hand function. The findings are intended to guide access selection when TRA is unavailable, inform patient counseling, and support follow-up strategies in this population.

### PMID 41788084 (2026) — Cureus
TITLE: Traumatic Liver Injury With Delayed Bleeding After Extracorporeal Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.102814 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Although chest compressions are a crucial component of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), they can sometimes result in traumatic complications. The incidence of hepatic injury, although rare relative to rib and sternal fractures, may result in severe hemorrhage and may be fatal, especially in patients receiving concomitant antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy. This risk is particularly pronounced after extracorporeal CPR (E-CPR), as dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) for acute coronary syndrome and unfractionated heparin for preventing circuit thrombosis are required. We present a case of traumatic liver injury (TILI) following E-CPR for refractory ventricular fibrillation (VF) owing to acute myocardial infarction (AMI). In the absence of contrast extravasation on contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), nonoperative management was initially selected. However, the patient became transfusion-dependent despite receiving conservative management, prompting transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE), which resulted in rapid hemodynamic stabilization. The patient survived with a favorable neurological outcome. The present case highlights the need for maintaining a high index of suspicion for occult bleeding after E-CPR and underpins early minimally invasive hemostatic interventions, even in the absence of radiographic extravasation.

### PMID 41768304 (2026) — Journal of the Saudi Heart Association
TITLE: From Compression to Closure: Efficacy and Safety of Vascular Closure Devices (VCD) Versus Manual Compression: A Comparative Analysis of Hemostatic Strategies of Obtura, Angioseal, and ProGlide VCD.
DOI: 10.37616/2212-5043.1477 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Use of vascular closure devices (VCDs) for femoral artery puncture site hemostasis has increased but their safety and efficacy have remained unclear. This study was designed to compare safety and efficacy of Obtura, Angioseal, and Proglide VCD to manual compression (MC) and also between for femoral artery haemostasis.
METHODS: This was prospective, randomized controlled study where patients were randomly assigned on 1:1:1:1 basis. Primary endpoints were time to hemostasis (TTH) and ambulation time (AT) while secondary endpoints were deployment success, device related adverse events and technical success rate. ANOVA and Tukey HSD was conducted to draw significant difference between individual strategies. P &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: Total of 1000 patients (250 in each arm) who underwent transfemoral intervention at LPS Institute of Cardiology, Kanpur, India between January 2025 and March 2025 were evaluated. Sheath size, common femoral artery diameter and device size did not differ significantly across all the groups. Mean TTH was shortest for Angioseal (1.30 min) followed by Obtura (2.58 min), Perclose (3.97 min), and MC (17.61 min). Similarly, mean AT was shortest for Angio-Seal (123.06 min) followed by Perclose ProGlide (162.56 min), Obtura (185.42 min) and MC (743.23 min). Technical success in Angio-Seal, Obtura and Perclose ProGlide were 99.1%, 97.4% and 94.6% respectively. No access site complications (re-bleeding, infection, arteriovenous fistula, and transient access site nerve injury) were noted. There were 2(0.8%), 5(2%), 7(3.2%) and 12 (4.8%) cases of haematoma in Angio-Seal, Obtura, Perclose ProGlide and MC arm respectively. There were 2(0.8%), 2(0.8%), and 4 (1.6%) case of arterial pseudoaneurysm Obtura, Perclose ProGlide and MC arm respectively while none in Angio-Seal arm.
CONCLUSION: Vascular closure devices showed significantly faster haemostasis and shorter ambulation time compared to manual compression highlighting their clinical efficiency and Angio-Seal was superior safety and efficacy over Obtura and Perclose ProGlide.

### PMID 41528588 (2026) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Evaluation of fibrinogen concentrate for hemostasis during thoracic aortic surgery (complete republication).
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-025-02238-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether the coagulation function was improved and bleeding tendency was controlled by fibrinogen concentrate.
METHODS: In 32 patients with hypofibrinogenemia&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;150&#xa0;mg/dL during either thoracic or thoracoabdominal aortic surgery, blood coagulation ability was observed using ROTEM Sigma&#xae; and the 3&#xa0;min bleeding amount was measured during surgery.
RESULTS: The mean blood fibrinogen levels decreased to 109&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;26&#xa0;mg/dl at the end of cardiopulmonary bypass, but significantly increased to 231&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;38&#xa0;mg/dl after the administration of fibrinogen concentrate (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.0001). The 3&#xa0;min bleeding amount was 144&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;88&#xa0;ml after heparin neutralization, but it significantly decreased to 85&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;74&#xa0;ml with fibrinogen concentrate (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0001). FIBTEM A10 was extremely low at 4.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.7&#xa0;mm after heparin neutralization, but the value increased to 14.1&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4.1&#xa0;mm with fibrinogen concentrate (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.0001). EXTEM A10 (the extrinsic coagulation ability) and INTEM A10 (the intrinsic coagulation ability) were both low at 31.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;11.0&#xa0;mm and 30.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;10.7&#xa0;mm, after heparin neutralization, but they both significantly increased to 42.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.9&#xa0;mm and 39.1&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.7&#xa0;mm (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.0001) with fibrinogen concentrate. There were no operative deaths, but there were three cases in which thromboembolism could not be ruled out. Two patients had myocardial infarction due to occlusion of the reconstructed right coronary artery and the other had newly developed cerebral infarction, but the causes could not be clarified.
CONCLUSION: The administration of fibrinogen concentrate rapidly increased blood fibrinogen levels and significantly reduced the 3&#xa0;min bleeding amount. In addition, significant improvements in extrinsic and intrinsic coagulation abilities were observed with the administration of fibrinogen concentrate.

### PMID 41075954 (2026) — The American journal of cardiology
TITLE: The Efficacy of Hemostatic Agents on Radial Artery Compression Methods Following Transradial Procedures: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2025.09.058 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: Radial artery hemostasis in patients undergoing transradial procedures can be achieved through various compression methods, including manual or mechanical devices, with or without the use of hemostatic agents, and may involve patent hemostasis or concomitant ulnar compression. Previous findings suggest that radial artery compression should be maintained for 120 minutes postprocedure. However, the optimal compression method and the efficiency of hemostatic agents remain uncertain. Therefore, we decided to perform a systematic review and meta-analysis evaluating the efficacy of radial artery compression with adjunctive hemostatic agents versus compression without hemostatic agents on patients following transradial procedures. The systematic search was conducted using PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Central databases. The outcomes evaluated were: time to achieve hemostasis (TAH), failure to achieve hemostasis (FAH), 24-hour radial artery occlusion (24-RAO), and hematoma occurrence. We performed subgroup analyses separating manual and mechanical compression with hemostatic agents. 13 randomized controlled trials were included, comprising 6,588 patients. 2,924 (44.4%) patients underwent compression with hemostatic agents, and 3,664 (55.6%) underwent compression without hemostatic agents. The statistical analysis indicated that hemostatic agents were associated with a significantly reduced TAH (MD -86.59 min; 95% CI -106.88 to -66.30; p &lt; 0.01) compared to compressions without hemostatic agents. No statistical difference was found between the methods regarding 24-RAO, FAH, and hematoma occurrence. However, subgroup analyses revealed that, in the manual compression with hemostatic agents subgroup, 24-RAO was also significantly reduced (RR 0.46; 95% CI 0.27-0.78). In conclusion, this meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials reveals that compression with hemostatic agents, compared to compressions without hemostatic agents, can reduce TAH without compromising the occurrence of hematomas for patients following transradial procedures. 24-RAO was also less frequent in patients who underwent manual compression with hemostatic agents.

### PMID 40919191 (2025) — Annals of vascular diseases
TITLE: The Efficacy of Hydrofit and Spongel in the Management of Venous Injury.
DOI: 10.3400/avd.nmt.25-00073 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative venous bleeding, particularly from deep pelvic veins, can be difficult to control with suturing or standard compression. We introduce the "French toast method," a hemostatic technique that combines Hydrofit (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) with a gelatin sponge (Spongel; LTL Pharma, Tokyo, Japan). A small amount of Hydrofit is spread onto the sponge, which is then applied to the bleeding site. Immediately afterward, saline is poured over the area to activate Hydrofit, followed by fingertip compression. This method enables rapid and secure hemostasis without the need to remove a silicone sheet, thereby reducing the risk of rebleeding and simplifying management of difficult venous hemorrhage.

### PMID 40726858 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: A Delayed Sterile Abscess Following a Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (PCI)-Related Myocardial Injury Successfully Treated With an Omental Flap: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.86890 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic agents are commonly used in cardiac surgery to achieve rapid hemostasis in fragile myocardial tissue, particularly following myocardial infarction or mechanical injury during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). While effective in the acute setting, retained hemostatic materials can lead to delayed complications, including sterile abscess formation. We present a case of a 77-year-old man who developed a sterile abscess one year and nine months after emergency surgical hemostasis for myocardial oozing following PCI. The abscess presented as localized swelling and discharge from the lower end of the sternotomy scar. Laboratory tests showed no signs of systemic inflammation, and cultures were negative. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a fluid collection extending from the pericardial space to the subcutaneous tissue. Conservative treatment, including antibiotics and drainage, was ineffective. Surgical removal of the foreign material was performed under cardiopulmonary bypass. Due to dense adhesions and uncertainty regarding complete removal, a pedicled omental flap was transposed through the diaphragm into the pericardial space. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and follow-up imaging confirmed complete resolution of the fluid collection. This case highlights the diagnostic challenge of sterile abscesses related to retained surgical materials and demonstrates the utility of omental transposition when complete removal is not feasible.

### PMID 41185940 (2025) — ACS biomaterials science &amp; engineering
TITLE: Reduced Keratin-Based Bioadhesives for Peri-Implant Soft Tissue Sealing around Transcutaneous Metallic Prostheses.
DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.5c01430 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: When a percutaneous metallic implant breaches the skin barrier, the lack of peri-implant soft tissue sealing arising from a foreign body reaction and epithelial downgrowth results in delayed wound healing and closure. This facilitates microbial pathogen entry, leading to infection, inflammation, and ultimately, peri-implantitis. Toward this end, bioglue formulations of -human hair keratin (HHK) and chicken feather keratin coupled with polyphenols, dopamine (DOPA), quercetin (Q), and tannic acid (TA) were developed for peri-implant soft tissue sealing. A freeze-thaw gelation mediated by thiol recombination of reduced keratins was employed for attachment of soft tissue (porcine intestine) to titanium. Lap shear tests revealed that the adhesion strength of reduced keratins improved with polyphenol addition, with a maximal glue strength exhibited by HHK + TA (10:1 w/w) when applied between the porcine intestine and titanium. Rheological characterization ascertained shear-thinning behavior and injectability of the glues into wet aqueous media and dry surfaces. Despite inferior glue strength to commercial ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate bioglue, the keratin &#xb1; polyphenol glues were more skin compatible, evidenced by greater viability and proliferation of immortalized human skin epidermal keratinocytes (HaCaT) and equine dermal fibroblasts (E. Derm NBL6). Furthermore, the antioxidant activity of keratin &#xb1; polyphenol glue formulations conferred greater anti-inflammatory activity in bacterial lipopolysaccharide stimulated RAW 264.7 murine macrophages. Taken together, the application of keratin &#xb1; polyphenol glues for soft tissue sealing may be a promising approach to mitigate peri-implantitis around transcutaneous metallic prostheses.

### PMID 40998373 (2025) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Cardiac Arrest due to Pseudoaneurysm-induced Compression after Ascending Aortic Replacement for Stanford Type A Acute Aortic Dissection:Report of a Case].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports, English Abstract
ABSTRACT: We present the case of a 27-year-old male who collapsed due to severe stenosis of an artificial vessel caused by a pseudoaneurysm at the central anastomotic site after acute aortic dissection Stanford type A. Although we believe that BioGlue mediated tissue toxicity may be one cause of this pseudoaneurysm, other factors, such as tissue separation due to tissue fragility caused by infection, inflammation, and cutting caused by the surgical procedure, are also thought to have contributed. Emergency re-operation was performed after resuscitation. The patient was eventually discharged home without adverse events on the 34th postoperative day. Careful observation in mid- to long-term and remote post-operative phases is necessary for patients subjected to procedures using BioGlue, and prompt repair of pseudoaneurysms is desirable.

### PMID 40648914 (2025) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: BioGlue&#xae; Induced Mass Formation Aggravating Spinal Canal Invasion After Intradural Tumor Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm14134540 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background/Objectives: The aim of this study was to evaluate whether the use of BioGlue&#xae; increases the risk of postoperative mass formation and subsequent spinal canal invasion after intradural spinal tumor surgery. Methods: After retrospectively reviewing patients who underwent intradural tumor surgery from 2018 to 2023, we evaluated mass formation as detected in postoperative MRI according to the Epidural Spinal Cord Compression (ESCC) grade. Patients were divided into two groups based on the use of BioGlue&#xae;, and we analyzed MRI postoperatively to compare the differences in ESCC grades and the incidence of symptomatic spinal canal invasion between the two groups. Additionally, we performed a logistic regression analysis to identify risk factors associated with mass formation and to explore their relationship with BioGlue&#xae;. Results: This study included a total of 153 patients, 87 in the BioGlue&#xae; and 66 in the non-BioGlue&#xae; groups. In the BioGlue&#xae; group, 18 patients had ESCC grade 2, and 11 had grade 3. Conversely, in the non-BioGlue&#xae; group, only 8 patients had ESCC grade 2, and none had grade 3 (p = 0.001). Among the cases of symptomatic spinal canal invasion, all five cases were identified in the BioGlue&#xae; group (p = 0.001). Both univariate and multivariate analyses showed that BioGlue&#xae; was a significant risk factor for spinal canal invasion (univariate: OR = 3.931, p = 0.005, multivariate: OR = 3.812, p = 0.003). Conclusions: Our findings indicated that BioGlue&#xae; was a significant risk factor for mass formation aggravating spinal canal invasion after intradural tumor surgery.

### PMID 39917778 (2025) — European heart journal. Case reports
TITLE: An aortic root abscess mimic identified by multi-disciplinary imaging review: a case report.
DOI: 10.1093/ehjcr/ytaf004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: While echocardiography and cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) can aid in the diagnosis of prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE), post-operative changes can lead to false-positive imaging findings. We report a case of a patient with an aortic valve prosthesis with remnant BioGlue deposits mimicking a para-valvular abscess on imaging in the setting of suspected PVE.
CASE SUMMARY: A 67-year-old man presented with 2 days of fever, chills, and altered mentation. He had a history of two prior aortic root replacements-19 and 4 years prior to his presentation. He had blood cultures that were persistently positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Initial transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was notable for a thickening of the posterior aortic root thought to be consistent with post-surgical changes. Cardiac PET showed significant uptake around the prosthetic aortic valve, concerning for a para-valvular abscess. However, given the patient's high risk for re-do surgery, clearance of blood cultures, and preserved valve function, our multi-disciplinary endocarditis team (MET) recommended non-surgical management and close follow-up. After 6 weeks of appropriate antibiotics, a TEE demonstrated concern for an evolving para-valvular abscess. The MET performed extensive review of his prior surgical interventions and cardiac imaging, revealing the previous use of surgical BioGlue and stability in the aortic root on imaging, consistent with non-infectious post-surgical changes, and conservative management was recommended.
DISCUSSION: Thorough review of prior interventions and serial imaging in patients with suspected PVE through a multi-disciplinary team approach is essential in elucidating the complete, often complex, clinical picture and recommending the most appropriate management.

### PMID 39893617 (2025) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Embankment technique in extended sandwich patch repair for post-infarction ventricular septal rupture.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-025-02125-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Extended sandwich patch repair for post-infarction ventricular septal rupture is a surgical technique that closes the defect using two patches, with one on the right ventricular side and the other on the left ventricular side. In this technique, filling materials such as surgical glue are often used between the two patches. We routinely use BioGlue surgical adhesive as a filler. However, there are concerns regarding residual shunts because of incomplete closure of the defect and the risk of embolism caused by the glue leaking into the left ventricle. Therefore, we have developed a technique to create a "bank" using an absorbable hemostatic agent between the patch and the defect, aiming to secure defect sealing and prevent embolism caused by the glue. We have named this procedure the "embankment technique." In 11 consecutive cases treated with this procedure, no residual shunts or embolic events were observed.

### PMID 39639799 (2025) — Biomaterials science
TITLE: A 3D bioprinted adhesive tissue engineering scaffold to repair ischemic heart injury.
DOI: 10.1039/d4bm00988f | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Adhesive tissue engineering scaffold (ATES) devices can be secured on tissues by relying on their intrinsic adhesive properties, hence, avoiding the complications such as host tissue/scaffold damage that are associated with conventional scaffold fixation methods like suturing or bioglue. This study introduces a new generation of three-dimensional (3D) bioprinted ATES systems for use as cardiac patches to regenerate the adult human heart. Tyramine-modified methacrylated hyaluronic acid (HAMA-tyr), gelatin methacrylate (GelMA), and gelatin were used to create the hybrid bioink formulation with self-adhesive properties. ATESs were bioprinted and further modified to improve the adhesion properties. In-depth characterization of printing fidelity, pore size, mechanical properties, swelling behavior, as well as biocompatibility was used to create ATESs with optimal biological function. Following in vitro testing, the ATESs were tested in a mouse model of myocardial infarction to study the scaffold adhesive strength in biological milieu. The method developed in this study can be used to manufacture off-the-shelf ATESs with complex cellular and extracellular architecture, with robust potential for clinical translation into a variety of personalized tissue engineering and regenerative medicine applications.

### PMID 41019961 (2025) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Coronary stenting after aortic root replacement.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2025.08.056 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe a case of severe coronary artery stenosis in a 29-year-old male 1 month after aortic root replacement (ARR). The patient presented with exertional chest pain that progressed to prolonged resting angina and ventricular arrhythmia. Electrocardiography showed ischemic changes suggestive of left coronary artery involvement, and multislice computed tomography angiography confirmed subtotal stenosis at the left main (LM) bifurcation. Urgent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with drug-eluting stent implantation from the LM to the left anterior descending artery was performed using a provisional technique, resulting in improvement of left ventricular ejection fraction from 23% to 55%. The patient was discharged without complications and remained event-free at 6-month follow-up. This case highlights a rare but potentially life-threatening coronary complication after ARR, which may be related to perfusion cannula placement, technical factors during coronary ostial reimplantation, or proliferative reactions to the aortic prosthesis or gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue. It underscores the need for early recognition and vigilance for coronary ischemia after ARR - even in young patients without prior coronary artery disease - and emphasizes the efficacy of emergency PCI. A multidisciplinary approach is recommended to optimize outcomes in complex postsurgical cardiovascular patients.

### PMID 41569881 (2025) — Journal of neurosurgery. Case lessons
TITLE: "Dural sealant-oma" after posterior fossa surgery: illustrative case.
DOI: 10.3171/CASE25574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Dural sealants, widely used in neurosurgical practice, have been associated with few complications, mostly relating to the expansive nature of the hydrogel. Although generally well tolerated, DuraSeal expands up to 150% after application, and rare reports have described complications from mass effect.
OBSERVATIONS: This report presents the case of a 34-year-old female with a past surgical history of multiple operations for a Chiari type 1 malformation. After a thorough workup, intraoperative images and histological findings revealed a concealed hematoma-like mass at the patient's previous surgical site, likely due to the DuraSeal system. Imaging revealed that the DuraSeal was mostly hyperintense on T2-weighted MRI with focal spots of hypo-/isointensity, similar in appearance to an abscess or hematoma. Histological analysis showed exuberant fibrosis, granulation tissue, and a granulomatous response to the foreign material used for the dural patch and seal rather than the wall of an infectious abscess.
LESSONS: This case adds to the growing body of literature on DuraSeal, highlighting the imaging and histological characteristics of "dural sealant-omas" and their expansile nature that can lead to the formation of a mass mimicking an abscess or a hematoma. In areas susceptible to compression, clinicians ought to be vigilant to identify findings consistent with the appearance of these dural sealant-omas. https://thejns.org/doi/10.3171/CASE25574.

### PMID 40094962 (2025) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: The Remote Intradural Migration of Polyethylene Glycol-Based Hydrogel Sealant Following Lumbar Laminectomy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm14051472 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background/Objectives: Synthetic polyethylene glycol (PEG)-based hydrogel sealants, such as Adherus, are commonly used in spinal surgeries to achieve watertight dural closure and prevent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks. This case report describes an unusual instance of suspected hydrogel sealant migration resulting in an intradural collection at a spinal level remote from the original surgery. Methods: A 57-year-old female with a history of osteoarthritis and prediabetes underwent a minimally invasive L5-S1 laminectomy for the removal of an epidural abscess causing cauda equina and S1 nerve root compression. During the procedure, a dural puncture occurred, which was repaired using Duragen (collagen matrix) and Adherus (synthetic PEG hydrogel sealant). Postoperatively, the patient developed urinary retention and new bilateral posterior leg pain. An MRI on postoperative day four revealed a new peripherally enhancing dorsal intradural collection at the L2 level, causing significant thecal sac narrowing and compression of the cauda equina nerve roots, suggestive of migration of the hydrogel sealant used during surgery. Conservative management was adopted. Results: The patients symptoms gradually resolved. Follow-up imaging at five months showed resolution of the intradural collection, with residual intradural inflammatory changes and arachnoiditis. Conclusions: While PEG-based hydrogel sealants like Adherus are effective in preventing CSF leaks, they can, in rare instances, migrate and cause remote intradural collections with neurological symptoms. Surgeons should exercise meticulous application techniques, thoroughly document the use of sealants, and maintain vigilant postoperative monitoring to mitigate these risks.

### PMID 40600113 (2025) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Ischemic sciatic neuropathy and pelvic bone infarction following embolization of bilateral internal iliac artery aneurysms: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2025.05.089 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 82-year-old man underwent bilateral internal iliac artery (IIA) embolization for IIA aneurysms and endovascular repair for an abdominal aortic aneurysm. The bilateral IIA branches were embolized with coils and Amplatzer Vascular Plugs, and N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) was used for the left superior lateral sacral artery. Postprocedure, the patient developed numbness, pain, and walking difficulty. He was diagnosed with ischemic sciatic neuropathy, and magnetic resonance imaging revealed pelvic bone infarction. NBCA injection and IIA embolization were considered the causes. These complications highlight the risk of ischemic effects. We recommend using coils instead of NBCA for IIA branch embolization.

### PMID 40384912 (2025) — Interventional radiology (Higashimatsuyama-shi (Japan)
TITLE: Transarterial Embolization Using the Quintet-coaxial Catheter System for a Type II Endoleak after Endovascular Aneurysm Repair.
DOI: 10.22575/interventionalradiology.2024-0011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Purpose: Transarterial embolization of the internal iliac artery-associated type II endoleaks necessitates adequate support to approach the abdominal aortic aneurysm sac. Herein, we report initial experience with transarterial embolization of the internal iliac artery-associated type II endoleaks using the quintet-coaxial catheter system. Techniques: The quintet-coaxial catheter system consisted of the following five coaxial devices: a 5-F thin-walled flexible guiding sheath, a 5-F guiding catheter, a 3.4-F large-bore distal access catheter, a 2.7-F high-flow microcatheter, and a 1.9-F microcatheter. From the ipsilateral femoral artery, the system was advanced into the abdominal aortic aneurysm sac via a long, thin, and tortuous access route arising from the lumbar and iliolumbar arteries. Embolization using a 20% mixture of n-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate with iodized oil was successfully performed in three cases with sac expansion caused by a persistent internal iliac artery-associated type II endoleaks. The inflow artery was embolized using metallic coils through the 2.7-F microcatheter. The 3.4-F large-bore distal access catheter improved the stability of the double coaxial microcatheter system and facilitated the access of the 1.9-F microcatheter to the abdominal aortic aneurysm sac. Conclusions: The quintet-coaxial catheter system enables the embolization of type II endoleaks through long, thin, and tortuous access routes.

### PMID 39427979 (2025) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Clinical Application of n-Butyl-2- Cyanoacrylate (NBCA) in the Transarterial Embolization for Type I/II Endoleak During and After EVAR Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2024.09.060 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Exploring the effectiveness and safety of n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) in the transarterial embolization for common endoleak during and after endovascular repair of aortic aneurysm (EVAR).
METHODS: A total of 226 patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) were treated with EVAR in 4&#xa0;years from August 2019 to February 2023, including 46 patients with ruptured aneurysms (rAAA). 37 cases, 28 nonruptured AAA patients and 9 rAAA patients, developed endoleak during EVAR surgery and follow-up period and were then treated with NBCA for transarterial embolization. A follow-up was done for at least 6&#xa0;months to observe its clinical efficacy and adverse reactions.
RESULTS: Among 37 cases of endoleak, there were 8 cases of primary type Ia endoleak and one case of primary right type Ib endoleak in the rAAA group, one case of primary type Ib endoleak, 2 cases of secondary type Ia endoleak, and 25 cases of postoperative type II endoleak in the nonruptured AAA group. Three patients with primary type Ia endoleak were treated with coil-assisted NBCA in the rAAA group, while the remaining 34 patients with type I and type II endoleaks were treated with NBCA alone. All transarterial embolization achieved technical success, and the endoleak disappeared. Postoperative hospitalization observation showed that 3 cases of patients in the rAAA group who experienced primary type Ia endoleak during emergency EVAR surgery died within 4&#xa0;days after surgery due to hemorrhagic shock and multiple organ failure. Two patients experienced non-AAA-related deaths during the follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: Transarterial embolization with NBCA for the treatment of primary and secondary endoleak is a safe and effective method. It can achieve more dense embolization of the aneurysm sac and more complex endoleaks embolization. And, it showed a low recurrence rate of endoleak and the incidence of perioperative complications after surgery, which is worthy of clinical promotion and application. Even in emergency EVAR combined with primary type I endoleak treatment in rAAA patients, patients can still benefit.

### PMID 38937084 (2025) — Journal of neurointerventional surgery
TITLE: Adenosine-assisted embolization of cerebral arteriovenous malformations: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1136/jnis-2024-021866 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cerebral arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are complex lesions that can cause hemorrhagic stroke and significant neurological disability. Adenosine induces cardiac standstill and hypotension, which are thought to be useful during cerebral AVM embolization. Herein, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of the technique's safety.
METHODS: Following PRISMA guidelines, four databases were queried for studies describing the use of adenosine-assisted embolization of cerebral AVMs. Adenosine-related intraoperative complications, permanent neurological outcomes, morbidity, and mortality assessed the technique's safety. Single proportion analysis under a random-effects model was performed. Heterogeneity was assessed using I&#xb2; statistics, and publication bias was evaluated through funnel plot analysis and Egger's regression test.
RESULTS: Ten studies were included, involving 79 patients (55.7% male) with 79 AVMs (54.4% unruptured and 70.9% Spetzler-Martin grade III-V) who underwent 123 embolizations (80.4% and 5.9% under transarterial and transvenous approaches, respectively) with n-butyl cyanoacrylate (80.4%), ethylene vinyl alcohol (14.4%), or both (5.2%). The incidence of transient adenosine-related intraoperative complications was 0% (95% CI 0% to 3%, I2=24%). Besides, the incidence of adenosine-related morbidity, mortality, and permanent outcomes was 0% (95% CI 0% to 3%, I2=0%). During follow-up, good functional outcomes were reported for 64 patients (81%).
CONCLUSIONS: Adenosine's effects on blood flow control can facilitate embolization and mitigate the risk of AVM rupture and embolic agent migration. Although current evidence stems from observational studies, the results of this meta-analysis suggest a safe drug profile due to minimal associated morbidity and mortality. Further research from larger randomized and controlled studies is warranted to attain a higher level of evidence.
PROSPERO REGISTRY NUMBER: CRD42023494116.

### PMID 41805482 (2025) — Angiologiia i sosudistaia khirurgiia = Angiology and vascular surgery
TITLE: Embolization of high-flow arteriovenous malformations against adenosine-induced cardioplegia with non-adhesive embolizing agents.
DOI: 10.33029/1027-6661-2025-31-3-86-92 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: High-flow arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) have long been considered by neuroradiologists as a target for embolization with adhesive embolizing materials based on N-butyl-cyanoacrylates (Glubran, Histoacryl).
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the prospects of using adenosine triphosphate-induced cardioplegia during embolization of high-flow malformations or AVMs containing a hypertrophic shunt in the structure with non-adhesive embolizing materials.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study included 100 patients presenting with high-flow AVMs and operated on in 2018-2023. Of these, 83 patients had malformations corresponding to Spetzler-Martin grade III-V. The epileptic type of the course was dominant in 45% of patients, and among SM grade V AVMs, 10 patients out of 19 suffered hemorrhage. A total of 100 operations on embolization of high-flow malformations were performed. The key condition for the success of the operation was the provision by the anesthesiology team of prolonged (10-20 seconds) adenosine triphosphate-induced cardioplegia at the initial stage of AVM embolization. Not only the risk of embolizate migration directly through the high-flow shunt into the drainage veins and cerebral sinuses was minimized, but also the effect of 'hemodynamic calm' appeared, when non-adhesive embolizing material encountering no resistance filled the shunt and all compartments of the malformation as evenly and completely as possible. After that, with the heart rhythm restored, embolization was continued according to the operation plan.
RESULTS: We operated on a total of 100 patients (58 men, 42 women, mean age 41.2 years), performing 100 procedures on the background of adenosine triphosphate-induced cardioplegia (1 mg/kg body weight). In 89 patients, we managed to attain complete asystole lasting from 5 to 35 seconds. In nine patients, we achieved pronounced bradycardia and arterial hypotension, in which the conditions of embolization of high-flow malformations practically corresponded to those on the background of complete asystole. No migration to cerebral veins and sinuses was noted. If necessary, adenosine triphosphate-induced cardioplegia was used more than one time. In 86 patients - once, in 11 patients - twice, in 2 patients - thrice and in 1 patient - four times. No events of tachyphylaxis, pronounced arrhythmia and cardiac dysfunction were observed during either surgery or 24-hour postoperative monitoring.
CONCLUSION: Adenosine triphosphate-induced cardioplegia is an effective, repeatable and safe technique allowing it to perform controlled embolization of high-flow arteriovenous malformations, requiring neither additional devices nor special skills, with no need to form a combination of various-viscosity embolizates to disconnect high-flow shunts.

### PMID 41088202 (2025) — BMC surgery
TITLE: Safety and efficacy analysis of different embolization methods of Glubran-2 glue in the treatment of arterial gastrointestinal bleeding.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-025-03236-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study summarized our experience in treating arterial gastrointestinal bleeding with Glubran-2 glue embolization, and analyzed efficacy and safety of Punctate embolism and Flake Embolism.
METHOD: Clinical data collected between January 2009 and January 2021 from patients with arterial gastrointestinal bleeding treated with Glubran-2 glue were analyzed retrospectively. Subsequently, univariate analysis and binary logistic regression analysis were performed to examine the risk factors associated with clinical outcomes and 30-day postoperative mortality. Finally, according to the embolization methods, it is divided into Punctate embolism(n=37) and Flake embolism(n&#xf1d;44), and the curative effects of the two groups of embolization methods are analyzed.
RESULT: For a total of 81 patients, the technical success rate was 100%, the clinical success rate was 71.6% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;58), and the 30-day mortality rate post-endovascular interventions was 13.6% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;11). In addition, there was a significant negative correlation between the volume of blood transfusion and clinical outcome (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05), Furthermore, clinical outcome, coagulopathy, and heart rate were identified as independent risk factors for the 30-day mortality rate post-endovascular interventions. Finally, the clinical success rate (86.5%VS59.1%) of Punctate embolism is much higher than that of Flake embolism, and the mortality rate (5.4%VS20.5%) is obviously lower (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05).
CONCLUSION: The findings of the study confirm that the use of Glubran-2 glue embolization offers a secure and effective treatment strategy for treating arterial gastrointestinal bleeding. The results suggest that punctate embolism may be associated with improved outcomes compared to flake embolism.

### PMID 40858285 (2025) — Contact dermatitis
TITLE: Systemic Allergic Dermatitis to Cyanoacrylate Used for Embolisation.
DOI: 10.1111/cod.70018 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 40842740 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: From Pseudocyst to Pseudoaneurysm: A Complex Pancreatic Vascular Emergency Managed With a Multi-stage Interventional Radiology Approach.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.88448 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Acute-on-chronic pancreatitis is frequently complicated by the formation of pancreatic pseudocysts (PPs). Haemorrhage within a pseudocyst is a life-threatening event, typically resulting from the development of a pseudoaneurysm (PA) involving adjacent arterial structures. First-line treatment is endovascular embolization, an interventional radiology (IR) approach. However, if embolization fails, remaining treatment options are severely limited, as surgery is often considered high-risk or unfeasible. We present a case of chronic pancreatitis complicated by a haemorrhagic PP complicated by PA formation of several adjacent vessels within the pancreatic head. The patient was successfully managed with multiple embolization sessions, performed by IR, the only viable treatment option in this scenario. A 43-year-old man with a history of alcohol-related liver cirrhosis (Child-Pugh B), alcoholic hepatitis, and recurrent chronic pancreatitis presented with melaena. Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed a pseudocyst in the pancreatic head containing internal haemorrhage, with active bleeding from multiple arterial feeders within the pancreaticoduodenal arcade (PDAA). Five direct angiography sessions were required. A large amount and combination of coils as well as large volumes of glue (Glubran II; GEM S.r.l., Lucca, Italy), and stent placement were all necessary to achieve complete occlusion of all feeding vessels causing bleeding within the PP. Surgical intervention would have necessitated a pancreaticoduodenectomy in a hostile operative field, with prohibitively high morbidity and mortality. Endovascular embolization remains the treatment of choice for PA in the setting of haemorrhagic pancreatic pseudocysts. This case highlights the life-saving role of IR, particularly when surgical options are unfeasible. It also emphasizes the importance of timely escalation, multidisciplinary decision-making, and advanced embolization techniques. Notably, this is the first reported case of a persistently haemorrhagic PP successfully managed with a multi-stage interventional radiology approach incorporating Glubran II, coils, thrombin, and covered stent deployment. Given the rarity of the condition and the effectiveness of the treatment, this case describes an evolving endovascular strategy finding application in a highly complex clinical scenario.

### PMID 40261554 (2025) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: Micro-CT and histological assessment of renal arterial embolization with Glubran&#xae;2 cyanoacrylate: a medium-term follow-up study in a rabbit model.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-025-00549-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cyanoacrylate glues are widely used in interventional radiology as effective embolic agents due to their rapid polymerization and ability to achieve vessel occlusion. Nonetheless, concern remains regarding cast stability and potential recanalization over time. This study used multiple modalities to evaluate the medium-term outcomes of Glubran&#xae;2 glue (methacryloxysulfolane and N butyl cyanoacrylate) embolisation in a rabbit renal-artery model.
METHODS: The left renal arteries of six rabbits were embolized with 12.5% or 25% Glubran&#xae;2. In-vivo micro-CT scans were performed immediately after embolisation (M0) and ex-vivo scans and a histological assessment were done at one month (M1). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done at M1 to assess arterial occlusion and parenchymal changes. Quantitative and semi-quantitative parameters reflecting glue distribution, cast integrity, and tissue response were analysed. Statistical comparisons used non-parametric tests.
RESULTS: All six embolisations were completed without complications. Micro-CT at M1 revealed significant cast resorption and fragmentation with both concentrations, but with no evidence of arterial recanalization. MRI and histology confirmed the persistent vascular occlusion with chronic ischemic changes in the renal parenchyma. Compensatory neovascularization from the renal capsule was observed, with no significant differences in histological inflammation between the two concentrations. Glue casts remained within the arterial lumens and were often surrounded by granulomatous inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: Glubran&#xae;2 was effective for renal artery embolisation, even at a low concentration of 12.5%: despite partial cast resorption, the arteries remained occluded. Micro-CT proved to be a powerful tool for assessing changes in glue casts. Longer-term studies are warranted to further assess vascular remodelling and occlusion durability.

### PMID 40087691 (2025) — BMC musculoskeletal disorders
TITLE: A magnesium calcium phosphate-based cement as a bone adhesive: characterization and biomechanical evaluation.
DOI: 10.1186/s12891-025-08498-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Usually, comminuted fractures contain fragments that are too small for fixation with Kirschner (K)-wires or screws. For those bony or osteochondral fragments, a bone adhesive would be desirable to, for example, enable easy anatomic reduction, avoid discarding of the fragments, and enable temporary fixation to visualize reduction before definitive osteosynthesis is performed. Most of the currently available bone adhesives have shortcomings, such as cytotoxicity, lack of resorbability, and inadequate mechanical properties. Thus, there is room for improved bone adhesives. The present work involves synthesis, characterization, and biomechanical evaluation of three variants of a novel magnesium calcium phostphate-based cement that may be used as a bone adhesive.
METHODS: Three novel experimental formulations of a magnesium calcium phosphate-based cement and a commercially-available cyanoacrylate bone adhesive (Glubran&#xae; 2) were used. The formulations were a magnesium phosphate (Mg3PO4&#x2009;+&#x2009;MgO&#x2009;+&#x2009;phytic acid) (MPC_25), a magnesium calcium phosphate (Mg2.75Ca0.25PO4 + MgO&#x2009;+&#x2009;phytic acid) (MPCa_22.5), and a magnesium phosphate that had undergone modified temperature stages during sintering (Mg3O8P2 * x H2O) (HT-MPC). In vitro quasi-static compression tests were conducted using cuboid specimens. Split fractures of the lateral tibial plateau were created in dissected porcine tibiae. The lateral fracture fragments were glued onto the condyles. Load was applied on the glued fracture fragments via the femoral component of a knee hemiarthroplasty. Cyclic loading tests with increasing load levels, load-to-failure tests, and torque tests were conducted using this biomechanical model.
RESULTS: Among the experimental cement formulations, HT-MPC had the highest compressive strength (26.8 &#xb1; 9.5&#xa0;MPa), MPCa_22.5 had the highest cyclic increasing load-to-failure (162 &#xb1; 40&#xa0;N) and the highest load-to-failure (295 &#xb1; 84&#xa0;N), while the highest calculated shear strength was obtained with both MPC_25 and MPCa_22.5 (0.27 &#xb1; 0.12 and 0.26 &#xb1; 0.06&#xa0;MPa, respectively), and the highest torque-to-failure was obtained with both MPCa_22.5 and HT-MPC (2.2 &#xb1; 0.8 and 2.1 &#xb1; 1.2 Nm, respectively). The calculated shear strength for the experimental cement formulations (0.13-0.38&#xa0;MPa) is above the minimum that has been suggested to be required for a bone adhesive to be used in clinical practice (0.2&#xa0;MPa). Relative to the experimental cement formulations, the compressive strength of Glubran&#xae; 2 was significantly lower, but for each of the other four biomechanical parameters, values were significantly higher.
CONCLUSIONS: Each of the synthesized novel magnesium calcium phosphate-based cement formulations has adequate compressive strength, shear strength and resistance to fatigue failure. Thus, each merits further study for use in intraoperative fixation of small bone fragments.

### PMID 39672946 (2025) — Aesthetic plastic surgery
TITLE: Efficacy of Fibrin Sealant in Submental Liposuction: A Prospective Randomized Study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00266-024-04615-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The incidence rate of submental liposuction has been increasing in recent years. Although this procedure is relatively simple, serious complications, including fatalities, have been reported, primarily owing to intraoperative and postoperative bleeding.
METHODS: To enhance the safety of liposuction, we examined the efficacy of Beriplast&#xae; P (CSL Behring, Melbourne, Australia), a physiological tissue adhesive fibrin sealant, in reducing postoperative swelling. Swelling was measured using the image analysis software VECTRA&#xae; (Vectra AI, Inc., CA, USA). Twenty-nine cases of submental liposuction performed from February to August 2024 were analyzed for tissue volume changes immediately postoperatively and at the time of suture removal, comparing those who received the fibrin sealant to those who did not.
RESULTS: The group using the fibrin sealant had significantly less postoperative swelling compared to the group that did not use the fibrin sealant (p&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The fibrin sealant may be used to effectively suppress postoperative swelling, reducing the risk of complications and improving patient satisfaction, thereby enhancing the overall safety and effectiveness of cosmetic surgery.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE I: This journal requires that authors assign a level of evidence to each article. For a full description of these Evidence-Based Medicine ratings, please refer to the Table of Contents or the online Instructions to Authors www.springer.com/00266 .

### PMID 40583463 (2025) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: An Animal-Free Patient-Derived Tissue-Mimetic Biochip Model of the Human Synovial Membrane for Human-Relevant Osteoarthritis Research.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202404799 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Current synovial models fail to capture human-relevant OA traits. This study develops a fully humanized, animal-free synovial membrane model, mimicking OA synovial structure and molecular profile. Protocols for rheumatoid synovial micromasses are adapted for 3D biochip cultures of OA synoviocytes using TISSEEL fibrin and ELAREM lysate. Cell activity, mRNA expression, and structural changes are evaluated under varying hydrogel stiffness and cytokine exposure, with results compared to human OA and animal (equine and murine) synovial tissues. The animal-free biochip protocols replicate synovial architecture successfully. Improved gene expression of reticular collagen III (COL3A1) is achieved with 50&#xa0;mg&#xa0;mL-1 fibrinogen and 1% hPL. A 50 pg&#xa0;mL-1 TNF-&#x3b1; and IL-1&#x3b2; stimulus induced a pro-fibrotic phenotype (COL1A1, COL3A1) distinct from the inflammatory response triggered by ng/mL dosages (IL6, MMP1, MMP3, and MMP13, vs the pg/mL model). The clinical relevance of the patient-relevant OA synovial model is underscored by significant Yap1 overexpression, reflecting synovial hyperplasia from cell activation and inflammation. Yap1 distribution, as a biomarker (ctrl vs kOA tissue), is best replicated in the low-dose pg/ml-treated model. The tissue-mimetic biochips provide a human-relevant OA study platform offering patient-relevant molecular insights into the structure-function relationships of osteoarthritic synovial tissues while eliminating animal-derived materials.

### PMID 40456207 (2025) — Journal of neurosurgery. Case lessons
TITLE: Anaphylaxis associated with Tisseel fibrin sealant during re-resection of a craniopharyngioma: illustrative case.
DOI: 10.3171/CASE2517 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tisseel is a widely used fibrin sealant often used in cranial surgery to control bleeding from the cavernous sinus, often with successful results.
OBSERVATIONS: The authors present the case of a 10-year-old female patient who developed anaphylaxis during a re-resection of a craniopharyngioma, shortly after the application of Tisseel in the cavernous sinus. This reaction included a strong drop in blood pressure, rise in pulse, increase in oxygen requirements, and diffuse erythema and urticaria soon after after the use of Tisseel. Symptoms normalized after administration of adrenaline, clemastine, and hydrocortisone. A skin prick test later confirmed that the allergic reaction had not been to a single component of Tisseel but to a combination of its components.
LESSONS: This case and the accompanied literature can aid in recognizing patients at risk for an anaphylactic reaction against aprotinin. It also serves to remind us that medicine used locally in the surgical field can also cause anaphylaxis. https://thejns.org/doi/10.3171/CASE2517.

### PMID 41240180 (2025) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Efficacy of a synthetic collagen-based sealant (TachoSil&#xae;) in preventing cerebrospinal fluid leak following planned and incidental durotomies in spine surgery: a retrospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-025-03917-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a significant complication following planned or incidental durotomies during spinal surgery. While primary suturing remains the gold standard for dural closure, it is common to necessitate adjunctive reinforcement techniques. This study aims to evaluate the efficacy of a synthetic collagen-based sealant patch (TachoSil&#xae;) in preventing CSF leaks in a large cohort of patients undergoing spinal surgery.&#xa0;A retrospective analysis was conducted in whom TachoSil&#xae; was used as a dural sealant, either following planned (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12) or incidental (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;42) durotomies, or prophylactically (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;31) after decompression for critical lumbar canal stenosis. The primary endpoint was the prevention and resolution rate of CSF leaks. Secondary endpoints included reoperation rates and postoperative complications. A total of 85 patients (6.8%) met the inclusion criteria (mean age, 64.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;15.4 years). TachoSil&#xae; was used as monotherapy in 39 patients and in combination with primary suturing or other sealants in 46 patients. Overall, 66 patients (77.6%) did not require surgical reintervention. TachoSil&#xae; monotherapy was associated with a significantly higher success rate (89.7%) compared to combined techniques (68.2% for TachoSil&#xae; plus suturing and 60.0% for TachoSil&#xae; plus other sealants; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.041). Excluding its prophylactic use (either planned or incidental durotomy, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;54), its efficacy in avoiding reintervention was 86.7% for TachoSil&#xae; alone, 77.3% for TachoSil&#xae; plus suture, and 64.7% for TachoSil&#xae; plus other combinations of sealants (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.67). Postoperative complications occurred in 22 patients (25.9%), primarily including persistent CSF fistula, pseudomeningocele formation, and surgical site infections.&#xa0;TachoSil&#xae; demonstrated high efficacy as a standalone dural reinforcement method and when combined with suture or other sealant techniques in preventing CSF leaks following spinal surgeries involving dural compromise.

### PMID 40400950 (2025) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Biocompatibility of a novel lung sealant based on functionalized polyoxazolines in an ovine model of parenchymal lung injury.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd-24-1733 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A lung sealant based on a porcine gelatin carrier impregnated with N-hydroxysuccinimide ester functionalized poly(2)oxazolines (NHS-POx) and nucleophilically activated polyoxazolines (NU-POx) was shown to be efficacious for lung sealing ex-vivo and in-vivo. In the current study, we investigated the local biocompatibility by assessing inflammation, healing, and biodegradability in an ovine model of superficial parenchymal lung injury.
METHODS: Three groups, NHS-POx, fibrin patch (TachoSil&#xae;) and untreated control, are randomly applied to superficial lesions (3 mm depth) on the right lung (n=3/lung) of adult female domestic sheep, which are sacrificed for blinded histological assessment at 5, 14, and 42 days (n=4 animals per term). Semi-quantitative scoring (scale 0-4) was performed on immune cell subtypes (polymorphonuclear cells, lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages, giant cells, necrosis) and biomaterial response (fibrosis, neovascularization, fatty infiltrate). Post-hoc analysis was performed for a suspected labeling mistake and adapted datasets were obtained (6 weeks).
RESULTS: The total cell response score was significantly higher for NHS-POx vs. control [score: 11.5 (range, 9-13) vs. 7 (range, 6-8), P=0.005] at 5 days, and for fibrin patch vs. control [score: 14 (range, 12-17) vs. 7 (range, 5-8), P=0.02] at 2 weeks. At 6 weeks, cell response was similar between groups (P=0.22), with outliers due to granulomatous inflammation to residual patch (n=1 fibrin patch and n=1 mix-up sample likely fibrin patch). Wound healing, fibrosis, and neovascularization were similar across groups, showing local pleural thickening. NHS-POx patch showed mesothelial coverage at 2 weeks and was macro- and microscopically completely degraded at 6 weeks with replacement of the patch material with extracellular matrix (adapted data).
CONCLUSIONS: The NHS-POx patch shows a comparable to favorable biocompatibility profile compared to fibrin patch, and is a potent candidate for clinical lung sealing applications.

### PMID 40291184 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Pneumatocele With Perforation of the Residual Lung Immediately After Thoracoscopic Left Lower Lobectomy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.81216 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cases of pneumatocele formation following pulmonary resection are increasingly reported, yet its underlying pathogenesis and optimal treatment remain unclear. Here, we present a case of pneumatocele perforation occurring immediately after thoracoscopic left lower lobectomy. A 66-year-old man was found to have a suspicious nodule in the left lower lung zone during a routine chest X-ray as part of a medical checkup. CT suggested lung cancer in the left lower lobe, prompting referral to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment. Contrasted CT imaging revealed a ground-glass nodule with a maximum diameter of 4.6 cm, including a 4 cm solid component, located in segments S9/10 of the left lower lobe. No signs of emphysema were observed, and pulmonary function tests indicated normal respiratory capacity. PET-CT showed mild uptake (SUVmax 2.04) in the left lower lobe mass, with no evidence of distant metastasis. Additionally, contrast-enhanced brain MRI showed no abnormalities suggestive of metastasis. Bronchoscopy was performed, but transbronchial lung biopsy and brushing/irrigation cytology yielded no evidence of malignancy. Based on these findings, stage IB primary lung cancer was suspected, and a surgical biopsy followed by lobectomy was planned. The procedure was conducted using a four-port, completely thoracoscopic approach. Intraoperative needle biopsy confirmed adenocarcinoma, leading to left lower lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection. Immediately after chest wound closure, a large volume of air leakage was observed, along with pneumatocele formation and perforation on the mediastinal side of the upper lobe. The pneumatocele was incised, its base cauterized, and covered with a TachoSil&#xae; fibrin sealant patch (CSL Behring, King of Prussia, PA, USA). Postoperatively, a mild air leak persisted, requiring a single session of adhesive therapy. Lung fragility and increased negative intrathoracic pressure following resection are key risk factors for pneumatocele formation. While most cases can be managed conservatively, surgical intervention should be considered in symptomatic cases, particularly those presenting with pneumothorax or hemoptysis. If a pneumatocele develops intraoperatively, positive pressure ventilation and compression may cause further expansion. Therefore, we recommend prompt incision to prevent enlargement, followed by air leak closure through cauterization of the base and application of a sealing material.

### PMID 40283128 (2025) — Life (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Dura Closure Tactics to Prevent CSF Leakage in Microvascular Decompression Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/life15040574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (1) Background: Achieving a complete and secure dural closure to prevent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a critical concern in microvascular decompression (MVD). Proper dural closure minimizes complications, such as infections caused by CSF leakage. This study introduces a novel three-step dural suturing method, termed the "triple-layer closing technique". (2) Methods: From September 2020 to March 2023, a total of 475 patients underwent MVD surgery at our institution, all of whom received dural closure using the triple-layer closing technique. This technique incorporates three layers: Duragen&#xae; (synthetic dura, Integra Lifesciences), TachoSil&#xae; (collagen matrix, Nycomed), and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMC) bone cement. Postoperative complications, including CSF leakage and infections, were retrospectively analyzed. (3) Results: CSF leakage was observed in five patients (1.1%), all of whom presented with CSF rhinorrhea and radiological evidence of effusion within the mastoid air cells. These patients were successfully treated with lumbar drainage, and none required reoperation. No other postoperative infections or complications were reported. (4) Conclusions: The triple-layer closing technique, utilizing Duragen&#xae;, TachoSil&#xae;, and PMMC bone cement, is an effective and reliable method for dural closure. This technique significantly reduces the risk of CSF leakage and surgical site infections, enhancing postoperative outcomes in MVD procedures.

### PMID 40102276 (2025) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: How I do it: combined interposition-transposition technique for microvascular decompression in primary hemifacial spasm.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-025-06472-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Video-Audio Media, Case Reports, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Two surgical microvascular decompression techniques to treat primary hemifacial spasm (HFS) are described in literature. The "interposition" uses different materials as "spacers" while the "transposition" consists in suturing the offending vessel to the petrous bone dura mater. In the literature is described a transposition surgery adopting self-adhesive materials reporting promising results.
METHOD: We describe a combination of these two techniques using autologous muscle and Tachosil&#xae;. The step-by-step surgical principles are described in the article and clarified in a video.
CONCLUSION: This procedure is effective to cure the HFS especially in case of large arteries when interposition only is insufficient.

### PMID 38886595 (2025) — International journal of impotence research
TITLE: Long-term histological and hemodynamic findings of repairing penile tunica albuginea defects with collagen fleece in dogs.
DOI: 10.1038/s41443-024-00934-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Clinically, collagen fleece patching of the penile tunica albuginea (TA) has been successful. However, the histopathological and hemodynamic outcomes are not known. We studied in vivo TachoSil&#xae; patching in two beagle dogs weighing 16.8 (16.7-16.9) Kg. Bilateral intracavernous pressures (ICP) response to 10&#x2009;mg papaverine hydrochloride were measured. A full-thickness defect was created on the left side in TA 1 &#xd7; 0.5&#x2009;cm, and four transverse incisions 1&#x2009;cm long were made on the right side, placed 0.5&#x2009;cm apart, and covered with TachoSil&#xae;. Six months later, ICP measurements were repeated, and the penis was excised for histopathology. Grossly, the graft site was indistinguishable. The mean baseline ICP was 19.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.98&#x2009;mmHg and increased after papaverine injection to a mean peak ICP of 122&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;26.1&#x2009;mmHg. The ICP measurement before and after grafting did not show a significant difference in the baseline (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.068) or the peak pressure (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.465). Histologically, minimal foreign body reaction was seen, and the TA was completely regenerated. The underlying cavernous tissue did not show inflammation or necrosis. The study is the first to show the long-term histopathologic regeneration of TA after collagen fleece patching while maintaining the hemodynamic response to papaverine.

### PMID 41625090 (2025) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Endoscopic transorbital approach to managing indirect carotid cavernous fistula: A novel technique.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_938_2025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Carotid cavernous fistula (CCF) is a rare vascular shunt between the carotid artery and the cavernous sinus, leading to venous hypertension and occasionally cortical venous reflux. It is primarily treated with endovascular therapy. However, transvenous or transarterial endovascular access may be difficult in some cases and may fail to obliterate the fistula. We describe the first case of utilizing the endoscopic transorbital approach (ETOA) to directly obliterating the CCF.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 65-year-old man presented with the left eye blurring of vision for 2 months. He was diagnosed with the left Barrow type D indirect CCF with cortical venous reflux on digital subtraction angiogram. Primary transvenous embolization failed due to thrombosed venous access. Thus, we employed ETOA through a lid crease incision, lateral orbitotomy, and drilling of the sphenoid wing to access the cavernous sinus. Direct cannulation of the cavernous sinus was attempted. Ultimately, we injected hemostatic agents including Floseal to directly obliterate the CCF. Postoperative and follow-up digital subtraction angiogram showed complete obliteration. This is the first case of endoscopic-assisted transorbital approach to direct obliteration of a CCF. This approach allows for a smaller wound, less morbidity for complex cases with difficult venous access, with potential for complete obliteration.
CONCLUSION: We illustrate the novel use of ETOA to direct obliteration of a complex CCF.

### PMID 40376473 (2025) — Current urology
TITLE: Prolonged life-threatening anaphylaxis to Floseal during partial nephrectomy: A case report.
DOI: 10.1097/CU9.0000000000000200 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Floseal Hemostatic Matrix is a topical hemostatic agent used across specialties and commonly applied to the renal bed during partial nephrectomy. Here we present the first adult case of Floseal allergy in the literature. A 62-year-old man underwent partial nephrectomy for a Bosniak type IV cyst. After unclamping the kidney, the patient declined precipitously, later determined due to an anaphylactic reaction to the Floseal placed on the renal bed. The patient had a prolonged anaphylactic reaction that required ionotropic support for over 24 h, possibly due to continued exposure. His tryptase level was elevated, and allergy testing revealed an allergy to the gelatin matrix component of the Floseal. Floseal anaphylaxis should be considered during episodes of cardiovascular collapse after drug administration. However, consideration should be given to removing it to prevent continued exposure and weighed against the risk of prolonged surgery in an anaphylactic patient.

### PMID 39976432 (2025) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Management of Major Arterial Injuries: A Critical Complication of Endoscopic Endonasal Surgery.
DOI: 10.1227/ons.0000000000001507 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Endoscopic endonasal surgery (EES) is the preferred approach for treating sellar and parasellar lesions due to its panoramic view and detailed anatomical definition. This study aims to review major arterial injuries during EES, a rare but critical complication associated with high mortality and morbidity rates.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted, including 15 patients from 5640 EES procedures performed between August 1997 and February 2024 at in our center/Department of Neurosurgery. The study focuses on perioperative and postoperative management strategies, highlighting the use of oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel&#xae;)/gelatin-thrombin matrix (Floseal&#xae;) and multidisciplinary collaboration to achieve hemostasis.
RESULTS: The incidence of major arterial injury was 0.2%, with a mean patient age of 38.4 years and a female-to-male ratio of 10:5. The most common tumors were adenomas (n = 7) and chordomas (n = 5). The most commonly bleeding arteries in 6 patients each are the cavernous segment of the internal carotid artery and the paraclival carotid artery. Low-flow bleeding was observed in 10 of our patients, while high-flow bleeding was seen in 5 patients, 4 of whom were recurrent cases ( P &lt; .05). In 3 patients with high-flow bleeding from segments of the carotid artery, digital subtraction angiography was performed for stent placement or coil embolization, while in 1 patient with high-flow bleeding, digital subtraction angiography was used for monitoring cerebral blood flow. One of our patients died of a myocardial infarction at the 14th month of follow-up and 1 of our patients developed left-hemiparesis.
CONCLUSION: The study underscores the importance of preoperative planning, surgical expertise, and multidisciplinary teamwork in managing major arterial injuries during EES. The authors advocate for the development of standardized treatment algorithms to improve outcomes in these patients. The findings contribute to the limited literature on managing internal carotid artery injuries in EES, emphasizing the need for ongoing research and algorithm development.

### PMID 41205717 (2025) — The Journal of arthroplasty
TITLE: The Application of Flowable Gelatin Without Thrombin in Total Joint Arthroplasty: A Propensity Score-Matched Comparative Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.arth.2025.10.122 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Flowable gelatin (FG) without thrombin is a widely utilized intraoperative hemostatic agent, yet its efficacy in total joint arthroplasty remains debated. This study aimed to assess its clinical impact on total knee arthroplasty (TKA) and total hip arthroplasty (THA).
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of patients who underwent primary TKA and THA at a single institution from 2018 to 2024, categorizing them based on intraoperative FG usage. Patients who received FG were propensity score-matched in a 2:1 ratio to those who did not, based on demographic characteristics, comorbidities, and surgical factors. Primary outcomes included blood loss, transfusion rate, thromboembolic events, and other perioperative complications. Regression analyses were conducted to assess the impact of intraoperative FG use on total blood loss in both TKA and THA. A total of 612 TKA patients (non-FG: 233; FG: 117) and 844 THA patients (non-FG: 391; FG: 203) were included, with a mean follow-up exceeding two years (up to six years).
RESULT: Both total blood loss (TKA: 899.0 versus 1,122.1 mL; THA: 1,021.8 versus 1,328.4 mL) and hidden blood loss (TKA: 789.1 versus 1,010.8 mL; THA: 858.6 versus 1,169.9 mL) were significantly reduced in the FG group, accompanied by lower transfusion rates (TKA: 4.3 versus 12.9%; THA: 8.87 versus 19.69%). The incidence of thromboembolic events, including deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, did not differ significantly between groups (P &gt; 0.05). Multivariate analyses further identified FG use as an independent predictor of reduced total blood loss.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study found that FG effectively reduces perioperative blood loss and transfusion rates in both TKA and THA, without increasing the risk of lower limb thrombosis or other postoperative complications.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level II study.

### PMID 40469338 (2025) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Endoscopic subdural membranectomy for multi-septated chronic subdural hematoma: Finding a safe solution when middle meningeal artery embolization is not feasible.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_340_2025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Multi-septated chronic subdural hematoma (mCSDH) is a special type of chronic subdural hematoma (CSDH) that is characterized by a hematoma cavity separated by fibrous septa that hinders adequate drainage. Treatment of mCSDH using minimally invasive endoscopic-assisted techniques that may serve as an addition to the standard technique of burr-hole craniotomy drainage. No prior video on the nuances of endoscopic membranectomy (EM) has been described.
CASE DESCRIPTION: In this surgical video, we present the case of an 82-year-old female who presented with symptoms of right-sided body weakness and progressive headaches following a ground-level fall a month prior. Computed tomography (CT) head imaging revealed a subacute CSDH overlying the left frontotemporal and parietal regions, measuring 2.4 cm in maximum diameter, with a 0.9 cm midline shift toward the right side and multiple internal septations. Middle meningeal artery embolization could not be performed due to vascular access limitations. The patient consented to the procedure, and a mini left frontoparietal craniotomy was performed with traditional evacuation of the hematoma. Further, a rigid short endoscope (Karl Storz) with a 0&#xb0; and 30&#xb0; high-definition lens was introduced into the subdural space. EM and meticulous septation lysis were performed by microscissors and endoscopic bipolar coagulation along with intermittent irrigation, allowing for the maximal drainage of the subdural hematoma (SDH), hemostasis of friable and bleeding membranes with membranectomy, thereby promoting brain expansion. The duration of surgery was 3.7 h. The patient showed immediate improvement in the postoperative period and was discharged home on postoperative day 3. The interval CT scan at 6 months showed no recurrence. IRB approval was not required per the institutional policy.
CONCLUSION: This video case presentation highlights that EM enhances intra-operative visualization, identification, and division of neo membranes or solid clots under direct vision, helping to prevent recurrence and rebleeding. Judicious use of diluted peroxide, bipolar coagulation, SURGIFLO&#xae;, and fibrin glue effectively controls bleeding. A rigid 30&#xb0; endoscope aids in visualizing blind spots and bridging vein attachments, ensuring complete SDH evacuation. By adapting techniques over time, we have improved both patient outcomes by minimizing bleeding and operational effectiveness from aggressively peeling membranes off the dura, which could trigger bleeding, to focusing on lysis of unstable, hemorrhagic membranes while preserving thinner, non-bleeding ones. For distant membranous bleeds, SURGIFLO&#xae; and fibrin glue are sufficient, and aggressive lysis in the para-sagittal and parieto-occipital posterior areas is avoided.

### PMID 40394249 (2025) — European archives of oto-rhino-laryngology : official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS) : affiliated with the German Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
TITLE: Revision tracheal resection anastomosis for recurrent stenosis after airway surgeries: functional outcomes.
DOI: 10.1007/s00405-025-09441-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the surgical and functional outcomes as well as the quality of life among patients who underwent revision tracheal/cricotracheal resection anastomosis for recurrent stenosis after previous unsuccessful airway surgeries.
METHODS: This prospective study was conducted on 53 patients. Circumferential resection of the stenotic airway segment was done with primary end-to-end anastomosis. All surgeries were performed by the authors of this work with the same standardized surgical techniques. To decrease the anastomotic tension, suprahyoid release was performed for all patients and trachea-hyoid detensioning stitches were placed. Surgiflo was applied over the line of the anastomosis to enhance healing. Surgical and functional outcomes were evaluated.
RESULTS: Types of anastomosis were cricotracheal anastomosis (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;18), thyrotracheal anastomosis (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;24), and tracheo-tracheal anastomosis (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;11) according to the remaining proximal and distal stumps. The overall decannulation rate was 92.5% (49 out of 53 patients). No major intraoperative complications were reported. Postoperative complications were reported in 13 patients (24.5%), in the form of restenosis (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;7), granulation tissue formation at the site of anastomosis (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5), surgical emphysema / minor air leak through drains (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4), unilateral vocal fold paralysis (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;2), wound seroma (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1). Regarding functional outcomes, dyspnea was considerably alleviated both at rest and during exercise, and most patients had satisfactory voice and swallowing related functions. The majority of patients reported adequate QOL.
CONCLUSION: Revision tracheal/cricotracheal resection anastomosis presents significant surgical challenges. Nevertheless, by employing meticulous surgical techniques and implementing strategies to reduce anastomotic tension and enhance healing such as suprahyoid release, trachea-hyoid detensioning stitches, and the application of surgiflo, high success rates and satisfactory functional outcomes were achieved.

### PMID 39988823 (2025) — Orthopaedic surgery
TITLE: Use of Fluid Gelatin in Lumbar Spinal Stenosis Undergoing Unilateral Biportal Endoscopic: A Prospective, Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.1111/os.70009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: In patients with lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS) undergoing unilateral biportal endoscopic unilateral laminotomy for bilateral decompression (UBE-ULBD), damage to the epidural venous plexus often leads to bleeding, increasing the risk of surgical complications. Surgiflo Hemostatic Matrix (SHM) is a gelatin extracted from porcine skin, used for intraoperative hemostasis. This study aims to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of using SHM during UBE-ULBD surgery.
METHODS: From October 2023 to July 2024, a total of 96 patients with LSS underwent UBE-ULBD surgery. These 96 patients were randomly divided into two groups: the SHM group (48 patients, using flowable gelatin) and the non-SHM group (48 patients, not using flowable gelatin). The primary outcomes included intraoperative blood loss, postoperative drainage volume, and the 3-min hemostasis success rate. Secondary outcomes included symptomatic postoperative epidural hematoma (SPEH), surgical time, postoperative hospital stay, hospitalization costs, and complications. We used independent sample t-tests to compare continuous data, and chi-square tests or Fisher's exact tests to analyze categorical data.
RESULTS: The intraoperative blood loss and postoperative drainage volume in the SHM group were significantly less than those in the non-SHM group (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05), and the 3-min hemostasis success rate in the SHM group was significantly higher than that in the non-SHM group (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). There were no statistically significant differences between the two groups regarding SPEH, postoperative hospital stay, hospitalization costs, and complications such as thrombosis formation and allergic reactions. However, the surgical time in the SHM group was significantly shorter than that in the non-SHM group (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05).
CONCLUSION: When patients with LSS undergo UBE-ULBD, the use of fluid gelatin can effectively reduce intraoperative and postoperative bleeding without introducing additional complications.

### PMID 41509832 (2025) — Journal of spine surgery (Hong Kong)
TITLE: BLEED-LESS: a scoping review on blood loss elimination in endoscopic decompression-lessons and literature on endoscopic spine surgery.
DOI: 10.21037/jss-25-11 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Endoscopic spine surgery has emerged as a significant advancement in minimally invasive spinal procedures, with advantages including reduced tissue trauma, faster recovery, and improved patient outcomes. A critical component of these surgeries is effective haemostasis, essential for maintaining visual clarity, ensuring surgical efficiency, and minimising perioperative complications. A scoping review was conducted to examine current clinical practices and research on haemostasis in endoscopic spine surgery, with the aim of synthesising existing knowledge into a practical framework to guide surgeons in managing intraoperative bleeding in endoscopic spine surgery.
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted across PubMed, Embase and Cochrane Library, guided by the Population-Concept-Context (PCC) framework. Studies were included if they reported on techniques to achieve haemostasis in endoscopic spine procedures. Data were extracted on study design, surgical technique, haemostatic tools or agents used, and bleeding-related outcomes.
RESULTS: The review identified various haemostatic methods including bipolar and radiofrequency cautery, tranexamic acid, gelatin-thrombin matrix sealants, bone wax, irrigation pressure modulation, and absorbable hemostatic agents. The review highlights that no single haemostatic method can be applied to all cases of endoscopic spine surgery. Instead, a multimodal approach is necessary to effectively achieve haemostasis. Based on this synthesis, we propose the FIBRE protocol, encompassing fluid management, initial exposure, bone bleeding control, red-out scenarios, and extra considerations, as a practical framework for managing haemostasis.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed FIBRE protocol is a framework for controlling bleeding, improving visualisation, and enhancing surgical outcomes. By integrating these practices, surgeons can refine their techniques and contribute to enhanced patient outcomes in minimally invasive spine surgery.

### PMID 41322758 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Real-World Case Series on Surgi-ORC&#xae; in ENT Surgery.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.95539 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Effective hemostasis is essential in ENT surgical operations to reduce blood loss and improve postoperative recovery. This case series assesses the hemostatic efficacy and safety of Surgi-ORC&#xae; Knit, an absorbable oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) hemostat, in four patients undergoing four different ENT operations. This case series included four patients who underwent parotidectomy, thyroidectomy, neck mass excision, and submandibular excision. To control bleeding, a Surgi-ORC&#xae; Knit was applied to the bleeding site. The study's primary objective was to monitor time to hemostasis for bleeding control in ENT surgery. The secondary aim of safety monitoring was to conduct a 60-day follow-up to confirm complete absorption and assess for adverse events. Along with this, the handling characteristics of the product were also assessed. Surgi-ORC&#xae; attained hemostasis within the range of 0.93 to 2.1 minutes. No adverse events were reported, and all patients had stable recoveries. The surgeons found that the product was easy to apply and had good tissue adherence. Surgi-ORC&#xae; was entirely absorbed within 28 days, which was confirmed by radiological imaging. On follow-up day 60, there were no signs of infections, adhesions, granuloma formation, or foreign body reactions. Surgi-ORC&#xae; Knit is a viable treatment option for managing bleeding in ENT surgeries. Surgeons found its user-friendly application, stability, and easy delivery in intricate surgery locations to be noteworthy advantages. Its safety is bolstered by complete absorption and no further complications.

### PMID 41155849 (2025) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: Evaluation of the Performance of StypCelTM Absorbable Hemostat for Intraoperative Hemorrhage Control in Neurosurgery: A Multicenter, Single-Arm Study in Riga, Latvia.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina61101862 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000068397">Clinical Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: Intraoperative bleeding during neurosurgical procedures poses a significant risk by increasing morbidity and mortality, obscuring the surgical field and prolonging operative time and hospitalization. Effective hemostasis is therefore essential, frequently necessitating the use of topical hemostatic agents. This study aimed to evaluate the performance of a plant-derived oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) hemostatic agent StypCel&#x2122; Absorbable Hemostat (Medprin Regenerative Medical Technologies Co., Ltd.) in various neurosurgical interventions, including intracranial tumor resections, spinal surgeries, trigeminal neuralgia operations, cerebrospinal fluid fistula repair and ventriculoperitoneal shunt implantation. The study aimed to assess its performance in these procedures due to the high risk of intraoperative bleeding and the challenges of achieving hemostasis in delicate neural structures. Materials and Methods: This prospective, single-arm clinical study included 46 patients who underwent neurosurgical procedures at three neurosurgerical clinics in Riga, Latvia. The primary endpoint was the rate of effective bleeding control achieved within 5 min of StypCel&#x2122; application. Safety assessments included monitoring for central nervous system infections (CNSI), intracranial granuloma formation, new-onset neurological deficits, seizures, anaphylactic reactions or device malfunction. All adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs) were documented during the postoperative follow-up. Results: The cohort consisted of 46 patients (29 females and 17 males), including 20 with neoplastic intracranial lesions and 26 with other neurosurgical pathologies. Effective bleeding control within 5 min was achieved in 93.5% of cases (95% CI: 82.1-98.6%). In three patients, bleeding control exceeded 5 min due to unexpected arterial hemorrhage encountered during intracranial tumor resection. No device-related AEs, SAEs, CNSIs or granuloma formations were reported throughout the follow-up period. Conclusions: The findings demonstrate that StypCel&#x2122; Absorbable Hemostat is a safe and effective adjunct for achieving intraoperative hemostasis in neurosurgical procedures. Its favorable safety profile and high hemostatic success rate support its clinical utility, particularly for controlling low-pressure venous or capillary bleeding. Further comparative and long-term studies are warranted to validate these results in broader surgical settings.

### PMID 40840071 (2025) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Retained Surgicel mimicking renal tumor recurrence: A diagnostic pitfall following partial nephrectomy - A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2025.111774 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: Partial nephrectomy is the standard treatment for localized renal cell carcinoma, often using oxidized cellulose (Surgicel&#xae;) for hemostasis. Retained Surgicel&#xae; may mimic tumor recurrence on imaging, posing a critical diagnostic challenge with potential for unnecessary interventions.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a 54-year-old female with chromophobe renal cell carcinoma who underwent open partial nephrectomy with Surgicel&#xae; placement. Two years later, imaging revealed a suspicious renal mass suggesting tumor recurrence. Surgical excision and histopathology identified a foreign body granulomatous reaction to retained Surgicel&#xae;, with no malignancy detected.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: Surgicel&#xae; typically resorbs within weeks but can occasionally cause granulomatous reactions appearing as enhancing masses with diffusion restriction on MRI, mimicking malignancy. Awareness of this entity and correlation with surgical history are essential. T2-weighted MRI assists differentiation, and biopsy confirms diagnosis, preventing unnecessary surgery.
CONCLUSION: Retained Surgicel&#xae; is a rare but important cause of false-positive tumor recurrence after partial nephrectomy. Accurate diagnosis through imaging, clinical correlation, and multidisciplinary communication can avoid misdiagnosis and unwarranted invasive procedures.

### PMID 40837324 (2025) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Dandy's vein decompression for trigeminal neuralgia: A rare venous conflict causing intractable facial pain.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_372_2025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is predominantly caused by arterial compression of the trigeminal nerve; however, venous conflicts, particularly involving Dandy's vein and the superior petrosal sinus (SPS), represent an uncommon but significant etiology.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We report a case of a 40-year-old female suffering from debilitating right-sided facial pain due to a rare "scissor effect" produced by the superior petrosal sinus and Dandy's vein (vein of the cerebellomesencephalic fissure) compressing the trigeminal nerve. Surgical decompression was performed by interposing autologous skeletal muscle wrapped with Surgicel between the conflicting venous structures and the nerve. The patient achieved complete pain relief without neurological deficits.
CONCLUSION: This case underscores the importance of recognizing venous causes of TN and highlights the effectiveness of Dandy's vein decompression.

### PMID 40809635 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Bilateral Systemic Artery-to-Pulmonary Vessel Fistulas Following Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery for Primary Spontaneous Pneumothorax: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.87862 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Systemic artery-to-pulmonary vessel fistula (SAPVF) is a rare vascular anomaly, with acquired forms typically arising secondary to intrathoracic inflammation, infection, trauma, or thoracic surgery. We report a case of a 21-year-old man with a history of bilateral video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) bullectomy for primary spontaneous pneumothorax who developed bilateral SAPVF. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed abnormally dilated pulmonary vessels with systemic arterial communications in both lungs, corresponding to previous surgical incision sites. On the left side, SAPVF developed despite the surgical wound separated from the lung by oxidized regenerated cellulose sheets. Due to multiple systemic feeding arteries, embolization was considered ineffective, and surgery was avoided owing to the high risk of postoperative reformation. The patient has been managed conservatively, with no progression observed over a two-year follow-up period. This case highlights that SAPVF can occur even after minimally invasive surgery such as VATS, emphasizing the need for careful follow-up and further evaluation of optimal preventive strategies.

### PMID 40800638 (2025) — Journal of surgical case reports
TITLE: Surgicel&#xae; mimicking a retained appendix on CT: a case report and literature review of diagnostic pitfalls in retained Surgicel&#xae; cases.
DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjaf388 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cross-sectional imaging, particularly computed tomography, is vital in post-operative care but can pose diagnostic challenges. Absorbable hemostatic agents like Surgicel&#xae; may mimic abscesses or hematomas, leading to misinterpretation. This review explores these pitfalls and presents a relevant case. 10 studies, including case reports, series, and observational studies, were reviewed to identify imaging characteristics and misdiagnoses of retained Surgicel&#xae; across cardiac, neurosurgical, abdominal, and gynecological surgeries. Surgicel&#xae; often appears as low-attenuation or gas-containing masses, mimicking complications like abscesses. Misdiagnoses frequently led to unnecessary imaging, treatments, or reoperations. Contributing factors included limited awareness of Surgicel&#xae;'s imaging appearance and potential for contrast enhancement. Misinterpretation of Surgicel&#xae; can increase interventions and healthcare costs. Clear communication between surgeons and radiologists about its use and location, along with radiologist awareness and clinical correlation, is key to avoiding misdiagnosis and improving patient care.

### PMID 40620452 (2025) — World journal of clinical cases
TITLE: Diced cartilage in capsula based on diced cartilage in fascia technique: A case report.
DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v13.i19.104400 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The Turkish Delight technique, initially described by Erol in 2000, involves the use of diced cartilage wrapped in oxidized cellulose (Surgicel&#x2122;) for nasal grafting in secondary rhinoplasty.
CASE SUMMARY: This paper presents a novel adaptation called Diced Cartilage in Capsula, where diced cartilage is wrapped in the periprosthetic capsule material formed from a previous breast augmentation procedure instead of fascia, a technique based on the Diced Cartilage in Fascia method. Utilizing autologous, biocompatible material minimizes foreign body reactions and enhances graft integration. This innovative approach demonstrates the potential for specific practices in cosmetic surgery by optimizing patient-specific resources and improving surgical outcomes.
CONCLUSION: The report compares traditional Turkish Delight applications with this new method, discussing biocompatibility, technique efficacy, and benefits in rhinoplasty.

### PMID 40579194 (2025) — BMJ case reports
TITLE: Surgicel-induced foreign body reaction mimicking local recurrence after right hemicolectomy for colorectal cancer.
DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2024-264233 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: Surgicel (oxidised regenerated cellulose) is a commonly used haemostatic agent in various surgical procedures. While it is generally safe and bio-absorbable, it may cause foreign body reactions that mimic malignancy on imaging. This case report presents a woman in her late 70s who underwent laparoscopic right hemicolectomy for a hepatic flexure mucinous carcinoma. During follow-up, imaging revealed a soft tissue nodule in the mesentery highly suspicious for a local metastatic deposit/lymph node recurrence. Subsequent positron emission tomography scan showed no avidity in the area and ensuing biopsy reported presence of foreign body reaction. Thus, this reaction was secondary to the presence of Surgicel placed at the time of initial procedure. This case emphasises the diagnostic challenges posed by foreign body granulomas and highlights the importance of integrating clinical, radiological and histopathological findings to avoid unnecessary interventions.

### PMID 40574938 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Preoperative Transcatheter Arterial Embolization and Modified Hepatorrhaphy for Severe Liver Trauma: An Emerging Damage-Control Strategy.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.86812 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The efficacy of hepatorrhaphy in managing severe hepatic trauma remains uncertain. Although perihepatic packing (PHP) is widely employed, it is associated with risks such as infection and abdominal compartment syndrome. These concerns underscore the need for safer and more effective damage-control strategies. We report the case of a 16-year-old female patient who sustained blunt abdominal trauma following a motorcycle collision and presented with hemodynamic instability due to severe hepatic and renal injuries. Preoperative transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) enabled hepatorrhaphy without the need for PHP. An absorbable oxidized regenerated cellulose hemostat (Surgicel NU-KNIT, Ethicon, Raritan, NJ) was used in place of conventional non-absorbable pledgets. A right nephrectomy was concurrently performed due to extensive hilar avulsion. The postoperative course was uneventful, and no further interventions were required. This case highlights two potential innovations: the integration of preoperative TAE with hepatorrhaphy and the use of an absorbable hemostatic agent. These approaches may enhance hemostatic efficacy and reduce reliance on PHP in selected trauma cases.

### PMID 40410772 (2025) — Journal of orthopaedic surgery and research
TITLE: Oxidized regenerated cellulose powder reduces perioperative bleeding and thigh swelling in total hip arthroplasty: a prospective interventional study.
DOI: 10.1186/s13018-025-05913-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Total hip arthroplasty (THA) is an effective treatment for hip osteoarthritis; however, perioperative blood loss and postoperative thigh swelling are significant challenges that can delay recovery and increase patient discomfort. Minimally invasive THA and pharmacological interventions, such as tranexamic acid, have mitigated some complications; however, achieving localized hemostasis, particularly in cancellous bones, remains problematic. We aimed to evaluate the efficacy of oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) powder in reducing perioperative blood loss and postoperative thigh swelling following THA.
METHODS: This prospective interventional study included 152 patients who underwent primary unilateral THA via the direct anterior approach. The patients were divided into ORC (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;74) and non-ORC (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;78) groups. ORC powder was applied to three critical surgical sites: the acetabulum, femoral medullary canal, and the surrounding soft tissue. The estimated total blood loss (eTBL), postoperative blood loss (ePBL), thigh swelling, and hematologic parameters (hemoglobin, hematocrit, D-dimer, creatine kinase, and C-reactive protein) were assessed. Clinical outcomes were evaluated using the modified Harris Hip Score (mHHS), Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC), and University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) activity score at 3 months postoperatively.
RESULTS: The ORC group exhibited significantly lower eTBL and ePBL, smaller reductions in hemoglobin levels, and higher hematocrit levels up to postoperative day 7. Postoperative thigh swelling was significantly reduced in the ORC group, particularly on day 1, with a trend toward reduced swelling at all time points. However, there were no significant differences in the clinical scores between the groups at 3 months postoperatively.
CONCLUSIONS: The ORC powder application during THA effectively reduced perioperative blood loss and postoperative thigh swelling. Powdered ORC has the potential to maximize efficacy in THA because of its ability to be applied to hemispherical acetabular surfaces and deep femoral medullary canals, effectively addressing bleeding from both soft tissue and cancellous bone.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This prospective interventional study was reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of Shizuoka Red Cross Hospital (Approval No: 2023-36) and was designed and conducted according to the rules of the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from patients or their families.

### PMID 40246197 (2025) — Journal of stomatology, oral and maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Buccal pad of fat, advanced platelet-rich fibrin, fibrin glue, and oxidized cellulose plug in the management of oroantral communication: A comparative clinical study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jormas.2025.102376 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: Oroantral communication (OAC) is a significant complication following the removal of maxillary posterior teeth that is a consequence of them being close to the maxillary sinus floor. The current study evaluated the efficacy of four treatment modalities for OAC management: buccal fat pads (BFPs), advanced platelet-rich fibrin (A-PRF), fibrin glue, and oxidized regenerated cellulose plugs. Twenty-four patients with OAC were randomly assigned to four treatment groups (n = 6 each) and clinically assessed for facial swelling, healing outcomes, and patient-reported pain at baseline, on day 3, and at weekly intervals for 4 weeks after their respective treatments. A linear mixed-effects model found a significant reduction in pain over time in all groups. Intergroup and intragroup comparisons of postoperative pain showed statistically significant differences between the groups at baseline and after 1 week. The BFP group had the highest scores for initial pain, while the A-PRF group had the least, with a consistent reduction throughout the study. The BFP group displayed significantly increased facial swelling on day 3, which had subsided after 2 weeks; the fibrin glue group followed a similar pattern but stabilized quickly. The A-PRF group showed minimal swelling and rapid tissue regeneration, while the oxidized regenerated cellulose group displayed less responsiveness for larger OACs. The choice of therapeutic technique for managing OACs should therefore be chosen according to the defect size and anatomical considerations. While BFP and fibrin glue were more efficacious for larger defects, the A-PRF technique showed rapid healing and less discomfort.

### PMID 40090222 (2025) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Single piece craniotomy in the management of a patient with large vertex epidural haematoma and deteriorating brain function in a limited resources community. Case report from Southwestern Uganda.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2025.111146 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: Vertex epidural haematoma is a rare form of epidural haemorrhage and a complication of head trauma that is both a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge for the trauma surgeon. It's usually as result of laceration in the superior sagittal sinus. Whereas most patients with small vertex epidural hematomas improve with conservative treatment, large or rapidly expanding lesions are fatal and require emergency craniotomy.
CASE PRESENTATION: Ours was a 28-year-old male patient who arrived at our emergency department in rural Southwestern Uganda with Glasgow coma scale of 12/15 following a head on collision of two Boda Boda motorcycles. CT scan imaging revealed a large acute Vertex Epidural haematoma and a linear skull fracture of the parietal bones crossing the midline. The haematoma was evacuated through a single piece craniotomy and hemostasia achieved by surgicel. Patient was transfused with two units of whole blood. Patients Glasgow coma scale improved to 15/15 after 24&#xa0;h postoperatively.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: Vertex epidural hematomas are both diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. Small haematomas do not require surgical intervention. Large and expanding haematomas are fatal and require urgent surgical evacuation by neurosurgeons. In rural centres in lower- and middle-income countries like our own, surgery is often more challenging. This is mainly due to nonavailability of neurosurgeons and lack of medical supplies. With careful planning, available midlevel medical doctors can safely evacuate a large vertex epidural hematoma through a single piece craniotomy.
CONCLUSION: When performed timely, emergency surgical decompression results into rapid improvement of brain function in patients with large vertex epidural hematoma and deteriorating brain function as observed in our patient. Massive haemorrhage from superior sagittal sinus and air embolism are important intraoperative complications that should be kept in mind. Careful pre operative planning is of paramount importance especially in centres without neurosurgeons and essential neurosurgery supplies.

### PMID 39838550 (2025) — Brain pathology (Zurich, Switzerland)
TITLE: Brain-derived textiloma post glioblastoma resection and application of oxidized regenerated cellulose: A pilot, bedside-to-bench, translational study.
DOI: 10.1111/bpa.13331 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: Oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC; marketed as Surgicel&#xae; and Tabotamp&#xae;) is routinely used as an intraoperative hemostatic agent. Rarely, residual ORC has been associated with a foreign body reaction generating cystic or granulomatous lesions (i.e., textilomas) at the surgical site. Here, we report a bedside-to-bench, translational report of an intracranial mass after neurosurgical resection of glioblastoma with ORC application. As part of patient care, we performed magnetic resonance imaging and histopathological analysis of the mass. We then performed in vitro studies to evaluate the effect of ORC on cytokine production and viability of BV-2 murine microglial cells by using quantitative PCR along with live cell microscopy and crystal violet staining, respectively. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a recurrent mass pressing on the adjacent right ventricle, which was removed in a second surgery for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Unexpectedly, histopathological examination of the resected mass revealed abundant ORC arising from the site with inflammation, microglial activation, and collagenization. Mechanistically, we show an ORC-induced modest increase in inflammatory cytokines with a subsequent decrease in microglial cell viability. These findings suggest that ORC may mediate microglial immune response and viability, and serve to raise awareness and guide interpretation of post-treatment surveillance imaging findings in the instance of foreign body reaction.

### PMID 40909244 (2025) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: The PEG-coated collagen patch Hemopatch&#xae; for hemostasis and dural sealing in neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2025.1636372 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage and bleeding are major postoperative complications that increase healthcare system costs. The use of Hemopatch&#xae; Sealing Hemostat has been shown to reduce the incidence of such postoperative complications. This technical report aims to provide neurosurgeons with the best recommendations for the effective use of Hemopatch&#xae; as a hemostatic and dural sealant in cranial and spinal procedures.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The clinical experiences of 10 neurosurgeons from around the world regarding the use of Hemopatch&#xae; were evaluated using an online survey, followed by a hands-on preclinical workshop on adult pigs, which concluded with an in-depth discussion about the use of the patch.
RESULTS: The survey results provide an overview of how and when experts use different types of dural repair materials, including decision-making factors. During the workshop, Hemopatch&#xae; presented excellent tissue adherence on all evaluated defects. The new configuration of the patch showed improved tissue adherence, less curling of the patch, and easier removal of the gauze used for compression. Experts recommend using patches that overlap the defect for &#x2265;1&#x2005;cm. When closing defects that do not allow for a dried application site, Hemopatch&#xae; can be put on a dry gauze, which can be bent into a U-shape. This allows better targeting of the application site and enables immediate compression upon placement.
CONCLUSION: The results provide information to improve the hands-on use of Hemopatch&#xae; as a dural sealant, therefore reducing the risk of postoperative complications such as CSF leaks, eventually reducing healthcare system costs.

### PMID 41625106 (2025) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Acute myelopathy caused by granuloma formation secondary to gelatin sponge: A case report of a rare complication.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_1054_2025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Gelatin-based hemostatic agents are widely used in neurosurgery due to their effectiveness and general biocompatibility. However, rare adverse events such as foreign body granuloma (FBG) formation can occur.
CASE DESCRIPTION: Here, we report the case of a 52-year-old male who developed progressive neurological symptoms compatible with myelopathy following cervical decompression surgery in which Gelfoam&#xae; was applied. A FBG was found on imaging and confirmed following surgical excision.
CONCLUSION: This case highlights the importance of including FBG in the differential diagnosis of postoperative neurological deterioration whenever gelatin-based hemostatic agents are used.

### PMID 41394171 (2025) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: A new method for repairing internal carotid artery rupture in skull base surgery: a case report and review of the literature.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2025.1673961 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Internal carotid artery rupture during skull base surgery represents a rare yet catastrophic complication, with limited reports documented in the literature. In this article, we describe a case of ICA rupture encountered during supratentorial craniotomy for recurrent pituitary adenoma resection. The rupture was successfully managed through a novel microsurgical repair technique, achieving complete tumor resection. A 48-year-old female presented with a history of progressive visual impairment in both eyes for the past two years, 14 years after the initial pituitary adenoma resection. Reoperation was performed through the original pterional incision. During tumor dissection, sudden rupture of the right ICA occurred. Immediate cervical common carotid artery compression was applied, followed by microsurgical hemostasis using absorbable gelatin sponge and cottonoids. Temporary aneurysm clips were placed to achieve proximal flow control, allowing full exposure of the ICA rupture site. A small autologous muscle patch was used to cover the defect, and microsurgical repair was performed using a figure-of-eight suture technique. Complete hemostasis and total tumor resection were achieved. Postoperative digital subtraction angiography confirmed the patency of the ICA without stenosis, and the patient exhibited no neurological deficits postoperatively. This case combined the advantages of muscle tissue application and surgical suturing. The use of autologous muscle tissue promoted platelet aggregation, reducing tension at the rupture site and preventing further vascular tearing, while rapid suturing minimized blood loss. Additionally, the proficient collaboration and coordination with the anesthesiologist and surgical assistants were vital for controlling the intraoperative hemorrhage and ensuring prompt repair.

### PMID 40297653 (2025) — Anaesthesia reports
TITLE: Pulmonary embolism of haemostatic material during paediatric neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.1002/anr3.70010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 7-year-old boy with juvenile pilocytic astrocytoma experienced sudden haemodynamic collapse after significant venous bleeding and the application of absorbable haemostatic gelatin sponge. Following successful resuscitation, intra-operative transthoracic echocardiography revealed acute right ventricular failure. Subsequent computed tomography angiography confirmed the diagnosis of a massive pulmonary embolism. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was initiated and catheter thrombectomy was performed. The patient had a rapid and complete recovery. This case underscores the importance of vigilance and multidisciplinary teamwork in the management of rare but life-threatening complications.

### PMID 39988811 (2025) — Orthopaedic surgery
TITLE: Effects of Fluid Gelatin for Lumbar Spinal Stenosis Undergoing Lumbar Endoscopic Bilateral Decompression: A Prospective, Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.1111/os.14373 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: In patients with lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS), prolonged compression of the epidural venous plexus heightens the risk of bleeding and hematoma during minimally invasive surgery. While absorbable fluid gelatin, an animal protein-based hemostatic agent, is available, its effectiveness in lumbar endoscopic unilateral laminotomy with bilateral decompression (LE-ULBD) remains debated. Our research aims to conduct a prospective randomized controlled trial to investigate the effectiveness and safety of this hemostatic material in patients undergoing LE-ULBD for LSS.
METHODS: From October 2023 to July 2024, a total of 90 patients with LSS who underwent LE-ULBD were enrolled in this study. The 90 patients were randomly divided into two groups: fluid gelatin group (45 cases, using fluid gelatin) and null-fluid gelatin group (45 cases, not using fluid gelatin). Primary outcomes included the success rate of achieving hemostasis within 3&#x2009;min and symptomatic postoperative epidural hematoma (SPEH). Secondary outcomes encompassed surgical time, intraoperative blood loss, perioperative blood loss, length of stay, and complications. Independent sample t tests were used to compare continuous data. Chi-squared tests and Fisher's exact probability tests were used to analyze the categorical data.
RESULTS: The success rate of achieving hemostasis within 3&#x2009;min (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) was significantly higher in fluid gelatin group compared to that in the null-fluid gelatin group, and perioperative blood loss (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) and surgical time (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) were notably lower in the fluid gelatin group. However, there were no statistically significant differences between the two groups regarding intraoperative blood loss, length of stay, and complications, such as SPEH, allergy, and thrombus.
CONCLUSION: In patients with LSS undergoing LE-ULBD surgery, using fluid gelatin can achieve rapid intraoperative hemostasis, shorten surgical time, and reduce perioperative blood loss without causing complications. Therefore, the conventional use of fluid gelatin in LE-ULBD surgery is an effective and safe strategy.

### PMID 39390956 (2025) — Nursing in critical care
TITLE: Nursing care during management of recurrent pheochromocytoma: A case study.
DOI: 10.1111/nicc.13165 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Pheochromocytoma can occur in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, placing them at increased risk of tumour recurrence after surgical resection. Therefore, management of pheochromocytoma in these patients is a clinical challenge. We aim to present and discuss the nursing management of patient with recurrent pheochromocytoma. Case studies. We reviewed and retrieved the necessary information from the medical records. A 34-year-old female with a history of medullary thyroid carcinoma and pheochromocytoma complicated by cardiomyopathy, who had undergone surgical resections 6&#x2009;years ago, presented with abdominal pain for 1&#x2009;day and was diagnosed with recurrent bilateral pheochromocytoma, hypertensive crisis, acute heart failure, and acute renal failure. Eight hours after hospital admission, she experienced sudden cardiac arrest and received cardiopulmonary resuscitations. She was then supported under extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). The adrenal tumour was successfully treated with absolute ethanol ablation followed by gelatin sponge particle embolization, a management approach which has not been reported previously. She had a satisfactory recovery. A comprehensive nursing management approach, including prone ventilation; safe transportation; close cardiopulmonary monitoring; pre-, intra- and post-procedure care; individualized early rehabilitation; and psychological supports, should be applied to improve the prognoses in patients with similar medical conditions. Bilateral adrenal pheochromocytoma can be managed by absolute ethanol ablation followed by gelatin sponge particle embolization. Comprehensive nursing management, including a team effort regarding patient positioning, transportation, close monitoring, early rehabilitation and psychological support, should be provided during the peri-procedure period.

### PMID 38888321 (2025) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Microvascular Decompression Using the Gelatin Sponge Insertion Technique for Trigeminal Neuralgia: A Retrospective Cohort Study.
DOI: 10.1227/ons.0000000000001229 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Microvascular decompression (MVD) is the primary surgical intervention for trigeminal neuralgia (TN), with Teflon being the most conventional decompressing material. However, Teflon has been associated with adhesion and granulomas after MVD, which closely correlated with the recurrence of TN. Therefore, we developed a new technique to prevent direct contact between Teflon and nerve. The purpose of this study is to compare the efficacy of MVD using the gelatin sponge (GS) insertion technique with that of Teflon inserted alone in treating primary TN.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the medical records and the follow-up data of 734 patients with unilateral primary TN who underwent MVD at our center from January 2014 to December 2019. After exclusions, we identified 313 cases of GS-inserted MVD and 347 cases of traditional MVD. The follow-up exceeded 3 years.
RESULTS: The operating time of the GS-inserted group was longer than that of the Teflon group (109.38 &#xb1; 14.77 vs 103.53 &#xb1; 16.02 minutes, P &lt; .001). There was no difference between 2 groups in immediate surgical outcomes and postoperative complications. The yearly recurrence rate for GS-inserted MVD was lower at first (1.0%), second (1.2%), and third (1.2%) years after surgery, compared with its counterpart of Teflon group (3.7%, 2.9%, and 1.7% respectively). The first-year recurrence rate ( P = .031) and total recurrence rate in 3 years ( P = .013) was significantly lower in the GS-inserted group than Teflon group. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis demonstrated better outcomes in GS-inserted MVD groups ( P = .020).
CONCLUSION: The application of the GS insertion technique in MVD reduced first-year postoperative recurrence of TN, with similar complications rates compared with traditional MVD.

### PMID 39637291 (2025) — Vascular
TITLE: Intercostal bypass graft pseudoaneurysm repaired with percutaneous glue embolization utilizing CT needle guidance: A case report.
DOI: 10.1177/17085381241305177 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: ObjectivesPseudoaneurysm formation in connective tissue patients postoperatively can be a challenging and life-threatening problem to treat. Repair of an aorta to intercostal bypass graft pseudoaneurysm post open thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair by percutaneous glue embolization utilizing Dyna CT Needle Guidance technology is a safe, minimally invasive method with low morbidity and short post-procedural recovery.MethodsA 30-year-old male with suspected connective tissue disorder who developed a Type B aortic dissection complicated by limb threatening right lower extremity ischemia treated with left-to-right fem-fem bypass and RLE fasciotomies. His thoracic aortic dissection subsequently was repaired urgently for persistent chest pain and rapid aortic expansion by open thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair with aorta to intercostal bypass graft. Seven weeks postop patient presented with hemoptysis and was noted to have an enlarging T9 intercostal pseudoaneurysm requiring repair.Results and conclusionsPost discharge follow-up thoracic CTA performed showed complete resolution of the T9 intercostal pseudoaneurysm. Therefore, percutaneous NBCA glue embolization with iGuide technology is a viable alternative to open thoracic pseudoaneurysm repair and offers distinct advantages over other imaging modalities for localization.

### PMID 40530200 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Endoscopic Ultrasound-Guided Variceal Therapy for Gastric Variceal Rupture After Failed Endoscopic Injection Sclerotherapy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.84354 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) has become an essential tool in vascular interventions due to its imaging potential in the proximity of various vascular structures in the mediastinum and abdominal cavity. EUS-guided variceal therapy (EUS-VT) has emerged as a promising approach for treating gastric varices (GV). Although still underused, EUS-VT offers such advantages as precise targeting and real-time variceal puncture visualization, making it a valuable alternative when conventional therapies fail. We report the case of a 63-year-old man with GVs secondary to fatty liver cirrhosis, who experienced repeated variceal ruptures despite multiple prior interventions (e.g., balloon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration, percutaneous transhepatic obliteration, partial splenic embolization, and several endoscopic injection sclerotherapy (EIS) sessions). During his most recent variceal rupture episode, EUS-VT was performed. A 23-gauge sclerotherapy needle failed to reach the target varix under EUS guidance. However, successful puncture and obliteration could be achieved using a 22-gauge fine-needle aspiration needle and cyanoacrylate glue. Doppler imaging confirmed lipiodol distribution and the absence of blood flow, indicating successful embolization. No adverse events occurred or rebleeding was observed during the one-month follow-up. This case demonstrates the clinical utility of EUS-VT as a rescue therapy for gastric variceal bleeding in patients with anatomically complex lesions refractory to standard treatments. EUS-VT should be considered a viable option in selected cases when conventional EIS is unsuccessful due to anatomical limitations.

### PMID 41019662 (2025) — Open respiratory archives
TITLE: Foreign Body Granulomatous Reaction Mimicking Tumor Recurrence After Lung Cancer Surgery: A Case Series.
DOI: 10.1016/j.opresp.2025.100481 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Mechanical hemostatic agents, such as oxidized cellulose (Willocell&#xa9;), are frequently used in thoracic surgery. Although considered safe, they can induce granulomatous reactions that mimic tumor recurrence. In this retrospective study, we analyzed patients from the Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge (July 2024-March 2025) who underwent EBUS due to lymphadenopathies with increased SUV on PET-FDG following surgery for lung cancer. Nine patients, who had undergone anatomical lung resections (VATS or RATS), presented with suspicious lymphadenopathies ipsilateral to the surgical site. EBUS-TBNA revealed no malignancy but showed amorphous material compatible with a foreign body reaction attributable to Willocell&#xa9;. Only one patient was diagnosed with tumor recurrence. This case series underscores the importance of maintaining a broad differential diagnosis when evaluating potential causes of increased metabolic activity on PET/CT scans, as its specificity is limited. EBUS-TBNA proves to be a key tool for achieving an accurate diagnosis in these scenarios. Los agentes hemost&#xe1;ticos mec&#xe1;nicos como la celulosa oxidada (Willocell&#xa9;) se utilizan frecuentemente en cirug&#xed;a tor&#xe1;cica. Aunque son seguros, pueden provocar reacciones granulomatosas que simulan recidiva tumoral. En este estudio retrospectivo, analizamos pacientes del Hospital Universitario de Bellvitge (julio 2024-marzo 2025) que se sometieron a EBUS por linfadenopat&#xed;as con captaci&#xf3;n aumentada en PET-FDG tras cirug&#xed;a por neoplasia pulmonar. Nueve pacientes, operados mediante resecci&#xf3;n pulmonar anat&#xf3;mica (VATS o RATS), presentaron ganglios linf&#xe1;ticos sospechosos ipsilaterales al sitio quir&#xfa;rgico. El EBUS-TBNA no mostr&#xf3; malignidad, pero s&#xed; material amorfo compatible con reacci&#xf3;n a cuerpo extra&#xf1;o atribuible al Willocell&#xa9;. Solo un caso present&#xf3; finalmente recidiva tumoral. Esta serie de casos destaca la importancia de mantener un diagn&#xf3;stico diferencial amplio ante posibles causas de aumento de la actividad metab&#xf3;lica en la PET/TC siendo el EBUS-TBNA una herramienta clave para un diagn&#xf3;stico certero.

### PMID 41221069 (2025) — HCA healthcare journal of medicine
TITLE: Use of Topical Hemostatic Agents in a Gynecologic Patient With Coagulopathy.
DOI: 10.36518/2689-0216.2029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The use of topical hemostatic agents has become common during surgical interventions. There is a wide variety of substances available to augment clotting, ranging from physical agents to topical thrombin combinations. Application of these agents in gynecologic surgery in patients with existing coagulopathies has not been studied.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 62-year-old woman with an inferior vena cava filter and a history of multiple deep vein thromboses presented to the clinic with pelvic pain, stress urinary incontinence, and uterovaginal prolapse. She underwent a total vaginal hysterectomy, sacral colpopexy, tension-free vaginal tape sling, and cystourethroscopy. Warfarin was cross titrated to enoxaparin prior to surgery. Patient had a 10-week sized uterus, normal appearing adnexa, and postoperatively bleeding was identified at the vaginal cuff. Preoperative hemoglobin was 9.0, and postoperative hemoglobin was 8.0 with normal coagulation factors. Several hemostatic techniques were used intraoperatively including combined gelatin-thrombin and gelatin-based agents. The procedure was complicated by a cystotomy which was repaired intraoperatively. The patient had postoperative bleeding from the incision site within the first 2 hours of recovery requiring a revision procedure. Exploration laparotomy was performed identifying the source of hemorrhage as a vaginal cuff hematoma. Suture and additional gelatin-thrombin sealant was applied to the pedicles and thrombin-soaked packing was placed in the vagina. Total estimated blood loss was 800 mL. The patient was transfused 2 units of packed red blood cells, 1 unit of platelets, and 1 unit of fresh frozen plasma. The patient made an uneventful recovery, and routine follow-up was conducted with no apparent complications.
CONCLUSION: This case illustrates special considerations for intraoperative topical hemostatic agent use for gynecologic patients taking chemoprophylaxis for history of thrombosis and the value of the material composition for timely activity. Fibrin sealants have more rapid hemostasis than an oxidized regenerated dry matrix of cellulose. Because of the proximity of the reproductive organs to the bladder and urinary system, procedures complicated by cystotomy may result in mild leakage of sanguineous urine. This leakage can reduce the efficacy of combined gelatin-thrombin spray by disrupting its chemical components, compared with other hemostatic agents.

### PMID 40880675 (2025) — Case reports in gastroenterology
TITLE: Repeated Delayed Bleeding following Treatment for a Pancreatic Pseudocyst during Lumen-Apposing Metal Stent Placement: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1159/000544823 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The lumen-apposing metal stent (LAMS) is a novel prosthesis for fistula formation between the gastrointestinal and cyst walls. Bleeding complications occur in 10% of cases mostly during LAMS placement. We present a case of recurrent bleeding following LAMS placement.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 47-year-old male was admitted to a local hospital for acute pancreatitis and subsequently referred for endoscopic drainage because of an enlarging pseudocyst near the tail of the pancreas. Treatment involved LAMS and endoscopic ultrasound-guided transmural drainage. Posttreatment computed tomography revealed cyst shrinkage; however, upper gastrointestinal bleeding was noted after discharge. Endoscopy identified bleeding within the fistula, which was controlled by spraying an absorbable local hemostatic agent into the cavity. After ensuring the absence of recurrent bleeding for approximately 1 month, the LAMS was removed under endoscopy. Following LAMS removal, arterial bleeding was observed within the cavity, prompting an emergency angiography. Angiography revealed bleeding from a pseudoaneurysm of the splenic artery, which was treated with coil embolization. No rebleeding occurred after the procedure.
CONCLUSION: Bleeding 1 week after placement or during removal is rare. However, following LAMS placement, there is a risk of bleeding until removal, with arterial bleeding often occurring at the time of removal. Therefore, it is necessary to establish a system that allows for prompt vascular embolization treatment.

### PMID 41597314 (2025) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: Ultrasound-Guided Femoral Hemostasis in Peripheral Angioplasty: Real-World Outcomes with Vascular Closure Devices Versus Manual Compression.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina62010028 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: Access-site complications (ASCs) remain clinically relevant after peripheral endovascular procedures, particularly with large femoral sheaths and complex anatomy. While randomized coronary trials show non-inferiority of vascular closure devices (VCDs) versus manual compression (MC), real-world data in peripheral interventions performed under systematic ultrasound-guided access are limited. Materials and Methods: This retrospective single-center cohort included consecutive peripheral arterial revascularizations (2010-2023) performed via common femoral access under real-time ultrasound guidance. Hemostasis was achieved using MC or VCDs, categorized as collagen plug-based, suture-mediated, or clip-based systems. The primary endpoint was 30-day ASCs, defined as hematoma requiring management, pseudoaneurysm, bleeding requiring transfusion, access-site thrombosis/occlusion, arteriovenous fistula, or infection. The secondary endpoint was VCD failure, defined as unsuccessful hemostasis requiring adjunctive measures. Multivariable logistic regression adjusted for prespecified anatomical and procedural covariates, including sheath size &gt; 6 Fr and puncture-site calcification. Results: Among 231 procedures, VCDs were used in 139 (60.2%) and MC in 92 (39.8%). ASC occurred in 28 cases (12.1%), with higher rates in the MC group compared with VCDs (18.5% vs. 9-14% across device types; p = 0.044). In adjusted analyses, MC (vs any VCD) (odds ratio [OR] 2.41, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.06-5.47; p = 0.035), sheath size &gt; 6 Fr, and puncture-site calcification were independently associated with ASCs. VCD failure occurred in 5 cases (3.6%) and was not observed with collagen plug-based devices. Conclusions: In this ultrasound-guided real-world peripheral cohort, VCD use was associated with lower 30-day ASC rates and low device failure rates compared with MC. Given the retrospective and non-randomized design, these findings should be considered hypothesis-generating and support individualized, imaging-guided strategies for femoral closure in peripheral interventions.

### PMID 40888777 (2025) — Journal of perianesthesia nursing : official journal of the American Society of PeriAnesthesia Nurses
TITLE: Comparison of the Teleflex Vasc&#xa0;Band Hemostat and the Terumo Radial (TR) Band&#xa0;Compression Device After Transradial Cardiac Catheterization: A Retrospective Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jopan.2025.02.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Transradial access has emerged as the preferred approach for cardiac catheterization. A comprehensive evaluation of the available hemostatic compression devices is necessary, as their use may impact clinical outcomes. This study aimed to compare the time to hemostasis and the rate of early local vascular complications in patients greater than or equal to 18&#xa0;years of age treated with either a Vasc Band hemostat or a Terumo Radial (TR) Band compression device after transradial cardiac catheterization.
DESIGN: Single-center, retrospective cohort study.
METHODS: The sample included 250 patients who underwent transradial cardiac catheterization from September 2022 to December 2022 at a 280-bed community hospital. Data were manually extracted from the electronic medical record system. The Mann-Whitney U test was used to assess the difference in time to hemostasis between groups. The &#x3c7;2 analyses was used to determine differences in rates of early local vascular complications between the groups.
FINDINGS: There were no statistical differences in baseline and procedural characteristics between the two groups. For patients who underwent a diagnostic left heart catheterization only, there was a significant difference in time (minutes) to hemostasis between the two devices: (Md&#xa0;=&#xa0;57, n&#xa0;=&#xa0;164), U&#xa0;=&#xa0;3517, z&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.940, P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.003. Time (minutes) to hemostasis was reduced with Vasc Band (Md&#xa0;=&#xa0;54.5, n&#xa0;=&#xa0;118) than TR Band (Md&#xa0;=&#xa0;68.5, n&#xa0;=&#xa0;46). No significant differences in time to hemostasis were found between the two devices among patients who underwent percutaneous coronary intervention: (Md&#xa0;=&#xa0;154.5, n&#xa0;=&#xa0;56), U&#xa0;=&#xa0;343, z&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.205, P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.838. There were no significant differences in bleeding, hematoma formation, or ecchymosis between the band types.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to compare outcomes of cardiac catheterization patients treated with the Vasc Band compared with the TR Band. Future prospective studies should assess the clinical outcomes of the Vasc Band in comparison with other radial artery compression devices.

### PMID 40765135 (2025) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: A Novel Non-Surgical Treatment for Iatrogenic Radial Artery Pseudoaneurysm: A Case Series.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.70081 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Iatrogenic radial artery pseudoaneurysm (iRAP) is a rare but potentially devastating complication after transradial access. Spontaneous thrombosis rarely occurs in lesions&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;2&#x2009;cm in size, surgery is invasive, and USG-guided thrombin injection risks distal embolisation due to the short necks of most iRAP.
AIMS: We describe a non-surgical approach by Differential Radial Artery Isolation and NEedle Decompression (DRAINED) for treating iRAP. The neck of the iRAP was confirmed by Doppler ultrasound. Two pneumatic hemostatic compression bands (TR band, Terumo) were inflated proximal and disteal to the iRAP to occlude antegrade and retrograde radial flow respectively, mimicking surgical isolation of the iRAP segment. Ultrasound-guided needle aspiration of its content under aseptic technique was followed by an additional compression band placed directly over the iRAP to prevent reaccumulation. After 2&#x2009;h, all three bands were gradually deflated. Digital perfusion was continuously monitored by plethysmography on pulse oximetry.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Medical records of 6 patients (50% female, mean age 72.5) with iRAP treated by DRAINED from 2018 to 2024 were retrospectively reviewed. Patient demographics, procedural details, and ultrasound records were identified. All underwent percutaneous coronary intervention, and 83.3% had 7&#x2009;Fr radial sheath insertion. Fifty percent received double-antiplatelet post-procedure and 50% received anticoagulation. All patients experienced resolution of iRAP after DRAINED, and there were no complications, such as radial artery thrombosis or distal embolisation.
CONCLUSION: DRAINED demonstrated safety and efficacy in our cohort of patients suffering iRAP after transradial access.

### PMID 40331558 (2025) — Technology and health care : official journal of the European Society for Engineering and Medicine
TITLE: Observation on the effect of roller-assisted balloon compression hemostat after percutaneous coronary intervention via radial artery.
DOI: 10.1177/09287329241296774 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BackgroundCardiovascular diseases are a global health concern, with coronary artery disease being particularly prevalent. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) via the radial artery approach (TRA) is now preferred due to its advantages. However, post-TRA hemostasis can lead to complications like hand swelling and pain.ObjectiveTo investigate the effect of roller support assisted balloon compression radial artery hemostasis device in patients undergoing percutaneous radial coronary intervention.MethodsA total of 122 patients undergoing percutaneous radial coronary intervention in our hospital from March 2022 to September 2022 were randomly divided into a control group and an observation group, 61 cases in each one. The observation group was treated with roller support assisted balloon compression type radial artery hemostasis device for compression hemostasis, and the control group was treated with balloon compression type radial artery hemostasis device (TR-Band). The complications such as bleeding at the puncture site, hematoma, swelling of the hand on the operation side, and pain in the operation limb as well as the patient satisfaction were observed in the patients of the two groups.ResultsThere were 10 cases of bleeding in the control group and 7 cases in the observation group, the bleeding mostly happens about 1&#x2005;h after surgery. As for the pain score between the two groups of the immediately, 1 h, 2 h, and remove time were (3.48&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.83), (4.82&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.77), (3.84&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.52), (1.48&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.94) respectively, where the values in the observation group were (2.10&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.48), (3.00&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.20), (3.07&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.67), (0.77&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.78). There were significant differences in swelling, pain and satisfaction of the hand on the operation side between the two groups (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05).ConclusionThe modified application of roller support assisted radial artery hemostat helps to reduce the incidence of postoperative non-vascular complications in patients and improve patient satisfaction, with good social effect.

### PMID 40211422 (2025) — Journal of health, population, and nutrition
TITLE: Effectiveness of visual management health education in preventing venous thromboembolism in patients with complete occlusion of chronic coronary arteries.
DOI: 10.1186/s41043-025-00825-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Exploring the effectiveness of visually managed health education in reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism in patients with complete occlusion of chronic coronary arteries.
METHODS: In this study, 100 patients with chronic total occlusion of coronary arteries and undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in cardiovascular medicine were included and divided into a test group and a control group with 50 patients in each group. Patients in the test group received health education based on visualization management, while patients in the control group received conventional health education. Relevant data were collected for further comparison. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS and t-test and &#x3c7;2 test were used to analyze the differences.
RESULTS: After intervention, there were higher levels of antithrombin III (AT3) and activated partial prothrombin time (APTT), while lower levels of D-dimer (D-D), fibrinogen degradation product (FDP), fibrinogen (FBG), and thrombin time (TT) in the test group than those before intervention. The control group showed decreased AT3 and APTT, while increased D-D, FDP,TT and FBG levels (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). After intervention, the levels of AT3 and APTT in the test group were higher than those in the control group, while the levels of D-D, FDP, FBG, and TT were lower than those in the latter control group (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Furthermore, both groups of patients showed a decrease in Padua scores and an increase in prevention cognition scores after intervention (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). After intervention, the Padua score of the test group was lower than that of the control group (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). The test group had higher compliance score (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) and satisfaction (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001).
CONCLUSION: Visual management health education can effectively improve the effect of health education, increase patients' awareness, compliance and satisfaction with VTE prevention, reduce the risk of lower limb VTE, and improve the coagulation function of CTO patients during PCI.

### PMID 40095150 (2025) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: PseuSeal technique: endovascular repair of Iatrogenic pseudoaneurysm using ExoSeal.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-025-00536-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The ExoSeal&#xae; (Cordis, Florida, USA) is a bioabsorbable vascular closure device that facilitates hemostasis by deploying a polyglycolic acid (PGA) plug. This report presents the "PseuSeal technique," a novel approach to seal pseudoaneurysm using ExoSeal in an off-label manner.
METHODS: The PseuSeal technique includes the PseuSeal Snare and PseuSeal Rendezvous, both performed via a contralateral crossover approach. The choice of approach depends on whether a 4-Fr catheter can be advanced into the pseudoaneurysm cavity. If feasible, the PseuSeal Snare is selected; otherwise, the PseuSeal Rendezvous is employed. In the PseuSeal Snare, a snare is deployed from a 4-Fr catheter within the pseudoaneurysm cavity. An 18-gauge needle is then used to retrogradely puncture the snare loop. A 0.035-inch guidewire is passed through the needle lumen, captured by the snare, and externalized. In the PseuSeal Rendezvous, an 18-gauge needle retrogradely punctures the guidewire within the cavity, and the guidewire is advanced into the needle lumen for externalization. After externalizing the guidewire in both approaches, an ExoSeal-specific sheath is inserted over the guidewire through the pseudoaneurysm neck into the main vessel. A balloon is advanced from the crossover sheath into the main trunk to cover the pseudoaneurysm ostium. The ExoSeal system is then inserted through the second sheath. As the ExoSeal's indicator wire is withdrawn, the balloon is inflated to stabilize the indicator wire, ensuring precise deployment of the PGA plug at the pseudoaneurysm neck. Balloon inflation is maintained for 5 minutes, with an additional 5 minutes if necessary. Hemostasis is confirmed by angiography.
RESULTS: The PseuSeal technique was successfully applied in&#xa0;five common femoral artery&#x3000;pseudoaneurysms, all of which had failed ultrasound-guided compression. Each case was treated using a&#xa0;6-Fr ExoSeal device, with no complications or recurrences observed during follow-up. Case 1 involved an 87-year-old female who developed a pseudoaneurysm following a peripheral intervention. The PseuSeal Snare achieved hemostasis in 32 minutes. Case 2 involved a 60-year-old male presenting with a pseudoaneurysm after a coronary intervention. The PseuSeal Rendezvous achieved hemostasis in 50 minutes.
CONCLUSION: The PseuSeal technique provides an effective alternative for pseudoaneurysm closure.

### PMID 40013802 (2025) — Cardiology in review
TITLE: Comparative Efficacy of Mechanical Versus Manual Compression Techniques on Radial Artery Hemostasis Following Transradial Coronary Angiography: A Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000866 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Mechanical compression for hemostasis posttransradial coronary angiography (CAG) or intervention is hypothesized to be more effective than manual compression owing to a more stable and continuous pressure. However, the current evidence comparing these 2 compression techniques is limited. A comprehensive search of the 3 major electronic databases-PubMed, Google Scholar, and Cochrane Library-was performed from inception to October 24, 2024, to identify relevant studies. Standardized mean difference and risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were pooled using the Mantel-Haenszel random effects model to calculate effect estimates. Statistical significance was set at P &lt; 0.05. Four studies with 1235 patients undergoing transradial CAG were included [mechanical (n = 450) and manual (n = 785)]. On pooled analysis, the mechanical compression method demonstrated a significantly longer mean time to achieve hemostasis (standardized mean difference: 3.21; 95% CI: 1.71, 4.71; P &lt; 0.0001) than the manual compression method. The risks of radial artery occlusion (RR: 1.05; 95% CI: 0.50, 2.22; P = 0.89), hematoma formation (RR: 1.86; 95% CI: 0.28, 12.40; P = 0.52), and bleeding during compression (RR: 0.23; 95% CI: 0.00, 24.81; P = 0.54) were comparable. Both types of hemostatic compression, manual and mechanical, are equally effective though mechanical compression takes significantly longer to achieve hemostasis. Further prospective randomized studies are needed to corroborate these findings.

### PMID 39571912 (2025) — International journal of cardiology
TITLE: A randomised control trial to compare conventional and haemostatic dressings in radial arterial access: Assessment of Radial Artery Complications Whilst Achieving Rapid Haemostasis (ARCH Trial).
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2024.132740 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: This trial aimed to compare conventional and haemostatic dressings in achieving rapid and effective radial artery haemostasis following coronary procedures.
BACKGROUND: In small studies, using a haemostatic dressing is associated with expedited haemostasis and a reduced duration of external radial compression.
METHODS: Patients were randomised to one of three compression strategies: 120-min (min) with conventional dressing (C2) vs 60-min with conventional dressing (C1) vs 60-min with haemostatic dressing (H1). The primary outcome was failure to achieve haemostasis at the planned time. The secondary outcomes included: total time-to-final haemostasis (TTH); subsequent radial artery occlusion (RAO), puncture-related haematoma and vascular injury requiring repair; incidence of delayed discharge due to prolongation of radial access site care.
RESULTS: A total of 2114 patients were randomised. At the planned time, 62&#xa0;% of patients in C1 and 50&#xa0;% in C2 failed to achieve haemostasis vs 5.2&#xa0;% in H1 (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001 for H1 vs C2 or C1). Median (IQR) TTH was 72 mins [68-81&#xa0;min] in H1, 136 mins [80-189] in C1, and 166&#xa0;min [133-213] in C2 (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001 for H1 vs C2 or C1). No significant differences were seen in access-site complications, with low rates of haematomas &gt;5&#xa0;cm and RAO. Overall, 16.2&#xa0;% of patients in C2 and 15.8&#xa0;% in C1 experienced delayed discharge exclusively due to prolonged radial care vs 2.0&#xa0;% in H1 (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001 for H1 vs C2 or C1).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of the haemostatic dressing allowed for more rapid, consistent and safe haemostasis, reducing nursing care requirements and incidence of delayed discharge.

### PMID 39543925 (2025) — The journal of vascular access
TITLE: Radial artery haemostasis after coronary angiography: A scoping review.
DOI: 10.1177/11297298241290567 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Scoping Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Nursing care in interventional cardiology is vital during perioperative stages, especially with coronary angiography. Radial artery access is now preferred, requiring proper haemostasis to prevent complications. Standardised protocols are needed for effective and economical haemostasis methods. This review aims to map the literature on haemostasis of the radial artery after coronary angiography, an area not previously reviewed.
METHODS: Following the Joanna Briggs Institute methodology for scoping reviews, two reviewers independently selected studies based on eligibility criteria. Data were extracted using a specially developed tool, with disagreements resolved through discussion or a third reviewer. Data synthesis is presented in tabular form and narrative summary. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis extension for scoping reviews guidelines were followed. Searches were conducted in PubMed, CINAHL Complete, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Scopus, Opengrey, DART-Europe e-theses portal and six key interventional cardiology reference sites.
RESULTS: From 43 manuscripts, four haemostasis methods for the radial artery after coronary angiography were identified: manual compression (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5), compression bandages (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;16), compression devices (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;30) and haemostatic patches (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;7). Nearly 70% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;30) of references focused on compression devices. Nine techniques were used to evaluate haemostasis methods, with visual inspection (34 references) and Doppler ultrasound (17 references) being the most common. Only nine haemostasis methods lacked an associated protocol.
CONCLUSION: This scoping review identifies four primary haemostasis methods post coronary angiography: manual compression, compression bandages, compression devices and haemostatic patches, with compression devices being the most frequently discussed. The variability in evaluation techniques, predominantly visual inspection and ultrasound, underscores the need for standardised guidelines. The absence of protocols for some methods further highlights the necessity for uniform standards to improve consistency and reliability in clinical practice. Standardising these methods and protocols is essential to enhance patient outcomes and advance the field.

### PMID 38796319 (2025) — Cardiovascular revascularization medicine : including molecular interventions
TITLE: Manual compression hemostasis using a hemostatic pad for the distal radial artery approach.
DOI: 10.1016/j.carrev.2024.05.028 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The method of hemostasis for the distal radial approach has not been standardized, although this approach has become increasingly popular due to its advantages. In this study, we investigated the feasibility of manual compression hemostasis using a calcium alginate pad after coronary angiography via the distal radial approach.
METHODS: We retrospectively collected 150 consecutive patients (mean age, 74.9&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;8.0&#xa0;years; male, 75&#xa0;%) who underwent coronary angiography via the distal radial artery with a predominantly 4 Fr sheath from April 2021 to December 2022 and were hemostatic according to the following methods. After sheath removal, hemostasis was achieved by manual compression for 10&#xa0;min using a hemostatic pad containing calcium alginate. When hemostasis was confirmed, a small log-shaped gauze was placed over the pad and fixed using a self-adhesive elastic bandage for 2&#xa0;h. All procedures were performed by four fellows just beginning the distal radial approach.
RESULTS: The mean compression time was 12.4&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;4.8&#xa0;min, and hemostasis was successfully achieved in all patients, allowing the release of the elastic bandage after 2&#xa0;h, with only one patient oozing the next morning. There were no major complications, while one patient had a &gt;10&#xa0;cm hematoma. Compared to that of the first 15 patients, for each fellow, the compression time of the subsequent patients was significantly shorter (14.5&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;6.7 vs 11.1&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;2.1&#xa0;min, p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Manual compression hemostasis using calcium alginate pads for the distal radial artery approach appears feasible with a simple learning.

### PMID 41440869 (2025) — Journal of cardiovascular development and disease
TITLE: Risk Factors and Preventing Strategies of Pocket Hematoma After Cardiac Implantable Electronic Device Implantation: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.3390/jcdd12120490 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Pocket hematoma is a common complication following cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED) implantation, traditionally perceived as a manageable local issue. Accumulating evidence, however, indicates that clinically significant pocket hematoma (CSH) is strongly associated with increased infection rates, elevated healthcare costs, and heightened mortality. Key risk factors include advanced age, low body mass index (BMI), chronic kidney disease, complex procedures (device upgrades/replacements) and periprocedural antithrombotic management, particularly uninterrupted dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) and heparin/low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) bridging strategies, which significantly elevate bleeding risk compared to continued vitamin K antagonist (VKA) therapy or direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) protocols. Novel compression devices and topical hemostatic agents show promise for prevention, while standardized definitions and risk stratification tools are urgently needed. This review synthesizes current evidence on multifactorial pathogenesis, adverse outcomes, and evolving preventive strategies for pocket hematoma, emphasizing its underappreciated clinical significance and the critical need for optimized periprocedural management in high-risk patients.

### PMID 39480369 (2025) — Gastrointestinal endoscopy
TITLE: Endoscopic devices and techniques for the management of gastric varices (with videos).
DOI: 10.1016/j.gie.2024.06.038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Video-Audio Media, Review, Practice Guideline
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Gastric variceal bleeding occurs less commonly than bleeding from esophageal varices (EVs), although it is associated with higher morbidity and mortality. Bleeding from gastroesophageal varices type 1 (GOV1) is treated like EVs. In contrast, other forms of gastric variceal bleeding, including gastroesophageal varices type 2 (GOV2) and isolated gastric varices types 1 (IGV1) and 2 (IGV2), are treated with varying endoscopic approaches. Nonendoscopic methods include transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) or balloon-occluded retrograde transvenous obliteration (BRTO). This technology report focuses on endoscopic management of gastric varices (GVs).
METHODS: The MEDLINE database was searched through August 2022 for relevant articles by using key words such as gastric varices, glue, cyanoacrylate, thrombin, sclerosing agents, band ligation, topical hemostatic spray, coils, EUS, TIPS, and BRTO. The article was drafted, reviewed, and edited by the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ASGE) Technology Committee and approved by the Governing Board of the ASGE.
RESULTS: Endoscopic injection with cyanoacrylate (CYA) glue has been the primary endoscopic method to treat GVs. EUS-guided angiotherapy with CYA glue and coil embolization has emerged as an alternative method enabling improved detection of GVs with a high technical success for targeting and obliterating GVs. Combining CYA glue with coil therapy allows the coil to act as a scaffold for the glue, reducing the risk of glue embolization and improving outcomes. Alternative injectates or topical treatments have been described but remain poorly studied.
CONCLUSIONS: The mainstay paradigm for the endoscopic management of gastric variceal bleeding is the injection of CYA glue. The published success of EUS-guided angiotherapy using CYA glue with or without embolization coils has increased our treatment armamentarium.

### PMID 38393421 (2024) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: Successful sutureless repair of multiple left ventricular free wall ruptures due to Takotsubo cardiomyopathy: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s40792-024-01848-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (TCM) is a temporary and reversible systolic abnormality of the left ventricular apical area resembling a myocardial infarction. Cardiac rupture due to TCM is a rare but fatal complication. Without cardiac surgery, 94% of patients with left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) due to TCM die. Furthermore, successful surgical cases are rare. We report herein the successful treatment of multiple LVFWRs due to TCM using a sutureless repair.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 80-year-old man quarreled with his daughter and had a sudden onset of chest pain. He was transferred to our hospital in shock. Electrocardiography showed ST elevation and contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a bloody pericardial effusion. Emergent coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis. Cardiac arrest ensued because of cardiac tamponade. Emergent surgery was undertaken and three oozing lacerations on the lateral and inferior walls were noted. A sutureless repair was performed using TachoSil&#xae; patches. We also applied Surgicel Nu-Knit&#xae; absorbable hemostat with Hydrofit&#xae; where TachoSil&#xae; failed to completely adhere because of hematoma formation and achieved complete hemostasis. We diagnosed the ruptures due to TCM according to the Mayo criteria. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 71.
CONCLUSIONS: A sutureless repair using TachoSil&#xae; patches and Surgicel&#xae; with Hydrofit&#xae; is a minimally invasive and effective method for the treatment of multiple LVFWRs due to TCM.

### PMID 39036193 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: A Case of Anaphylactic Shock Suspected to Be Caused by Bovine Serum Albumin Tissue Adhesive (BioGlue) During Thoracoabdominal Aortic Replacement.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.62678 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bovine serum albumin (BSA) tissue adhesive (BioGlue, Cryolife Inc., Kennesaw, GA, USA) is often used as a hemostatic adjunct in adult patients undergoing open surgical repair of large vessels, such as the aorta, femoral, and carotid arteries. We present a case of intraoperative anaphylaxis attributed to the use of BioGlue during thoracoabdominal aortic replacement. The patient suddenly developed hypotension, hypoxemia, and airway edema after the BioGlue application. BioGlue is composed of purified BSA and glutaraldehyde. Despite the BSA component being an allergen that can cause anaphylaxis in some patients, reported occurrences of anaphylaxis are extremely rare. We need to recognize BSA tissue adhesive as a potential allergen. In the event of an intraoperative shock, prompt recognition and investigation of the underlying cause are necessary.

### PMID 37704216 (2024) — Macromolecular rapid communications
TITLE: A Mesostructure Multivariant-Assembly Reinforced Ultratough Biomimicking Superglue.
DOI: 10.1002/marc.202300484 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The imitation of mussels and oysters to create high-performance adhesives is a cutting-edge field. The introduction of inorganic fillers is shown to significantly alter the adhesive's properties, yet the potential of mesoporous materials as fillers in adhesives is overlooked. In this study, the first report on the utilization of mesoporous materials in a biomimetic adhesive system is presented. Incorporating mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSN) profoundly enhances the adhesion of pyrogallol (PG)-polyethylene imine (PEI) adhesive. As the MSN concentration increases, the adhesion strength to glass substrates undergoes an impressive fivefold improvement, reaching an outstanding 2.5 mPa. The adhesive forms an exceptionally strong bond, to the extent that the glass substrate fractures before joint failure. The comprehensive tests involving various polyphenols, polymers, and fillers reveal an intriguing phenomenon-the molecular structure of polyphenols significantly influences adhesive strength. Steric hindrance emerges as a crucial factor, regulating the balance between &#x3c0;-cation and charge interactions, which significantly impacts the multicomponent assembly of polyphenol-PEI-MSN and, consequently, adhesive strength. This groundbreaking research opens new avenues for the development of novel biomimetic materials.

### PMID 39554876 (2024) — NMC case report journal
TITLE: Chronic Subdural Hematoma in the Posterior Fossa Associated with Hearing Impairment during Warfarin Therapy, Improved by Middle Meningeal Artery Embolization: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.2176/jns-nmc.2024-0138 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chronic subdural hematoma (CSDH) in posterior fossa is rare, and its pathogenesis and treatment remain unclear. In this study, we report a case of a patient with CSDH in the posterior fossa who was taking warfarin and underwent middle meningeal artery (MMA) embolization successfully. A 59-year-old man taking warfarin for a mechanical aortic valve presented with a complaint of hearing impairment. He then developed headaches and was referred to our hospital after the previous physician identified CSDH above and below the left tentorium cerebelli on computed tomography (CT). We conducted MMA embolization with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate while continuing anticoagulation therapy. Right after the day of the surgery, symptoms of hearing impairment and right hemiplegia immediately improved. He was discharged after 10 days of hospitalization and was able to walk independently. His symptoms disappeared 20 days after surgery. There was no recurrence 100 days after surgery. In this study, we experienced a case of a CSDH in the posterior fossa that was clinically improved by MMA embolization. MMA embolization is a useful option for nonspecific CSDH without interruption of warfarin therapy.

### PMID 39387042 (2024) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Embolization of a type 2 endoleak using a micropuncture introducer set and a triple-coaxial system through the deep iliac circumflex artery via the ipsilateral femoral artery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2024.08.134 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 83-year-old man underwent embolization for a type 2 endoleak following endovascular aortic repair for an abdominal aortic aneurysm. The type 2 endoleak originated from the left iliac circumflex artery, which was located very close to the puncture site in the left femoral artery. This proximity made the embolization procedure challenging; however, by employing a combination of a micropuncture introducer set and a triple-coaxial system, embolization with N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate was successfully achieved.

### PMID 39382336 (2024) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: Management of Giant Type II Arteriovenous Malformation of the Neck With Heart Failure in a Pediatric Patient With Coil and NLE Embolization: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1177/15266028241283313 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Although arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are typically benign lesions, massive ones can lead to severe complications, including heart failure. Notably, there is no standardized treatment for AVMs. Moreover, management of AVMs can be challenging when these lesions involve vital organ systems, such as the head and neck. In this report, we describe embolization of a massive cervical AVM in a pediatric patient with heart failure.
CASE REPORT: A 10-year-old boy presented with severe heart failure secondary to a massive AVM in the neck (right side). Despite 3 unsuccessful arterial embolization procedures, venous embolization of the dominant outflow vein using a coil and n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate, lipiodol, and ethanol proved effective, and symptoms, cerebral natriuretic peptide level (568-29 pg/mL), and echocardiography were significantly improved. Although residual AVM persisted in the right upper extremity for 6 months after surgery, his cardiac function remained preserved, and his activities of daily living have improved.
CONCLUSION: Venous embolization is a valuable treatment modality for type II AVMs with a dominant outflow vein. However, considering the patient burden associated with large AVMs, multiple therapeutic interventions at appropriate intervals and long-term follow-up are important.
CLINICAL IMPACT: We present a pediatric patient with a type II massive arteriovenous malformation (AVM) in the neck and severe heart failure. Despite undergoing 3 arterial embolization procedures, his condition remained unchanged. However, venous embolization of the dominant outflow vein resulted in a significant improvement in symptoms. This case emphasizes the importance of considering multiple and appropriately timed therapeutic interventions, particularly for massive AVMs, to optimize patient outcomes while minimizing treatment burden.

### PMID 39248677 (2024) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Innovative Endovascular Management of Giant Superficial Temporal Artery Pseudoaneurysm Presented With Periorbital Ulcerative Mass.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000010594 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Superficial temporal artery (STA) pseudoaneurysms, characterized by arterial wall defects leading to blood leakage into perivascular tissues, present as pulsatile edematous masses, often originating from trauma or iatrogenic causes. Although rare (&lt;1% of vascular lesions), anticoagulation agent use may contribute to their increasing incidence.
METHODS: Traditional surgical ligation and resection have been standard, but the advent of endovascular techniques offers minimally invasive alternatives that mitigate surgical risks, especially in patients with multiple medical comorbidities. This case report details the successful endovascular management of an STA pseudoaneurysm using n-butyl cyanoacrylate (n-BCA) glue embolization.
RESULTS: A 93-year-old female with renal failure, cardiac history, and anticoagulant therapy presented with large periorbital ecchymosis and edema after a fall. Computed tomography revealed a periorbital mass corresponding to her symptoms, and a repeat computed tomography conducted 2 months later indicated mass growth. Doppler ultrasonography suggested a partially thrombosed pseudoaneurysm from the right STA. Considering the patient's age and medical conditions, endovascular embolization using n-BCA glue was chosen over surgical ligation. The patient was discharged uneventfully, and follow-up confirmed spontaneous resolution.
CONCLUSION: This case demonstrates the evolving role of endovascular techniques, particularly in cases unsuitable for surgery. Liquid embolic agents like n-BCA offer precise occlusion capabilities, solidifying their potential as a standalone treatment option for STA pseudoaneurysms.

### PMID 39135676 (2024) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Successful embolization of a primary bronchial artery racemose hemangioma by the ingenious use of a microballoon catheter.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2024.06.093 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Primary racemose hemangioma of the bronchial artery (RHBA) is a rare congenital condition characterized by enlarged and convoluted bronchial arteries, often forming fistulas between the pulmonary artery or vein. Herein, we report a case of balloon-assisted embolization using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) performed for a primary RHBA in an asymptomatic 57-year-old woman. There were 2 tortuous and dilated branches of the right bronchial artery (RBA) (arising from the left subclavian artery and the descending thoracic aorta) which merged in the right pulmonary hilar region, forming multiple aneurysms that short-circuited the right pulmonary artery. Embolization was performed via the RBA arising from the subclavian artery using a triaxial system (a 5-Fr guiding catheter, a 2.7-Fr microballoon catheter, and a 1.9-Fr microcatheter). The guiding catheter was inserted into the peripheral side of the RBA using the microballoon catheter as an anchor; the balloon was slightly inflated and advanced further into the peripheral side using blood flow. The microcatheter was inserted as close to the aneurysms as possible and embolization was done using an NBCA-iodized oil mixture under blood flow control by the microballoon catheter. Bronchial artery embolization is the treatment of choice for primary RHBA because of the risk of rupture, and balloon-assisted techniques can help guide the catheter distally while also controlling blood flow.

### PMID 39094848 (2024) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Initial Outcomes of Embolization for Type II Endoleak: Comparison of n-Butyl Cyanoacrylate-Ethiodized Oil Mixture with n-Butyl Cyanoacrylate-Ethiodized Oil-Ethanol Mixture.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2024.07.023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare the safety and effectiveness of n-butyl cyanoacrylate (nBCA)-ethiodized oil (NE) mixture and nBCA-ethiodized oil-ethanol (NEE) mixture embolization for Type II endoleak (T2EL) after endovascular aortic repair.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study included 32 patients with 49 procedures who underwent T2EL embolization between January 2008 and June 2022. Cases with no follow-up after embolization, technical failure, treatment with coil only, Type I endoleak at the embolization, and re-embolization were excluded. The resultant final cohort included 24 patients (14 men and 10 women; mean age, 83.3 years [interquartile range, 77-89 years]) who underwent initial T2EL embolization, with 15 patients in the NE group and 9 patients in the NEE group. The 2 groups were compared in terms of adverse events (AEs), freedom from sac enlargement, and freedom from reintervention.
RESULTS: The follow-up period after embolization for T2EL was 960 days (SD &#xb1; 1,007) in the NE group and 484 days (SD &#xb1; 192) in the NEE group, without significant differences. No AEs above moderate were observed in either group. The rate of freedom from sac enlargement at 1 year was 65.0% in the NE group and 87.5% in the NEE group (P&#xa0;= .03). The rate of freedom from reintervention at 1 year was 69.2% in the NE group and 100.0% in the NEE group (P&#xa0;= .02).
CONCLUSIONS: The NEE group had significantly higher rates of freedom from sac enlargement and reintervention at 1 year compared with the NE group. These results suggest that T2EL embolization with NEE may be more effective than that with NE.

### PMID 39091545 (2024) — AME case reports
TITLE: Infected stent graft and severe aortitis after transcaval glue embolization of type II endoleak: a case report.
DOI: 10.21037/acr-23-148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Type II endoleaks are common and embolization is often performed if treatment is necessary. Although transarterial embolization is common, other methods including trans-caval embolization are also utilized. Complications can occur and we report a case of infection that was challenging to diagnose and treat. There is no data regarding the risk of aortic stent graft infection after trans-caval embolization with n-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate (n-BCA) glue of a type II endoleak.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We report a rare case of infected, Gore Excluder infrarenal stent graft after transcaval embolization with coil and n-BCA glue to treat a type II endoleak in a 71-year-old male. The endoleak caused a rapid sac enlargement. The stent graft was placed 5 years earlier electively. Soon after the endoleak embolization, the patient experienced abdominal pain and malaise. There was an intense inflammatory reaction involving the aneurysm wall and the adjacent bowel mesentery. Our differential included normal inflammation after embolization vs. infection and this was difficult to distinguish. The infection was confirmed by positron emission tomography scan and tissue biopsy. The patient was deemed high-risk for surgery because of his extensive cardiac history, status post coronary bypass and tissue mitral valve replacement, congestive heart failure with residual left ventricular ejection fraction of 36%. He was optimized by correcting fluid status, administration of intravenous antibiotic, and nutrition consultation with dietary supplementation before surgery over the course of 2 weeks. The graft was explanted through a transabdominal approach, and the aorta was reconstructed with cryopreserved allograft. Interestingly, the small and large intestine with their mesentery were found to be plastered to the aneurysm sac. The post-operative course was unremarkable except for a transient acute kidney injury that resolved within 1 week. Follow-up computed tomography scan at 6 months showed widely patent bypass.
CONCLUSIONS: Glue embolization induces inflammation promoting thrombus formation inside the aneurysm sac. With a transcaval approach to the sac, there is the risk of extravasation of glue outside the sac as well as contamination of the graft with instrumentation. Differentiating between inflammation and infection can be difficult, and tissue biopsy provided the most conclusive diagnosis. Risk minimization considerations include, pre-operative optimization, a transabdominal approach, ureteral stenting, and tissue buttressing of anastomosis.

### PMID 38904232 (2024) — The Tokai journal of experimental and clinical medicine
TITLE: Efficacy of Preemptive Embolization of Sac Branches During Endovascular Aneurysm Repair Using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: A type 2 endoleak (T2EL) is the most frequently occurring endoleak type after endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR). Residual T2ELs may cause aneurysm rupture; however, the management of a T2EL remains controversial. This study evaluated sac branch preemptive embolization using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate, aiming to prevent T2ELs and sac shrinkage.
METHODS: Twelve consecutive patients underwent elective preemptive embolization during EVAR at our hospital between August 2018 to March 2019. Their demographic information, operative details, and sac diameters were examined at 6 months after EVAR.
RESULTS: No procedural complications were observed. There were no in-hospital deaths among the 12 patients. Sac shrinkage was observed in this cohort (53.8-52.1 mm, p = 0.01). A total of 33 lumbar arteries were occluded with this procedure, and 2 patients had residual T2ELs at 6 months.
CONCLUSIONS: A T2EL in preemptive sac branch embolization during EVAR has advantages in terms of safety and reduction. Although no clear evidence is available for the management of T2ELs, this study proposes a new standard to prevent it and improve the long-term outcomes after EVAR. However, embolization remains imperfect and further research is necessary.

### PMID 38873388 (2024) — Journal of the Korean Society of Radiology
TITLE: [Endovascular Treatment of Aortic Dissection due to Suture Line Dehiscence after Aortic Graft Replacement for Type A Aortic Dissection: A Report of Two Cases].
DOI: 10.3348/jksr.2023.0142 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Aortic anastomotic leak is an uncommon complication after ascending aortic replacement for acute aortic dissection. Redo-surgery is the traditional standard treatment despite high mortality and morbidity. Recently, endovascular treatment has been attempted as an alternative approach in a few case reports. Here, we present two cases of aortic anastomotic leak due to suture line dehiscence after aortic graft replacement for type A aortic dissection, which were successfully treated by coil with subsequent N-butyl cyanoacrylate embolization and an Amplatzer&#x2122; vascular plug. &#xb300;&#xb3d9;&#xb9e5; &#xbb38;&#xd569;&#xbd80; &#xb204;&#xcd9c;&#xc740; &#xae09;&#xc131; &#xb300;&#xb3d9;&#xb9e5; &#xbc15;&#xb9ac;&#xc758; &#xce58;&#xb8cc;&#xc778; &#xc0c1;&#xd589; &#xb300;&#xb3d9;&#xb9e5; &#xce58;&#xd658;&#xc220; &#xd6c4; &#xbc1c;&#xc0dd;&#xd560; &#xc218; &#xc788;&#xb294; &#xd754;&#xd558;&#xc9c0; &#xc54a;&#xc740; &#xd569;&#xbcd1;&#xc99d;&#xc774;&#xb2e4;. &#xb300;&#xb3d9;&#xb9e5; &#xbb38;&#xd569;&#xbd80; &#xb204;&#xcd9c;&#xc758; &#xce58;&#xb8cc;&#xb85c;&#xb294; &#xc7ac;&#xc218;&#xc220;&#xc774; &#xc804;&#xd1b5;&#xc801;&#xc778; &#xce58;&#xb8cc; &#xbc29;&#xbc95;&#xc73c;&#xb85c; &#xcd94;&#xcc9c;&#xb418;&#xb098; &#xb192;&#xc740; &#xc0ac;&#xb9dd;&#xb960;&#xacfc; &#xc774;&#xd658;&#xc728;&#xc744; &#xbcf4;&#xc778;&#xb2e4;. &#xcd5c;&#xadfc;&#xc5d0;&#xb294; &#xba87; &#xac74;&#xc758; &#xc99d;&#xb840; &#xbcf4;&#xace0;&#xc5d0;&#xc11c; &#xc911;&#xc7ac; &#xc2dc;&#xc220;&#xc774; &#xb300;&#xc548;&#xc801;&#xc778; &#xc811;&#xadfc;&#xbc29;&#xc2dd;&#xc73c;&#xb85c; &#xc2dc;&#xb3c4;&#xb418;&#xace0; &#xc788;&#xb2e4;. &#xc774;&#xc5d0; &#xc800;&#xc790;&#xb4e4;&#xc740; A&#xd615; &#xb300;&#xb3d9;&#xb9e5;&#xbc15;&#xb9ac;&#xc758; &#xce58;&#xb8cc;&#xc778; &#xb300;&#xb3d9;&#xb9e5; &#xc774;&#xc2dd;&#xd3b8;&#xce58;&#xd658;&#xc220; &#xd6c4; &#xbd09;&#xd569;&#xc120; &#xc5f4;&#xac1c;&#xc5d0; &#xc758;&#xd55c; &#xb300;&#xb3d9;&#xb9e5; &#xbb38;&#xd569;&#xbd80; &#xb204;&#xcd9c;&#xc744; &#xcf54;&#xc77c;&#xacfc; N-butyl cyanoacrylate&#xb85c; &#xc0c9;&#xc804;&#xc220;&#xc744; &#xc2dc;&#xd589;&#xd55c; &#xc99d;&#xb840;&#xc640; &#xd608;&#xad00;&#xb9c8;&#xac1c;&#xb85c; &#xc131;&#xacf5;&#xc801;&#xc73c;&#xb85c; &#xce58;&#xb8cc;&#xd55c; &#xc99d;&#xb840;&#xb97c; &#xbcf4;&#xace0;&#xd558;&#xace0;&#xc790; &#xd55c;&#xb2e4;.

### PMID 38868262 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Foreign Body Granuloma After Embolization of Internal Iliac Artery Aneurysm Using N-Butyl-2-Cyanoacrylate: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.60187 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Foreign body granulomas following endovascular treatment are rare complications and are mostly reported in the brain or cutaneous vascular tissues. To the best of our knowledge, no study to date has reported on foreign body granulomas in the abdomen after injection of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA)-lipiodol mixture into the abdominal arteries. This study reports a case of foreign body granuloma that appeared 12 months after the embolization of a right internal iliac artery aneurysm using an NBCA-lipiodol mixture, which posed challenges in differentiation from malignant tumors. We present a 77-year-old man who underwent embolization of a right internal iliac artery aneurysm and open surgical repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm. A contrast-enhanced CT performed 12 months postoperatively revealed a right-sided retroperitoneal mass surrounding the iliopsoas muscle. The mass contained multiple, small, hyperdense areas, suggesting the migration of the NBCA-lipiodol mixture casts from the embolized right internal iliac artery aneurysm. The differential diagnosis included foreign body granuloma, lymphoma, and sarcoma. A biopsy of the lesion revealed a granuloma with various stages of inflammation, no hemosiderin deposition, multinucleated giant cells, and foam cells containing fat, and was diagnosed with a foreign body granuloma. Special staining for microorganisms revealed no findings suggestive of infection. Because the patient was asymptomatic, no treatment was administered. Contrast-enhanced CT at 24 months postoperatively showed shrinkage of the mass, with no change in size noted at 48 months postoperatively.&#xa0;This report highlights a foreign body granuloma that mimicked malignant tumors. Extravascular&#xa0;migration of the NBCA-lipiodol mixture casts likely contributed to granuloma formation. Radiologists should consider foreign body granulomas after embolization using NBCA into the abdominal arteries.

### PMID 38681718 (2024) — Indian journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: N-Butyl cyanoacrylate embolization of an extremely rare variant of sequestration complex - a high-flow left-to-left shunt between systemic artery and pulmonary vein.
DOI: 10.1007/s12055-023-01659-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: A 19-year-old female presented with hemoptysis. Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiography revealed aberrant vessels from descending thoracic aorta, draining into pulmonary veins (left-to-left shunt). She was managed by transcatheter embolization of the aberrant vessels using N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) with balloon occlusion. A systemic artery to pulmonary vein fistula is one of the least common congenital anomalies. Most of the reported cases have been managed by surgery. Only a few patients have been treated by transcatheter embolization, using coils or vascular plugs as the embolizing agents. To our knowledge, this is the first case of its kind that was managed by glue embolization. Favorable post-procedure results have led us to believe that glue embolization can be considered a suitable alternative to thoracotomy in such patients.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s12055-023-01659-5.

### PMID 38215817 (2024) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Injection of n-Butyl-2-Cyanoacrylate into the Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Sac during Endovascular Aortic Repair to Prevent Type II Endoleaks Caused by Lumbar Arteries.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2023.12.573 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate midterm results of whether the strategy to occlude target lumbar arteries using n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (nBCA) injection during endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) reduced the incidence of Type II endoleak (T2EL) after EVAR.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Between 2013 and 2020, 187 patients underwent EVAR; 106 in the treatment group received nBCA injection during EVAR, whereas 81 in the historical control group did not. The incidence of T2EL at 7 days, need for reintervention, and post-EVAR aneurysmal shrinkage were compared between the groups.
RESULTS: Between the treatment group and the control group, significant differences were achieved in the incidence of T2EL (2.8% vs 28.4%; P &lt; .0001) and decreased aneurysmal diameter was observed at 1 year after EVAR (-5.2 vs&#xa0;-3.8 mm; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.034). In multivariate analysis, nBCA injection (odds ratio [OR], 0.04; P&#xa0;= .001) and younger age (OR, 0.92; P&#xa0;= .036) were significantly associated with a reduced incidence of T2EL. As a possible adverse event associated with nBCA injection, 2 cases of transient lower-limb motor dysfunction (1.9%) were observed. Propensity score analysis revealed that the treatment group had a significantly lower incidence of T2EL than that in the control group (P&#xa0;= .0002) even though there was no difference in the incidence of inferior mesenteric artery coil embolization between the groups. The survival rate without aneurysm sac enlargement (100.0% vs 69.8%; P&#xa0;= .014) and the reintervention-free rate (100.0% vs 63.1%; P&#xa0;= .034) in the treatment group were significantly higher than those in the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Concomitant nBCA injection can provide durable EVAR without T2EL, as supported by the avoidance of reintervention associated with aneurysm sac enlargement.

### PMID 38071608 (2024) — Journal of medical imaging and radiation oncology
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of treating acute haemoptysis using glue embolization: A retrospective observational study and comparison to the literature.
DOI: 10.1111/1754-9485.13611 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D064888">Observational Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: A retrospective observational study of the short-term efficacy and safety of using glue embolization, namely n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA), in bronchial artery embolization (BAE) and comparison with the literature. The main aim of the study is to display the safety of this embolic material through standardization of interventional procedure for consideration of NBCA as a possible primary embolic agent in cases of BAE.
METHODS: A total of 35 BAE was performed in 31 patients with acute haemoptysis after failure of bronchoscopic therapy using NBCA. The mean age was 56&#x2009;years with 22 male patients. Pre-interventional bronchoscopy and computed tomographic angiography were performed. In 35 cases, embolization was performed exclusively with NBCA. One patient in combination with coils and one with particles and coils. The 1:4 NBCA-to-Lipiodol mixture was most commonly used. Post-interventional bronchoscopy was performed after 24&#x2009;h.
RESULTS: Technical success was possible in all cases. Clinical success was achieved in 94.3%. There was a mortality rate of 6.5% within 48&#x2009;h. No other embolization related major complications were noticed. A minor complication of temporary ischaemia of the bronchial mucosa. No reperfusion of the embolized vessel, however with rebleeding in four patients from different primarily not embolized bronchial arteries.
CONCLUSION: Despite previous concerns about its safety based on previous reports and in line with recent studies, we conclude that NBCA is a safe and effective embolic agent to perform BAE in cases of acute haemoptysis if performed according to a clear standard operating procedure as described with a possible superiority over embolic agents. Further blinded prospective comparative studies are necessary.

### PMID 37978126 (2024) — Emergency radiology
TITLE: Role of Interventional Radiology (IR) in vascular emergencies among cirrhotic patients.
DOI: 10.1007/s10140-023-02184-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Gastrointestinal hemorrhage remains one of the most common causes of morbidity and mortality among patients with liver cirrhosis. Mostly, these patients bleed from the gastroesophageal varices. However, nonvariceal bleeding is also more likely to occur in these patients. Because of frequent co-existing coagulopathy, cirrhotics are more prone to bleed from a minor vascular injury while performing percutaneous interventions. Ultrasound-guided bedside vascular access is an essential procedure in liver critical care units. Transjugular portosystemic shunts (TIPS) with/without variceal embolization is a life-saving measure in patients with refractory variceal bleeding. Whenever feasible, balloon-assisted retrograde transvenous obliteration (BRTO) is an alternative to TIPS in managing gastric variceal bleeding, but without a risk of hepatic encephalopathy. In cases of failed or unfeasible endotherapy, transarterial embolization using various embolic agents remains the cornerstone therapy in patients with nonvariceal bleeding such as ruptured hepatocellular carcinoma, gastroduodenal ulcer bleeding, and procedure-related hemorrhagic complications. Among various embolic agents, N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) enables better vascular occlusion in cirrhotics, even in coagulopathy, making it a more suitable embolic agent in an expert hand. This article briefly entails the different interventional radiological procedures in vascular emergencies among patients with liver cirrhosis.

### PMID 37337453 (2024) — The journal of vascular access
TITLE: Treatment of arteriovenous access pseudoaneurysms using ultrasound guided balloon assisted thrombin injection: Two cases and systematic review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1177/11297298231182158 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Arteriovenous fistula pseudoaneurysm (AVF-PSA) is a common complication, usually caused during dialysis cannulation, which traditionally has been treated with open and less frequently endovascular techniques. Thrombin injection, although established in the treatment of arterial pseudoaneurysms, has barely been used in the treatment of AVF-PSA, due to concerns for AVF thrombosis or proximal embolization.
METHODS: A systematic review was performed according to the PRISMA 2020 guidelines. PubMed and Cochrane Central databases were reviewed and all clinical reports on AVF-PSA balloon assisted percutaneous thrombin injection through July 2022 were included. The electronic search yielded five case reports. Due to between-study differences and small sample size, the findings were summarized from each report, but the results were not pooled. Additionally, we present our own experience on two patients with AVF-PSA that were treated with balloon assisted percutaneous thrombin injection.
RESULTS: A total of five case reports (no of patients: 7, including ours) were included for review. Most of the patients were male (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6) and the mean age was 65.9&#x2009;years. The average size of the PSA was 1.6&#x2009;cm. In all cases a balloon was inflated to prevent thrombin and thrombotic material intrusion into the fistula lumen, prior to thrombin injection. In one patient n-butyl cyanoacrylate and Lipiodol were used, due to thrombin non availability. Recurrence was reported in only one patient, and average follow-up is 16&#x2009;months.
CONCLUSIONS: Thrombin injection with concomitant balloon inflation seems to be a safe and effective treatment for arteriovenous fistula pseudoaneurysms. Future studies should be aimed at evaluating the long-term outcomes of such minimally invasive techniques.

### PMID 39685680 (2024) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Glue and Ethanol Mixture for Aneurysm Endovascular Treatment: Animal Lab Study, Imaging, and Histopathological Findings.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm13237222 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: This study aims to investigate the degree of penetration, permanence of occlusion, and vascular changes induced by a newly modified mixture of n-butyl cyanoacrylate (Glubran 2&#xae;), ethanol, and Lipidol&#xae; (GEL) in the endovascular treatment of experimental aneurysms induced in swine. Methods: Bilateral pouch aneurysms were created in the wall of the internal carotid artery in eighteen pigs. The sixteen aneurysms were treated with a new mixture of GEL with different component proportions. Angiograms were obtained at the time of treatment and at 1, 4, and 16 weeks after treatment. According to the scheduled experimental design, subjects were sacrificed at the time of treatment and 7, 30, and 90 days after the embolization of experimentally induced aneurysms. The internal carotid artery and aneurysms were removed en bloc and sampled for histopathologic study. Results: The mixture induced complete and stable occlusion without recanalization in all experimentally induced aneurysms throughout the study period. Histopathological studies showed focal angionecrosis and acute inflammatory reactions from 7 dpi, followed by chronic inflammation and vessel wall thickening. Conclusions: The GEL mixture may be useful in future clinical applications for the embolization of arteriovenous malformations, the control of acute bleeding, and the isolation of aneurysms due to its very short polymerization time and minimal adhesion to the microcatheter.

### PMID 39027005 (2024) — Frontiers in cardiovascular medicine
TITLE: Feasibility of a modified hybrid glubran-supported single-proglide technique for access closure during endovascular aneurysm repair.
DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1426961 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the feasibility of a hybrid Glubran-supported single-Proglide technique for large bore femoral access closure during percutaneous access endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR).
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed for all percutaneous EVARs at our center from January 2023 to June 2023. All patients received the hybrid Glubran-supported single-Proglide technique involving a mixture of surgical glue and Lipiodol injection after single suture placement for femoral access closure. Technical success was defined as achieving complete hemostasis without a bailout strategy. Vascular complications and bleeding were defined by Valve Academic Research Consortium-3 (VARC-3) criteria. Vascular access changes and 30-day mortality were recorded.
RESULTS: The technique success rate for the entire study population was 100% (55 femoral access in 37 patients; median age: 72; 78% males). The mean sheath size was 20.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.3F. The mean manual compression time was 3.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.4&#x2005;min, the mean hemostasis time was 9.0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.5&#x2005;min, and the mean procedural time was 103.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;34.7&#x2005;min. One patient (1.6%) developed an access site infection and recovered conservatively. No VARC-3 vascular complications and access changes were observed. No 30-day mortality happened.
CONCLUSIONS: The hybrid Glubran-supported single-Proglide technique is feasible for large bore access closure during EVAR and may be a viable alternative; however, larger prospective studies are required to confirm its efficacy.

### PMID 38935311 (2024) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: Antegrade embolization of varicocele with cyanoacrylate glue: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-024-00446-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Varicocele embolization is an effective, minimally invasive treatment option, with a symptom improvement rate of around 90%. However, anatomical variations and post-embolization recurrences pose challenges to its efficacy. This article discusses the antegrade embolization technique as a viable alternative for cases in which retrograde embolization fails, offering a broader spectrum of treatment options for varicocele.
CASE PRESENTATION: This case report details the treatment of a 27-year-old male with a left varicocele, diagnosed during infertility assessment, using an alternative embolization technique. Despite initial failed attempts at retrograde catheterization via the femoral vein, a direct inguinal puncture of the left testicular vein was successfully performed under ultrasound guidance. A mixture of Glubran&#xae; and Lipiodol&#xae; was used for embolization, achieving varicocele embolization without complications. The patient was discharged 2 hours post-procedure, with follow-up confirming the procedure's effectiveness and safety.
CONCLUSION: This article introduces a less invasive, ultrasound-guided technique for varicocele embolization, presenting a viable alternative to surgery when conventional retrograde methods fail.

### PMID 38666800 (2024) — Clinics and practice
TITLE: The Influence of Wound Closure Techniques after Surgical Decompression in Patients with Carpal Tunnel Syndrome on Sleep Disturbance and Life Quality: A Prospective Comparison of Surgical Techniques.
DOI: 10.3390/clinpract14020042 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The compression of the median nerve within the carpal tunnel is the cause of carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). Surgical decompression is successful in improving sleep and quality of life, but the effect of tissue adhesives as a material for wound closure has not been investigated. The objective of the study was to evaluate sleep disorders and health-related life quality by comparing two methods for wound closure after carpal surgery in participants who were randomized to receive tissue adhesives or transcutaneous sutures.
METHODS: The subjects, aged 61.56 &#xb1; 12.03 years, were randomized to receive either tissue adhesives (n = 50) or suture-based wound closure (n = 50) using the Glubran Tiss 2&#xae; skin adhesive after subcutaneous running sutures. The outcomes were assessed during the 12-month postoperative follow-up. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PQSI) and Insomnia Severity Scale (ISI) were used for the sleep disturbance assessment, and for the health-related quality of life assessment, the total SF-36 (36-Item Short Form Survey) was used.
RESULTS: The PQSI, ISI, and SF-36 were not statistically different between groups during the follow-up, except in the ISI score two weeks after surgery (9.40 &#xb1; 1.18 in the tissue adhesive group vs. 9.96 &#xb1; 1.09 in the suture-based group, p = 0.008). The PQSI, ISI, and SF-36 scores for all the subjects and groups were persistently improved at all the follow-up intervals after surgery. The total SF-36 score increased 12 months after surgery (49.84 &#xb1; 5.85 vs. 82.46 &#xb1; 5.68, p &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Cyanoacrylate-based adhesion material can be used for wound closure after open CTS decompression as a standard transcutaneous suture, and both techniques equally lead to improved sleep and life quality. The possible advantages of tissue adhesives include a faster reduction in the ISI.

### PMID 38435874 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: The Influence of the Tissue Adhesive Material as a Surgical Wound-Closure Technique Following Carpal Tunnel Decompression on Neurological and Functional Outcomes: A Single-Center Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.53312 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is caused by compression of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel. The effect of tissue adhesives as a material for wound closure following CTS decompression has been insufficiently investigated. This study aimed to evaluate outcomes by comparing two modalities of wound closure following carpal surgery in patients randomly assigned to either tissue adhesives or sutures. Methodology This randomized, prospective study was conducted in April 2022 at the University Hospital of Split in Croatia. Patients aged 61.56 &#xb1; 12.03 years were randomized to either tissue adhesive Glubran Tiss 2&#xae;-based (n = 50) or suture-based (n = 50) wound-closure techniques. The following outcomes were assessed before surgery and six months postoperatively: hand strength, electroneurographic characteristics of the median nerve, and the Boston Carpal Tunnel Questionnaire. Results Significant differences between glue-based and suture-based wound-closure techniques were found in the six-month postoperative hand grip strength (25.06 &#xb1; 6.69 vs. 21.41 &#xb1; 5.62 kg; p = 0.002), postoperative sensory amplitude (10.08 &#xb1; 5.50 vs. 7.54 &#xb1; 5.41 mV; p = 0.012), and postoperative sensory velocity (42.22 &#xb1; 11.04 vs. 35.23 &#xb1; 16.40 m/s; p = 0.008). In the glue-based group, significantly more patients achieved a postoperative sensory velocity greater than 45 m/s (47.9% vs. 22.0%; p= 0.006), postoperative distal sensory latency less than 3.5 ms (89.6% vs. 84.0%; p = 0.304), and postoperative motor latency of less than 4.2 ms (60.42% vs. 38.00%; p = 0.022). Conclusions This trial demonstrated that cyanoacrylate-based adhesion material for wound closure after open CTS decompression compared with sutures showed a significant six-month postoperative increment in hand grip strength and median nerve sensory conduction.

### PMID 39108388 (2024) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Perspective: Timely diagnosis and repair of intraoperative thoracic/lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_509_2024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Our review of 12 articles for this perspective showed the frequency of intraoperative thoracic and/or lumbar CSF fistulas/dural tears (DT) ranged from 2.6% - 8% for primary surgical procedures. Delayed postoperative CSF leak/DT were also diagnosed in 0.83% (17/2052 patients) to 14.3% (2/14 patients) of patients undergoing thoracic and/or lumbar procedures. Further, the rate of recurrent postoperative CSF leaks/DT varied from 13.3% (2/15 patients) to 33.3% (4/12 patients).
METHODS: Intraoperative, postoperative delayed, and recurrent postoperative traumatic postsurgical thorac CSF leaks/DT can be limited by performing initially sufficient operative decompressions and/or decompressions/fusions (i.e., utilizing adequate open exposures vs. inadequate minimally invasive (MI) approaches). The incidence of CSF leaks/DT can be further reduced by spine surgeons' utilization of operating microscopes, and their avoiding routine attempts at total synovial cyst excision and/or complete resection of hypertrophied/ossified yellow ligament in the presence of significant dural adhesions.
RESULTS: Multiple CSF leak/CT repair techniques included; using interrupted, non-resorbable sutures for direct dural repairs (i.e. 7-0 Gore-Tex sutures where the suture is larger than the needle thus plugging needle holes), and adding where needed muscle patch grafts, microfibrillar collagen, the rotation of Multifidus muscle pedicle flaps, fibrin sealants (FS)/fibrin glues (FG), lumbar drains (LD), and/or lumbo-peritoneal (LP) shunts.
CONCLUSION: Intraoperative, postopertive delayed, and/or recurrent postoperative thorac and/or lumbar traumatic surgical CSF leaks can be reduced by choosing to initially perform the appropriately extensive open operative decompressions and/or decompresssions/fusions. It is critical to use an operating microscope, non-resorbable interrupted sutures, and where necessary, muscle patch grafts, microfibrillar collagen, the rotation of Multifidus Muscle Pedicle Flaps, FS/FG, LD, and/or LP shunts.

### PMID 38531089 (2024) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Posterior Transdural Approach for Thoracic Corpectomies in the Setting of Complex Spine Deformity Reconstruction.
DOI: 10.1227/ons.0000000000001118 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: There are many surgical approaches for execution of a thoracic corpectomy. In cases of challenging deformity, traditional posterior approaches might not be sufficient to complete the resection of the vertebral body. In this technical note, we describe indications and technique for a transdural multilevel high thoracic corpectomy.
METHODS: A 25-year-old man with a history of neurofibromatosis type 1 presented with instrumentation failure after a previous T1-T12 posterior spinal fusion, extensive laminectomy, and tumor resection. The patient presented with progressive back pain, had broad dural ectasia, and a progressive kyphotic rotational and anteriorly translated spinal deformity. To resect the medial-most aspect of the vertebral body, a bilateral extracavitary approach was attempted, but was found insufficient. A transdural approach was subsequently performed. A left paramedian durotomy was made, followed by generous arachnoid dissection, bilateral dentate ligament division, and T4 rootlet sacrifice to mobilize the spinal cord. A ventral durotomy was then made and the ventral dura was reflected over the spinal cord to protect it while drilling. The corpectomy was then completed. The ventral and dorsal durotomies were closed primarily and reinforced with fibrin glue and fibrin sealant patch. The corpectomy defect was filled with nonstructural autograft.
RESULTS: The focal kyphosis was corrected with a combination of rod contouring, compression, and in situ bending. During the surgery, the patient had stable neuromonitoring data, and postoperatively had no neurological deficits. On follow-up until 1 year, the patient presented with no signs of cerebrospinal spinal leaks, no motor or sensory deficits, minimal incisional pain, and significantly improved posture.
CONCLUSION: Complex high thoracic (T3-5) ventral pathology inaccessible via a bilateral extracavitary approach may be accessed via a transdural approach as opposed to an anterior/lateral transthoracic approach that requires mobilization of cardiovascular structures or scapula.

### PMID 38830847 (2024) — Nature communications
TITLE: Instantly adhesive and ultra-elastic patches for dynamic organ and wound repair.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-48980-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bioadhesive materials and patches are promising alternatives to surgical sutures and staples. However, many existing bioadhesives do not meet the functional requirements of current surgical procedures and interventions. Here, we present a translational patch material that exhibits instant adhesion to tissues (2.5-fold stronger than Tisseel, an FDA-approved fibrin glue), ultra-stretchability (stretching to &gt;300% its original length without losing elasticity), compatibility with rapid photo-projection (&lt;2&#x2009;min fabrication time/patch), and ability to deliver therapeutics. Using our established procedures for the in silico design and optimization of anisotropic-auxetic patches, we created next-generation patches for instant attachment to tissues while conforming to a broad range of organ mechanics ex vivo and in vivo. Patches coated with extracellular vesicles derived from mesenchymal stem cells demonstrate robust wound healing capability in vivo without inducing a foreign body response and without the need for patch removal that can cause pain and bleeding. We further demonstrate a single material-based, void-filling auxetic patch designed for the treatment of lung puncture wounds.

### PMID 38657627 (2024) — Biomedical materials (Bristol, England)
TITLE: Ultrafast gelling bioadhesive based on blood plasma and gelatin for wound closure and healing.
DOI: 10.1088/1748-605X/ad42ec | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Tissue adhesives offer a plethora of advantages in achieving efficient wound closure over conventional sutures and staples. Such materials are of great value, especially in cases where suturing could potentially damage tissues or compromise blood flow or in cases of hard-to-reach areas. Besides providing wound closure, the tissue adhesives must also facilitate wound healing. Previously, plasma-based tissue adhesives and similar bioinspired strategies have been utilized to aid in wound healing. Still, their application is constrained by factors such as high cost, diminished biocompatibility, prolonged gelation times, inadequate swelling, quick resorption, as well as short-term and inconsistent efficacy. To address these limitations, we report the development of a highly biocompatible and ultrafast-gelling tissue adhesive hydrogels. Freeze-dried platelet-rich plasma, heat-denatured freeze-dried platelet-poor plasma, and gelatin were utilized as the base matrix. Gelation was initiated by adding tetrakis hydroxymethyl phosphonium chloride. The fabricated gels displayed rapid gelation (3-4 s), low swelling, increased proliferation, and migration against L929 cells and had porcine skin tissue adhesion strength similar to that of plasma-based commercial glue (Tisseel&#xae;).

### PMID 38520703 (2024) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part B, Applied biomaterials
TITLE: Photocurable extracellular matrix sealant for cessation of venous hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.b.35401 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S., Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage is the second leading cause of death in patients under 46&#x2009;years of age in the United States. Cessation of hemorrhage prevents hemorrhagic shock and tissue hypoxia. Controlling the bleed via direct pressure or tourniquet is often the first line of defense, but long-term care requires staples, hemostatic agents, or sealants that seal the vessel and restore blood flow. Here, we compare a new photocurable extracellular matrix sealant (pcECM) with low, medium, and high crosslink density formulations to a commercially available fibrin-based sealant, TISSEEL&#xae;. pcECM has potential uses in surgical and remote settings due to room temperature storage conditions and fast preparation time. Here, we determine if pcECM sealant can stop venous hemorrhage in a murine model, adhere to the wound site in vivo throughout the wound-healing process, and has the mechanical properties necessary for stopping hemorrhage. Adjusting pcECM crosslinking density significantly affected viscosity, swelling, burst strength, tensile strength, and elasticity of the sealant. 3-Dimensional ultrasound volume segmentations showed pcECM degrades to 17&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8% of its initial implant volume by day 28. Initially, local hemodynamic changes were observed, but returned close to baseline levels by day 28. Acute inflammation was observed near the puncture site in pcECM implanted mice, and we observed inflammatory markers at the 14-day explant for both sealants. pcECM and fibrin sealant successfully sealed the vessel in all cases, and consistently degraded over 14-28&#x2009;days. pcECM is a durable sealant with tunable mechanical properties and possible uses in hemorrhage control and other surgical procedures.

### PMID 38456966 (2024) — Journal of materials science. Materials in medicine
TITLE: Biochemical and biomechanical characterization of an autologous protein-based fibrin sealant for regenerative medicine.
DOI: 10.1007/s10856-024-06780-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Accidental events or surgical procedures usually lead to tissue injury. Fibrin sealants have proven to optimize the healing process but have some drawbacks due to their allogeneic nature. Autologous fibrin sealants present several advantages. The aim of this study is to evaluate the performance of a new autologous fibrin sealant based on Endoret&#xae;PRGF&#xae; technology (E-sealant). One of the most widely used commercial fibrin sealants (Tisseel&#xae;) was included as comparative Control. E-sealant&#xb4;s hematological and biological properties were characterized. The coagulation kinetics and the microstructure were compared. Their rheological profile and biomechanical behavior were also recorded. Finally, the swelling/shrinkage capacity and the enzymatic degradation of adhesives were determined. E-sealant presented a moderate platelet concentration and physiological levels of fibrinogen and thrombin. It clotted 30&#x2009;s after activation. The microstructure of E-sealant showed a homogeneous fibrillar scaffold with numerous and scattered platelet aggregates. In contrast, Control presented absence of blood cells and amorphous protein deposits. Although in different order of magnitude, both adhesives had similar rheological profiles and viscoelasticity. Control showed a higher hardness but both adhesives presented a pseudoplastic hydrogel nature with a shear thinning behavior. Regarding their adhesiveness, E-sealant presented a higher tensile strength before cohesive failure but their elastic stretching capacity and maximum elongation was similar. While E-sealant presented a significant shrinkage process, Control showed a slight swelling over time. In addition, E-sealant presented a high enzymatic resorption rate, while Control showed to withstand the biodegradation process in a significant way. E-sealant presents optimal biochemical and biomechanical properties suitable for its use as a fibrin sealant with regenerative purposes.

### PMID 38643178 (2024) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: A case of pulmonary visceral subpleural hematoma treated by hematoma evacuation during care of post-cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-024-02769-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The occurrence of pulmonary visceral subpleural hematoma during care of post-cardiopulmonary resuscitation including chest compressions and anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapies is extremely rare. Also, there are few reports of treatment of visceral subpleural hematoma, most of which are treated by lung resection. Here we describe a rare case that pulmonary visceral subpleural hematoma arose during post-cardiopulmonary resuscitation care and was treated by hematoma evacuation.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 58-year-old male with no smoking history and, past medical histories of rheumatoid arthritis, chronic atrial fibrillation, hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia developed ventricular fibrillation due to myocardial infarction and fainted. He received bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation and defibrillation by the ambulance crew and had return of spontaneous circulation. After transfer to our hospital, the patient underwent percutaneous catheter intervention and stenting with a diagnosis of myocardial infarction, followed by anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapies. On the 8th hospital day, chest radiography suggested right lower lobe pneumonia, and subsequent chest computed tomography revealed pulmonary hematoma in the visceral subpleural area from S6 to S10. Since no improvement was observed in hypoxemia, treatment was considered necessary. First, an attempt at computed tomography-guided drainage of hematoma was made, but insertion of the Pig-tail catheter was difficult due to hardness of the hematoma. Next, evacuation of hematoma was performed on the 13th hospital day. The hematoma was located in the visceral subpleural area and was removed by incising the pleura. TachoSil Tissue Sealing sheet and Polyglycoal acid sheet were applied to the sites of air leakage and oozing after hematoma evacuation. No re-bleeding or air leakage was observed after the treatment, and the patient was discharged on the 26th hospital day after an uneventful course.
CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary visceral subpleural hematoma may occur during post-cardiopulmonary resuscitation care, including chest compressions and anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapies. In our case, CT-guided puncture and drainage was difficult and surgical treatment by incision of the visceral pleura and hematoma evacuation alone was done successfully.

### PMID 39640106 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Postoperative Transient Neurogenic Claudication After Lumbar Endoscopic Decompression: The Role of Floseal in Minimally Invasive Spine Surgery.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.73083 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The shift toward minimally invasive procedures in American healthcare has transformed spine surgery, particularly with the rise of endoscopic techniques. Endoscopic spine surgery enables the treatment of conditions like lumbar spinal stenosis, offering advantages such as reduced tissue trauma, smaller incisions, and quicker recovery compared to traditional open surgery. Spinal stenosis, where the spinal canal narrows and compresses nerves, often results in significant pain, numbness, or weakness in the lower extremities. Despite the benefits of endoscopic decompression, it brings unique challenges, particularly regarding intraoperative bleeding control. Hemostatic agents, such as Floseal (Baxter, Deerfield, IL), a gelatin matrix, are commonly used to manage bleeding during surgery. However, their use in endoscopic procedures within confined spaces introduces considerations not seen in open surgeries. This case report presents a patient with lumbar stenosis who underwent endoscopic decompression and developed postoperative neurogenic claudication, illustrating both the outcome and the use of Floseal in minimally invasive spine surgeries.

### PMID 37870063 (2024) — Minimally invasive therapy &amp; allied technologies : MITAT : official journal of the Society for Minimally Invasive Therapy
TITLE: Can near-infrared imaging distinguish a gelatin-based matrix granuloma from a malignancy in a kidney?
DOI: 10.1080/13645706.2023.2272968 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Aim: Differentiating granulomas from cancerous tissue poses a significant challenge in upper urinary tract surgery. We present the case of a 62-year-old male with a gelatin-based matrix (SurgifloTM) granuloma in the kidney following renal cyst decortication eight years earlier.Methods: Contrast-enhanced abdominal tomography revealed a Bosniak type-4 cyst at the previous operation site. The patient underwent laparoscopic partial nephrectomy with near-infrared imaging.Results: The lesion presented as hypofluorescent relative to normal kidney tissue. Histopathological examination revealed a foreign body granuloma due to unabsorbed Surgiflo.Conclusion: The fluorescence pattern could not distinguish a Surgiflo granuloma from a malignant lesion of the kidney.

### PMID 39513085 (2024) — JMA journal
TITLE: A Case of Epidural Hematoma after Lumbar Spine Surgery in a Hemophilia B Carrier.
DOI: 10.31662/jmaj.2024-0005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemophilia B is a quantitative or qualitative factor IX anomaly that manifests as an X-linked recessive inheritance pattern in which females are carriers. Postoperative epidural hematoma emerges as a typical complication in spinal surgery, although its incidence is infrequent. No documentation of postoperative epidural hematoma in carriers of hemophilia B exists. A 64-year-old female patient presented with progressive pain and muscle weakness in both lower limbs. Despite a history of childbirth and prior colorectal cancer surgery, the patient displayed no abnormal bleeding tendencies. Subsequently undergoing decompression surgery for lumbar spinal canal stenosis, the patient experienced paralysis and pain in both legs within 5 hours postoperatively. A magnetic resonance imaging scan revealed severe spinal canal compression attributed to a postoperative epidural hematoma, prompting emergency decompression surgery that ameliorated symptoms. The application of gelatin-thrombin matrix sealants (GTMS) facilitated hematoma removal, resulting in an uneventful recovery. In a postoperative interview, it was revealed that her grandson was undergoing treatment for hemophilia B. Additionally, she exhibited diminished factor IX levels and was diagnosed as a hemophilia B carrier. A definitive preoperative diagnosis of the carrier status is imperative. In instances where surgical intervention is warranted, the implementation of factor IX replacement and intraoperative hemostasis with GTMS is promising for potentially averting the onset of postoperative epidural hematoma.

### PMID 39280739 (2024) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Intravenous misplacement of the nephrostomy catheter following percutaneous nephrolithotomy: A case report and review of 26 cases in the literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2024.07.147 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intravenous misplacement of the nephrostomy catheter following percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) is severe and extremely rare, and little information is available about this complication. Because the patient's prognosis may be poor, sufficient attention should be paid to early identification and treatment of this complication. We report a case with intravenous misplacement of nephrostomy catheter and severe bleeding from the catheter after PCNL was transferred to our hospital. The patient was successfully managed using a two-step intervention. First, the patient underwent embolization of the pseudoaneurysms in renal parenchyma, then underwent catheter withdrawal under digital subtraction angiography (DSA) and control bleeding by pushing the absorbable hemostatic material (Surgicel) into the tunneled renal drainage. There were no severe complications. Withdrawal could be performed by open surgery or under the supervision of imaging modalities. Some reports showed that minimally invasive management was safer and less invasive than open surgery.

### PMID 39003759 (2024) — Brain injury
TITLE: Massive traumatic epidural hematoma in a child with suprasellar arachnoid cyst and hydrocephalus.
DOI: 10.1080/02699052.2024.2378839 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a case of a child with a suprasellar arachnoid cyst and hydrocephalus who developed a massive traumatic epidural hematoma following a fall. This represents the first reported case of such a condition. The case is characterized by a progressive increase in hemorrhage leading to a massive hematoma, yet with relatively mild clinical symptoms. The hemorrhage originated from extensive blood seepage from the dura mater. Intraoperative hemostasis was challenging, and there was a large residual cavity of the epidural hematoma without repositioning of brain tissue after removal of the hematoma. Surgical measures such as extensive continuous compression hemostasis with Surgicel, the half-suspension technique, and continuous external drainage were employed to address these challenges. A second-stage surgery for the treatment of the suprasellar arachnoid cyst was performed 1.5&#x2009;months after hematoma evacuation, utilizing neuroendoscopic ventriculocisternostomy (VCC). We recommend that for patients with traumatic brain injury and hydrocephalus, especially those with skull fractures or minimal intracranial hemorrhage, relying solely on clinical symptom observation and monitoring is insufficient. Timely and close monitoring with cranial CT is crucial for the early detection of progressive intracranial hemorrhage.

### PMID 38977400 (2024) — Archives of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Pyogenic granuloma of the hard palate leading to alveolar cleft: a case report.
DOI: 10.7181/acfs.2024.00080 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This case report describes a rare occurrence of pyogenic granuloma (PG) in the hard palate deviating from its typical gingival location that led to the formation of an alveolar cleft. The aggressive growth pattern of the lesion, with atypical progression from a pedunculated nodule to an alveolar cleft, raised concern. The diagnosis was based on magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography findings, which revealed a tadpole-shaped lesion originating from the midline hard palate. The differential diagnosis included a minor salivary gland tumor. Surgical excision was performed under general anesthesia and resulted in a mucosal defect without nasolabial fistula formation or bone exposure. The palatal defect was packed with oxidized regenerated cellulose and closed with Vicryl Rapide sutures, both of which contributed to the patient's successful outcomes. Our comprehensive approach, extending across the stages of surgical planning, execution, and postoperative care, demonstrated the advantages of a multidisciplinary strategy for the accurate diagnosis and effective treatment of palatal PGs. This report makes a meaningful contribution to the existing literature on common oral lesions by emphasizing the importance of a broad differential diagnosis and a systematic approach to oral pathologies. It also raises clinical awareness of PGs with atypical presentations and the diagnostic challenge that they pose.

### PMID 38950539 (2024) — Facts, views &amp; vision in ObGyn
TITLE: Oxidised cellulose-based reaction mimicking a suspicious ovarian mass: a case report and a systematic review.
DOI: 10.52054/FVVO.16.2.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidised regenerated cellulose was introduced 60 years ago to control diffuse bleeding from large surfaces. Although considered safe and effective, foreign body reactions can mimic suspicious masses in several organs. We describe the third case, reported in PubMed, of an oxidised regenerated cellulose-based granuloma mimicking a suspicious ovarian tumour on MRI. During surgery, the diagnosis was suspected by granulomatous tissue and confirmed by pathology. The follow-up after the excision was uneventful. Although a rare complication, physicians should be aware of this presentation and of the recommendation to remove excess Surgicel after the bleeding has stopped.

### PMID 38803778 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Hypersensitive Reaction of Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose Powder in Total Knee Arthroplasty.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.59097 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The powdered form of oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC powder) is a widely used biodegradable hemostatic material in the field of surgery. There are several reports of its effectiveness and safety; however, excessive foreign body reactions remain a concern for surgeons in total knee arthroplasty (TKA). A 70-year-old woman who underwent unilateral TKA using ORC powder to control perioperative blood loss exhibited a skin rash around her operated knee at six days postoperatively. These reactions were potentially hypersensitive to ORC powder. After receiving antiallergic medication for 18 days, the skin rash disappeared. Although there are several reports on the safety of ORC powder, inadequate intraoperative lavage of the product may induce hypersensitive reactions such as skin rash.

### PMID 38770604 (2024) — Indian journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Biodegradable material for glaucoma drainage devices - A pilot study in rabbits.
DOI: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_1092_23 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To study the morphological and histological characteristics of the fibrous capsule formed around a novel biodegradable glaucoma drainage device (GDD) implant made of oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) after 1 and 3 months of its implantation.
METHODS: It was a prospective, interventional, preclinical experimental study using New Zealand white rabbits. All animals underwent GDD implantation with a novel biodegradable device. The device's body was made of ORC and attached to a silicone tube, connecting the body to the anterior chamber. Histopathology (hematoxylin and eosin/Masson's trichrome staining) and immunohistochemistry (Alpha-Smooth Muscle Actin expression) characteristics of the bleb formed around the novel device were noted at 1 and 3 months.
RESULTS: One month post implantation, the biodegradable material produced a significant foreign body type of reaction evidenced by the exuberant infiltration by macrophages, lymphocytes, and multinucleated giant cells. The granulomatous response subsided by 3 months with disorganized collagen deposition on Masson's trichrome staining. The silicone tube was an internal control, and histopathology demonstrated well-organized collagen deposition around it at 3 months. Immunohistochemistry for &#x3b1;-smooth muscle actin also demonstrated more myofibroblast transformation at the site of the tube than the biodegradable implant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the tissue response around a biodegradable GDD was different from the response to conventional devices. A diffuse, loose vascularized mesh was observed to develop, which may be more compatible with sustained IOP control over a longer period, in contrast to the usual thick and dense capsule formed around the non-biodegradable devices.

### PMID 38740614 (2024) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Comparison of transposition and interposition methods in microvascular decompression for hemifacial spasm: an analysis of 109 cases performed by a single surgeon in a single-center retrospective study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-024-06111-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Microvascular decompression (MVD), the standard surgical approach for hemifacial spasm (HFS), can be divided into the interposition and transposition methods. Although the risk of HFS recurrence following interposition has been reported, there is limited data comparing long-term outcomes between both methods performed by a single surgeon. This study aimed to investigate the efficacy of MVD techniques on HFS by comparing surgical outcomes performed by a single surgeon in a single-center setting.
METHODS: A total of 109 patients who underwent MVD were analyzed and divided into the transposition (86 patients) and interposition (23 patients) groups. Postoperative outcomes at 1&#xa0;month and 1&#xa0;year were assessed and compared, including rates of spasm relief, complications, and recurrence.
RESULTS: Outcome assessment revealed higher rates of early spasm relief in the interposition group (66.3% vs. 100%, transposition vs. interposition, respectively, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0004), although spasm relief at 1-year postoperatively was comparable between the two groups (84.9% vs. 95.7%, transposition vs. interposition, respectively, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.2929). No significant differences were observed in complication and recurrence rates. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated no significant differences in the duration of spasm resolution by MVD method (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.4347, log-rank test).
CONCLUSION: This study shows that both the transposition (Surgicel&#xae; and fibrin glue) and interposition (sponge) methods were excellent surgical techniques. The interposition method may achieve earlier spasm resolution compared to the transposition method.

### PMID 38462109 (2024) — International journal of biological macromolecules
TITLE: Silver-infused lysine crosslinked hydrogel with oxidized regenerated cellulose for prospective advanced wound dressings.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2024.130675 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The study aimed to develop a multifunctional wound dressing with enhanced antibacterial properties and wound healing promotion. The synthesis process involved preparing oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) following a modified procedure, synthesizing chitosan/silver nanoparticles (CS/Ag NPs) via an in-situ reduction method, and subsequently preparing ORC/CS/Lys@Ag NPs hydrogels. Characterization techniques including FTIR, XRD, SEM, and EDS were employed to analyze functional groups, lattice structure, morphology, and elemental composition. Gelation time, swelling behavior, water retention, mechanical properties, viscosity, self-healing capacity, rheological behavior, oxygen permeability, in vitro degradation, release of Ag+, and antibacterial properties were evaluated using various experimental methods. Results indicated that the novel wound dressing has the capability to evenly distribute Ag NPs to effectively counteract bacteria. It can maintain moist conditions for 86&#xa0;h, resist a sturdy mechanical pressure of 11.3&#xa0;KPa, and degrade by 11.045&#xa0;%&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.429 within 8&#xa0;h. Combining its efficient gas exchange abilities, self-repairing function, and biocompatibility, almost full recovery was observed in injured mouse skin within 13&#xa0;days, highlighting its promising clinical utility.

### PMID 38344086 (2024) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Aggressive osteoblastoma of the cervical spine and resultant complication due to swollen oxidized regenerated cellulose: A case report.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_854_2023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Osteoblastomas, although rare, are benign primary bone tumors, with cervical spine involvement being exceptionally uncommon. Late diagnosis, especially in aggressive cases, can lead to surgical challenges. Oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) used for hemostasis may result in complications if left in the surgical field.
CASE DESCRIPTION: An 8-year-old female presented with six months of intractable neck pain accompanied by swelling, hindering proximal right upper extremity evaluation. Motor strength was intact distally, with normal reflexes and no hypoesthesia. Imaging revealed a C4-5 facet joint lesion necessitating surgery. Intraoperative hemorrhage prompted ORC application, which led to postoperative arm pain and C5-6 radiculopathy. Subsequent surgery alleviated these symptoms.
CONCLUSION: Osteoblastomas, despite their benign classification, may exhibit aggressive characteristics, warranting en-bloc resection. Cervical spine osteoblastomas, due to their vascular nature and proximity to vital structures, complicate surgical interventions. ORC, a commonly used hemostatic agent, may induce compression complications, and early intervention is critical for patient recovery. This case underscores the intricacies of managing aggressive osteoblastomas in the cervical spine and highlights potential ORC-related complications. Surgeons must exercise caution when using ORC and consider postoperative risks. Prompt intervention and meticulous planning are paramount for favorable outcomes in such cases.

### PMID 37875212 (2024) — Journal of minimally invasive gynecology
TITLE: Multidirectional Traction Method Using SURGICEL NU-KNIT and Surgical Suture in Robot-assisted Laparoscopic Surgery for Endometrial Cancer.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2023.10.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To describe a novel approach to robot-assisted laparoscopic total hysterectomy (RH) for endometrial cancer that minimizes cancer sell spillage and develops a stable surgical field.
DESIGN: Demonstration of the multidirectional traction method with narrated video footage.
SETTING: Many reports have indicated that RH for endometrial cancer has the same or superior short-term results compared with conventional laparoscopic hysterectomy (LH), and the long-term prognosis is the same [1,2]. However, there are no randomized controlled trials of RH versus LH, and some previous reports [3] have suggested that RH has a worse prognosis than LH, so the long-term prognosis should be considered with caution. Factors that may affect the long-term prognosis include the use of uterine manipulators [4] and compression of the uterine body with robotic forceps without tactile sensation [3]. However, to the best of our knowledge, no surgical technique capable of avoiding these factors has been established yet. Herein, we report a multidirectional traction method using SURGICEL NU-KNIT (Ethicon; Johnson &amp; Johnson Medical Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), a local hemostatic agent, and surgical sutures.
INTERVENTION: Cut 2-0 Prolene (Ethicon; Johnson &amp; Johnson Medical Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) with straight needles (ST-70) thread to 35 cm, stick a 1&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;2 cm piece of SURGICEL NU-KNIT, and make knots Fig. 1. This implement is used to puncture the incisional margins of the peritoneum and then the abdominal wall to bring the thread to the surface of the body, where it is grasped with forceps and fixed. By repeating this operation, multidirectional traction can be obtained Fig. 2. A manipulating suture is also attached to the uterus to minimize the compression of the uterine body with robotic forceps.
CONCLUSION: The multidirectional traction method allows for reproducible stable surgical field development and minimizes cancer cell spillage by reducing uterine grasping by robotic forceps without the use of uterine manipulators.

### PMID 37558972 (2024) — Updates in surgery
TITLE: The importance of coordination in preventing overdiagnosis: a retrospective analysis of unabsorbed oxidized regenerated cellulose.
DOI: 10.1007/s13304-023-01624-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) is commonly used to control small intraoperative bleedings in lung cancer surgery. However, difficulties in its absorption may lead to complications that can mimic malignancy recurrence in the affected areas, and may require further examination.
METHODS: Between 2015 and 2022, patients who underwent malignant tumour resection and lymph node dissection and were subsequently evaluated for suspected lymph node recurrence and underwent EBUS-guided needle biopsy were included in the study. Pathology reports of these patients showed an ORC-related foreign body type granulomatous reaction. Such reactions, caused by delayed absorption of ORC, can mimic malignancy recurrence and result in unnecessary biopsies.
RESULTS: In a total of 13 patients (10 males), pathology was observed in 18 lymph node areas after malignant resection and lymph node dissection, and ORC was detected in subcarinal and inferior paratracheal lymph node areas in all patients. The average age of the patients was calculated as 63.1&#xa0;years (range 51-74). The mean SUVmax value observed in these lymph node areas on PET/CT was 5.22 (range 0-14.36). Although the SUVmax value decreased as the time between surgery and EBUS increased, no statistically significant difference was observed (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.100).
CONCLUSION: The study suggests that in cases of suspected unexpected lymph node recurrence in postoperative follow-up of lung cancer, it is important for clinicians to communicate with the surgeon and re-evaluate the use of ORC by reviewing the operative notes. This may help in determining an appropriate further investigation strategy.

### PMID 39797168 (2024) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Absorbable Powder Haemostat Use in Minimally Invasive Thoracic Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm14010085 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: Significant intraoperative and postoperative blood loss are rare but possibly life-threatening complications after lung resection surgery either during open or minimally invasive procedures. Microporous Polysaccharide Haemospheres (ARISTA&#x2122;AH) have demonstrated time-efficient haemostasis, lower postoperative blood volumes and a lower blood transfusion requirement, without any identified adverse events across other specialities. The primary aim of our study was to evaluate the impact of ARISTA&#x2122;AH on short-term postoperative outcomes in thoracic surgery. Our secondary aim was to compare ARISTA&#x2122;AH with other commonly used haemostatic agents. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed a prospectively collected database of consecutive early-stage lung cancer patients surgically treated in two European centres (October 2020-December 2022). Exclusion criteria included open surgery, patients with coagulopathy/anticoagulant medication, major intraoperative bleeding, non-anatomical lung resection and age &lt;18 years. The cohort was divided into five groups according to the haemostatic agent that was used. Propensity score matching was used to estimate the effect of ARISTA&#x2122;AH on various intra- and postoperative parameters (continuous and binary outcome modelling). Results: A total of 482 patients (M/F:223/259; VATS 97/RATS 385) with a mean age of 68.9 (&#xb1;10.6) years were analysed. In 253 cases, ARISTA&#x2122;AH was intraoperatively used to control bleeding. This cohort of patients had a significant reduction in total drain volume by 135 mls (standard error 53.9; p = 0.012). The use of ARISTA&#x2122;AH did reduce the average length of a hospital stay (-1.47 days) and the duration of chest drainage (-0.596 days), albeit not significantly. In the ARISTA&#x2122;AH group, we observed no postoperative bleeding, no blood transfusion requirement, no 30-day mortality and no requirement for redo surgery. The use of ARISTA&#x2122;AH significantly reduced the odds of postoperative complications, as well as the need for transfusion and redo surgery. Conclusions: Our data showed that Microporous Polysaccharide Haemospheres are a safe and effective haemostatic device. Their use has a positive effect on the short-term postoperative outcomes of patients surgically treated for early-stage lung cancer.

### PMID 39559590 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Effects of Intraoperative Epidural Steroid-Soaked Gelatin Sponge in Lumbar Spine Surgery: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.71855 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: This systematic review and meta-analysis evaluated the impact of intraoperative epidural steroid-soaked gelatin sponge in lumbar spine surgery for conditions like spinal stenosis and nerve root compression. Surgery often involves removing structures to decompress the nerves. Steroids are used to alleviate inflammation and pain, with gelatin sponges serving as carriers to extend their effect. While epidural steroid injections have been effective, the combined use of gelatin sponges remains controversial. The study systematically searched databases including PubMed, MEDLINE, and Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled Trials databases involving lumbar surgeries using steroid-soaked gelatin sponges. Seven studies with 620 patients were included, focusing on postoperative pain scores, analgesic use, hospital stay, and complications. The quality of the studies was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 tool. Results showed no significant difference in pain scores between the steroid and control groups on postoperative day 1 and at three months. However, there was a trend toward reduced pain in the steroid group. Notably, patients in the steroid group required fewer analgesics, indicating a significant reduction in postoperative pain medication use. Other factors, such as surgery time, blood loss, and hospital stay, showed no statistically significant differences between the groups. The findings suggest that while the use of steroid-soaked gelatin sponges does not significantly change immediate postoperative pain levels, it may contribute to improved pain management. This approach is safe, with minimal risk of complications, and may provide prolonged, localized effects due to the slow release of steroids. Future large-scale randomized trials are needed to further validate these findings. In conclusion, the use of steroid-soaked gelatin sponges in lumbar spine surgery is a feasible option to consider, with potential benefits in postoperative pain management and reduced analgesic consumption.

### PMID 39325203 (2024) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Optimized microvascular decompression surgery for improving the results of hemifacial spasm: an analysis of reoperations.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-024-02892-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microvascular decompression (MVD) surgery is an effective curative treatment for hemifacial spasm (HFS). This study aims to establish techniques that may lead to favorable outcomes by analyzing reoperations in patients with persistent or recurrent HFS.Patients who exhibited persistent or recurrent HFS symptoms after prior MVD surgery were identified as candidates for reoperation. Information regarding the reoperations was collected by tracing the entire surgical procedures and peri-operative management. Clinical manifestations and follow-up data were obtained from the hospital records and subsequent visits.Twenty-six patients underwent repeat MVD surgery. Among them, multi-culprit neurovascular compression (NVC) was identified as the primary cause of failure to response to the previous operation in 73.08% of cases. Pure tissue adhesion accounted for 38.46% of cases, while shredded Teflon pledget (STP) shifting was observed in 7.69% of cases. Postoperative outcomes were assessed through revisits and categorized into four groups: excellent (76.92%), good (15.38%), fair (7.69%), and poor (0%). The longest follow-up period exceeded 65 moths.The trans-lateral suboccipital infra-floccular approach provides a better visual field. Examination of entire length of the facial nerve is essential. STP with gelatin sponge implantation is a suitable material for facilitating nerve and vascular positioning and reducing adhesion.

### PMID 39426922 (2024) — British journal of anaesthesia
TITLE: Use of coagulation factor concentrates and blood transfusion in cardiac surgery: a retrospective cohort study of adults with hereditary and acquired bleeding disorders.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bja.2024.07.041 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cardiac surgery poses a significant risk of perioperative bleeding and allogeneic blood transfusions, particularly in patients with bleeding disorders. Increasingly frequent use of coagulation factor concentrates could impact haemorrhagic risks, thromboembolic events, and costs. We describe the use of coagulation factor concentrates and allogeneic blood products in cardiac surgical patients with hereditary and acquired bleeding disorders to assess pertinent outcomes, including perioperative haemorrhage, thromboembolism, and hospital costs.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study using the Premier Health Database, including adult cardiac surgical patients diagnosed with hereditary or acquired bleeding disorders compared with those without bleeding disorders.
RESULTS: Patients with acquired bleeding disorders required more extensive use of coagulation factor concentrates and blood products compared with those with hereditary bleeding disorders or without bleeding disorders. The highest exposures to coagulation factor concentrates were found in the acquired bleeding disorders group, with 24% receiving factor VIIa and 11.7% receiving prothrombin complex concentrate. This group also experienced significantly higher rates of complications, including a 15.8% rate of haemorrhage and a 19.2% rate of thromboembolic events. The acquired bleeding disorders group had longer intensive care and hospital stays, and the highest mortality rate (19.2%). The increased use of perioperative replacement of factor VIII and factor IX in the hereditary bleeding disorders group led to increased pharmacy costs but did not significantly impact blood bank charges.
CONCLUSIONS: Acquired bleeding disorders in cardiac surgery patients are associated with increased use of haemostatic interventions, postoperative complications, and increased healthcare costs. Improved management of perioperative haemostasis and thromboprophylaxis strategies are essential for optimising patient outcomes and reducing expenses.

### PMID 39200878 (2024) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Omentoplasty for Cervical Lymphocele after Aortic Arch Replacement.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm13164737 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Lymphocele formation is a rare complication after surgical procedures involving the mediastinum. While uncomplicated lymphoceles show high rates of spontaneous closure and are usually treated conservatively, surgical treatment might be required in cases with persistent or recurrent lymphoceles. We present the case of a 53-year-old male with reoccurring cervical swelling after two surgeries of the thoracic aorta. After 1.5 years, the swelling occurred for the first time and appeared for the next 2 years repeatedly without clinical or laboratory signs of infection. A cervical lymphocele was suspected, and the decision for surgical revision was made. Fibrin glue was applied to the potential leakage of the thoracic duct, and the cavity was filled with a free omental flap. This resulted in a complete regression of the swelling.

### PMID 38668626 (2024) — Toxins
TITLE: Isolation and Functional Characterization of Erythrofibrase: An Alfa-Fibrinogenase Enzyme from Trimeresurus erythrurus Venom of North-East India.
DOI: 10.3390/toxins16040201 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Green pit viper bites induce mild toxicity with painful local swelling, blistering, cellulitis, necrosis, ecchymosis and consumptive coagulopathy. Several bite cases of green pit vipers have been reported in several south-east Asian countries including the north-eastern region of India. The present study describes isolation and characterization of a haemostatically active protein from Trimeresurus erythrurus venom responsible for coagulopathy. Using a two-step chromatographic method, a snake venom serine protease erythrofibrase was purified to homogeneity. SDS-PAGE of erythrofibrase showed a single band of ~30 kDa in both reducing and non-reducing conditions. The primary structure of erythrofibrase was determined by ESI LC-MS/MS, and the partial sequence obtained showed 77% sequence similarity with other snake venom thrombin-like enzymes (SVTLEs). The partial sequence obtained had the typical 12 conserved cysteine residues, as well as the active site residues (His57, Asp102 and Ser195). Functionally, erythrofibrase showed direct fibrinogenolytic activity by degrading the A&#x3b1; chain of bovine fibrinogen at a slow rate, which might be responsible for causing hypofibrinogenemia and incoagulable blood for several days in envenomated patients. Moreover, the inability of Indian polyvalent antivenom (manufactured by Premium Serum Pvt. Ltd., Maharashtra, India) to neutralize the thrombin-like and plasmin-like activity of erythrofibrase can be correlated with the clinical inefficacy of antivenom therapy. This is the first study reporting an &#x3b1;-fibrinogenase enzyme erythrofibrase from T. erythrurus venom, which is crucial for the pathophysiological manifestations observed in envenomated victims.

### PMID 38125347 (2024) — Experimental and therapeutic medicine
TITLE: Pseudoaneurysm of the superficial temporal artery after sagittal split ramus osteotomy: A case report.
DOI: 10.3892/etm.2023.12301 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Sagittal split ramus osteotomy (SSRO) is a widely performed orthognathic surgery; however, among the various reported complications of SSRO, pseudoaneurysms are rarely reported. Pseudoaneurysms are rare vascular lesions formed by damage to the arterial wall that can occur after trauma or postoperatively, causing uncontrolled bleeding. The present report describes a case of a pseudoaneurysm that occurred after SSRO in a 22-year-old female patient. Le Fort I osteotomy and bilateral SSRO were performed under general anesthesia to improve the gummy smile and mandibular asymmetry of the patient. While osteotomizing the medial side of the left SSRO, major bleeding occurred from the soft tissue of the posterior margin of the mandibular branch. Direct compression with gauze and a local hemostatic agent stopped the bleeding. Immediately after returning to the ward, bleeding was observed from the left wound site and marked swelling of the left buccal area occurred. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a pseudoaneurysm of the left superficial temporal artery (STA). Subsequently, arterial embolization for the pseudoaneurysm was performed. Overall, the present report describes a rare case of pseudoaneurysm of the STA as a postoperative complication of SSRO.

### PMID 39580841 (2024) — Georgian medical news
TITLE: SUCCESSFUL EMERGENCY ARTERIAL EMBOLIZATION FOR MASSIVE GASTRODUODENAL BLEEDING IN HIGH-RISK PATIENT. CASE REPORT.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Massive upper gastrointestinal bleeding still remains a challenge, which can cause serious clinical problems especially in high-risk patients. We present a rare case of patient with complex pathology successfully managed by endovascular treatment. A 78-year-old man with a medical history of chronic bronchitis, several minor strokes, type II diabetes, a 30-year history of smoking, and a family history of cardiovascular disease, presented with severe pain on the left side of his chest radiating to his left arm. Urgent coronary angiography (CAG) revealed subtotal occlusive thrombosis of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA). An immediate percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was conducted and after thrombus aspiration, a 4.0 mm &#xd7; 30 mm drug-eluting stent (JW Medical Systems) was implanted in the proximal RCA. 12 hours after surgical intervention the patient experienced a sudden syncopal episode. Emergency fibrogastroscopy revealed active gastroduodenal bleeding from a chronic anterior duodenal ulcer measuring 2.0 mm &#xd7; 1.5 mm. Endoscopic hemostasis failed and due to patient's unfavorable risk factors (hemorrhagic shock, hemodynamic instability, coagulopathy and etc.,) open surgery was considered as a very high-risk procedure according to the Rockall score. As a last and alternative method, the embolization of the gastroduodenal artery was performed via a radial approach, using a hemostatic sponge and embolization coils (Cook Incorporated, USA). The rapid hemostasis was achieved, patient's condition stabilized post-intervention, and he was discharged in satisfactory condition on the 10th day of hospitalization. Our case illustrates that transcatheter arterial embolization is a safe and feasible method of treatment and real alternative to surgery and failed endoscopic approaches especially in complex and high-risk patients.

### PMID 39407942 (2024) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Incidence and Predictors of Early and Late Radial Artery Occlusion after Percutaneous Coronary Intervention and Coronary Angiography: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm13195882 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Introduction: Trans-radial access for coronary angiography and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) has gained popularity due to its advantages over the traditional transfemoral approach. However, radial artery occlusion (RAO) remains a common complication following trans-radial procedures. This study aimed to investigate the incidence of early and late RAO along with their risk factors. Methods: Six databases, Medline (Ovid), National Library of Medicine (MeSH), Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Wiley), Embase, Scopus, and Global Index Medicus, were searched. The systematic review and meta-analysis followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Data were extracted and analyzed. Using a random-effect model, the primary endpoint was the overall incidence of RAO after invasive coronary procedures. Subgroup analysis and meta-regression were also performed to identify possible predictors of RAO. Results: A total of 41 studies with 30,020 patients were included. The overall incidence of RAO was 13% (95% CI = 0.09-0.16). The incidence of early RAO (within 24 h) was 14% (95% CI = 0.10-0.18) in 26 studies, while the incidence of late RAO (after 24 h) was 10% (95% CI = 0.04-0.16) in 22 studies. The average incidence rates of early RAO in studies with catheter sizes of &lt;6 Fr, 6 Fr, and &gt;6 Fr were 9.8%, 9.4%, and 8.8%. The overall effect size of female gender as a predictor was 0.22 with a 95% CI of 0.00-0.44. Age was a potential predictor of early RAO (B = 0.000357; 95% CI = -0.015-0.0027, p: 0.006). Conclusions: This meta-analysis provides essential information on the incidence of early (14%) and late (10%) RAO following angiographic procedures. Additionally, our findings suggest that female sex and age are possible predictors of RAO. A larger catheter, especially (6 Fr) and hemostatic compression time &lt;90 min post-procedure, substantially reduced the incidence of RAO. The use of oral anticoagulation and the appropriate dosage of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) does reduce RAO, but a comparison between them showed no statistical significance.

### PMID 39100041 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: A Case Report on the Utilization of a Hemostasis Analyzer System in the Management of a Patient With Essential Thrombocythemia.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.63787 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Essential thrombocythemia (ET) is a myeloproliferative neoplasm characterized by persistent elevation of platelet count due to abnormal proliferation of megakaryocytes. While some cases may be asymptomatic, the condition is associated with an increased risk of complications such as thrombosis and bleeding tendencies, necessitating appropriate management tailored to individual cases. Hemostasis analyzer systems are automated analytical devices designed for comprehensive evaluation of blood coagulation function. These systems enable rapid and accurate measurement of multiple parameters, including coagulation time, platelet function, and fibrin formation, thus facilitating a holistic assessment of hemostatic function. A 76-year-old male patient&#xa0;presented to our hospital. At the age of 65, he received treatment for promyelocytic leukemia and achieved remission. At 75 years, he developed leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, and progressive anemia. A comprehensive examination, including bone marrow biopsy and genetic testing, revealed a JAK2 mutation, leading to the diagnosis of ET. At the age of 76 years, he complained of chest discomfort during exertion. Further investigation revealed severe aortic valve stenosis and two-vessel coronary artery disease. The patient underwent aortic valve replacement and three-vessel coronary artery bypass grafting. A hemostasis analyzer system was used to monitor coagulation function throughout the procedure. Compared with the normal range, his coagulation profile showed a tendency toward&#xa0;hypercoagulability. Intraoperative and postoperative transfusions were performed as required. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful without any complications related to bleeding or thrombosis.

### PMID 38881025 (2024) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: Evaluation of the safety and efficacy of the Axiostat&#xae; dressing device to achieve radial artery access hemostasis: The R3A study.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.31129 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Radial access is the default approach in interventional cardiology. The Axiostat&#xae; surgical hemostatic dressing, using chitosan as its active component, has demonstrated potential in accelerating blood clotting. This study aims to assess the efficacy and the safety of the Axiostat&#xae; dressing in achieving hemostasis in patients undergoing transradial coronary angioplasty (TRCA).
METHODS: This prospective, single-center observational study, conducted in 2022, enrolled consecutive patients undergoing TRCA, with a target of 150 participants. The primary outcome was the success rate of radial artery hemostasis at 120&#x2009;min, without bleeding necessitating immediate re-compression. The secondary outcome included Axiostat&#xae; performance at 24&#x2009;h and 30 days Postprocedure.
RESULTS: The study was terminated prematurely for ethical and patient safety reasons, after inclusion of 41 consecutive TRCA patients due to an unexpectedly high radial artery thrombosis rate (19.5%, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8/41) observed 24&#x2009;h Postprocedure. The success rate of radial hemostasis with the Axiostat&#xae; dressing was 78.0%. Procedural details and patient characteristics were comparable between successful Axiostat&#xae; removal and device failure cases.
CONCLUSION: The use of the Axiostat&#xae; dressing to achieve hemostasis after TRCA is effective but is associated with an unexpectedly high incidence of radial thrombosis. Our results should encourage caution in the future evaluation and use of this device for radial artery compression following TRCA.

### PMID 38879573 (2024) — Journal of medical case reports
TITLE: Spontaneous intercostal artery bleeding occurring simultaneously in numerous vessels during antithrombotic therapy with mechanical circulatory support: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s13256-024-04602-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intercostal artery bleeding often occurs in a single vessel; in rare cases, it can occur in numerous vessels, making it more difficult to manage.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 63-year-old Japanese man was admitted to the emergency department owing to sudden chest and back pain, dizziness, and nausea. Emergency coronary angiography revealed myocardial infarction secondary to right coronary artery occlusion. After intra-aortic balloon pumping, percutaneous coronary intervention was performed in the right coronary artery. At 12 hours following percutaneous coronary intervention, the patient developed new-onset left anterior chest pain and hypotension. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed 15 sites of contrast extravasation within a massive left extrapleural hematoma. Emergency angiography revealed contrast leakage in the left 6th to 11th intercostal arteries; hence, transcatheter arterial embolization was performed. At 2 days after transcatheter arterial embolization, his blood pressure subsequently decreased, and contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed the re-enlargement of extrapleural hematoma with multiple sites of contrast extravasation. Emergency surgery was performed owing to persistent bleeding. No active arterial hemorrhage was observed intraoperatively. Bleeding was observed in various areas of the chest wall, and an oxidized cellulose membrane was applied following ablation and hemostasis. The postoperative course was uneventful.
CONCLUSION: We report a case of spontaneous intercostal artery bleeding occurring simultaneously in numerous vessels during antithrombotic therapy with mechanical circulatory support that was difficult to manage. As bleeding from numerous vessels may occur during antithrombotic therapy, even without trauma, appropriate treatments, such as transcatheter arterial embolization and surgery, should be selected in patients with such cases.

### PMID 37486239 (2023) — Interdisciplinary cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Sutureless repair for vena cava bleeding using an elastomeric sealant in a porcine model.
DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivad122 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To address the issue of bleeding from the vena cava, a common complication of cardiac and aortic surgeries, we developed a sutureless repair technique using Hydrofit, an elastomeric sealant. In a porcine model, we surgically incised the inferior vena cava and applied the elastomeric sealant with a pericardial patch, achieving complete haemostasis through manual compression. This simple and rapid technique demonstrates effective sutureless haemostasis for the vena cava.

### PMID 38046217 (2023) — European heart journal. Case reports
TITLE: In vivo optical coherence tomography visualisation of coronary artery embolism caused by BioGlue in a middle-aged woman with Marfan syndrome who underwent the Bentall procedure: a case report.
DOI: 10.1093/ehjcr/ytad585 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Coronary artery embolism caused by BioGlue is a rare complication; therefore, its diagnosis and treatment remain undefined.
CASE SUMMARY: A 47-year-old woman underwent ascending aortic replacement and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) for type A acute aortic dissection involving the right coronary artery ostium in 2017. Subsequently, she was diagnosed with Marfan syndrome. Five years later in 2022, she underwent aortic arch replacement, the Bentall procedure, and repeat CABG because of aortic root enlargement and aortic regurgitation progression. Twelve days after surgery, coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) revealed left anterior descending (LAD) artery stenosis, whereas pre-operative CCTA was normal. On post-operative day 13, coronary angiography revealed 99% LAD artery stenosis. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) showed a non-echoic mass with clear margins, and optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated a crystalloid mass. Both images suggested that the embolus was inorganic matter, suspected as being the surgical adhesive BioGlue. We could not remove the embolus by repeated thrombectomy; therefore, drug-eluting stent implantation was performed. Seven months after surgery, she had no symptoms, and CCTA confirmed stent patency.
DISCUSSION: To our knowledge, this is the first case report to describe BioGlue embolism observed by OCT. We performed an in vitro study using a blood vessel model, and the obtained OCT image was very similar to the in vivo image. Although BioGlue embolism is a rare complication, it should be considered in cases of perioperative myocardial infarction of uncertain aetiology, and coronary imaging is useful for diagnosis.

### PMID 37548628 (2023) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: A Nature-Inspired Versatile Bio-Adhesive.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202301560 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The application of most hydrogel bio-adhesives is greatly limited due to their high swelling, low underwater adhesion, and single function. Herein, a spatial multi-level physical-chemical and bio-inspired in-situ bonding strategy is proposed, to develop a multifunctional hydrogel bio-glue using polyglutamic acid (PGA), tyramine hydrochloride (TYR), and tannic acid (TA) as precursors and 4-(4,6-dimethoxytriazine-2-yl) -4-methylmorpholine hydrochloride(DMTMM) as condensation agent, which is used for tissue adhesion, hemostasis and repair. By introducing TYR and TA into the PGA chain, it is demonstrated that not only can the strong adhesion of bio-glue to the surface of various fresh tissues and wet materials be realized through the synergistic effect of spatial multi-level physical and chemical bonding, but also this glue can be endowed with the functions of anti-oxidation and hemostasis. The excellent performance of such bio-glue in the repair of the wound, liver, and cartilage is achieved, showing a great potential in clinical application for such bio-glue. This study will open up a brand-new avenue for the development of multifunctional hydrogel biological adhesive.

### PMID 37497265 (2023) — European heart journal. Case reports
TITLE: Left main coronary artery embolism caused by BioGlue surgical adhesive after type A acute aortic dissection repair: intracoronary imaging and histopathological analysis.
DOI: 10.1093/ehjcr/ytad313 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 37364078 (2023) — Wiadomosci lekarskie (Warsaw, Poland : 1960)
TITLE: MANAGEMENT OF MINIINVASIVE TREATMENT OF PRIMARY VARICOSE SUPERFICIAL VEINS.
DOI: 10.36740/WLek202305215 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The aim: Determination of the optimal method for surgical correction of stages C2-C6s varicose superficial veins.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Materials and methods: The treatment results of 228 patients with stages C2-C6 of primary varicose according to the CEAP classification using thermal and non-thermal treatment methods were analyzed.
RESULTS: Results: All patients underwent operations under the control of ultrasound scanning. In patients after EVLA, total trunk obliteration was detected in 148 patients (98.7%) after 1 week, and in 100% after a year. In 2 patients, reflux was diagnosed in the PDSV and in the ZDSV after 1 week. In patients after RFA, inflow reflux on the leg was in 1 patient (5.2%), in others - complete obliteration (18 patients - 94.7%). In patients after MOCA, recanalization was performed in 5 patients (19.2%) with a control ultrasound investigation after 1 month. In patients after cyanoacrylate obliteration, inflow reflux on the leg after 1 month was in 2 patients (14.2%). In patients who underwent UGS of the GSV trunk, 5 patients (33.3%) had persistence of pathological reflux after 1 month with control ultrasound. All corrections were performed using Foam form sclerotherapy.
CONCLUSION: Conclusions: EVLA is the most effective method of treating varicose veins and gives the best long-term results. The advantage of non-thermal methods is the lack of influence on paravenous structures and no need for tumescent anesthesia, which is important in case of an allergic history. After applying cyanoacry&#xac;late, there is no need for mandatory compression. The advantage of foam scleroobliteration is its lowest cost among all methods. Foam sclerotherapy was the method of choice for correction of postoperative treatment.

### PMID 36762899 (2023) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Fetal Endoscopic Third Ventriculostomy Is Technically Feasible in Prenatally Induced Hydrocephalus Ovine Model.
DOI: 10.1227/neu.0000000000002361 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Congenital obstructive hydrocephalus generates progressive irreversible fetal brain damage by ventricular enlargement and incremental brain tissue compression that leads to maldevelopment and poor clinical outcomes. Intrauterine treatments such as ventriculo-amniotic shunting have been unsuccessfully tried in the eighties.
OBJECTIVE: To assess if prenatal endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) is feasible in a large animal model and optimize this technique for ventricular decompression and potential arrest of fetal brain damage in fetal lambs.
METHODS: We generated hydrocephalus in 50 fetal lambs by injecting a polymeric agent into the cisterna magna at midgestation (E85). Subsequently, 3 weeks later (E105), fetal ETV was performed using a small rigid fetoscope. The endoscopy entry point was located anterior to the coronal suture, 7 mm from the midline.
RESULTS: We obtained clear visualization of the enlarged lateral ventricles by endoscopy in the hydrocephalic fetal lambs. The floor of the third ventricle was bluntly perforated and passed with the scope for a successful ETV. Total success was achieved in 32/50 cases (64%). Causes of failure were blurred vision or third ventricle obliteration by BioGlue in 10/50 (20%) cases, anatomic misdirection of the endoscope in 5 (10%) cases, 2 cases of very narrow foramen of Monro, and 1 case of choroid plexus bleeding. If we exclude the cases artificially blocked by the polymer, we had a successful performance of prenatal-ETV in 80% (32/40) of hydrocephalic fetuses.
CONCLUSION: Despite the inherent difficulties arising from ovine brain anatomy, this study shows that innovative fetal ETV is technically feasible in hydrocephalic fetal lambs.

### PMID 34668154 (2023) — Journal of nuclear cardiology : official publication of the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology
TITLE: Previous BioGlue repair mimicking cardiac infection with 18F-FDG PET imaging.
DOI: 10.1007/s12350-021-02807-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 38187484 (2023) — Postepy w kardiologii interwencyjnej = Advances in interventional cardiology
TITLE: Percutaneous interventions of coronary artery fistulas: a single-center experience.
DOI: 10.5114/aic.2023.133230 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Coronary artery fistula (CAF) is a congenital communication between the coronary artery and other vascular structures or cardiac chambers. Percutaneous CAF closure is an emerging alternative to surgery, but long-term outcome data are limited.
AIM: To review our center's experience with percutaneous CAF closure methods.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Patients who were admitted to our department and underwent percutaneous coronary artery fistula intervention between January 2002 and April 2022 due to presence of CAF-related symptoms or complications were retrospectively analyzed. Data were obtained retrospectively from the hospital electronic database.
RESULTS: A total of 39 patient were included. Mean age was 57.3 &#xb1;12.5 years and 23 (59%) patients were male. The most common symptom was angina (69.2%) and 51.2% of the patients were under treatment with at least one anti-anginal agent at admission. The right coronary artery (n = 19) and left anterior descending artery (n = 19) were the most common sites of CAF origin, and the pulmonary artery (n = 22) was the main drainage site. Coil embolization was performed most frequently and occlusion via cyanoacrylate in 3 patients and detachable balloon angioplasty in 1 patient were preferred. Percutaneous occlusion was achieved in 34 cases, 2 of the 5 failed cases underwent surgical occlusion, and remaining patients were treated with anti-anginal drugs. Complications occurred in 6 (15.3%) patients and all of the patients recovered without sequelae.
CONCLUSIONS: Coronary artery fistulas may present with different symptoms or complications and there are several techniques for percutaneous occlusion. Percutaneous closure of CAF is feasible and safe in anatomically suitable vessels, with good results at follow-up.

### PMID 38021278 (2023) — Jornal vascular brasileiro
TITLE: The essential role of thoracic duct embolization in management of traumatic iatrogenic chylothorax.
DOI: 10.1590/1677-5449.20230101 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study aims to describe a case series of patients who underwent thoracic duct embolization (TDE) to treat traumatic iatrogenic chylothorax (TIC). Three patients were included: Case #1, a 49-year-old woman with follicular lymphoma developed a TIC following video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery to resect a solid right paravertebral mass and was treated with TDE using microcoils and N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue. Case #2, a 68-year-old man with cardiac amyloidosis developed a TIC following heart transplantation and was treated with TDE using microcoils and ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer. Case#3: A 6-year-old patient with congenital heart disease developed a TIC following a Fontan procedure and was treated with TDE using NBCA glue. All lesions were identified during lymphangiography and TDE was successfully performed in all cases. TDE is a safe and valuable technique that provides minimally invasive treatment for TCI. Este estudo objetiva descrever uma s&#xe9;rie de casos de pacientes submetidos a emboliza&#xe7;&#xe3;o do ducto tor&#xe1;cico (EDT) para tratamento de quilot&#xf3;rax iatrog&#xea;nico (QI). Tr&#xea;s pacientes foram inclu&#xed;dos. Caso 1: um homem de 49 anos com linfoma folicular apresentou QI ap&#xf3;s ressec&#xe7;&#xe3;o de uma massa paravertebral por toracoscopia v&#xed;deo-assistida e foi submetido a EDT com micromolas e n-butil-cianoacrilato (NBCA). Caso 2: um homem de 68 anos com amiloidose card&#xed;aca apresentou QI ap&#xf3;s ser submetido a transplante card&#xed;aco e foi submetido a EDT com micromolas e copol&#xed;mero de etileno e &#xe1;lcool vin&#xed;lico. Caso 3: um paciente de 6 anos com malforma&#xe7;&#xe3;o card&#xed;aca cong&#xea;nita apresentou QI ap&#xf3;s cirurgia de Fontan e foi submetido a EDT com NBCA. Todas as les&#xf5;es foram identificadas durante a linfangiografia, e a EDT foi realizada com sucesso. A EDT &#xe9; uma t&#xe9;cnica segura e valiosa, que pode oferecer um tratamento minimamente invasivo em casos de QI.

### PMID 37650514 (2023) — Diagnostic and interventional radiology (Ankara, Turkey)
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of transcatheter arterial embolization for hemodynamically unstable bleeding after percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy.
DOI: 10.4274/dir.2023.232253 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) in controlling hemodynamically unstable bleeding following a percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy (PTNB).
METHODS: A total of seven patients (four men and three women; mean age, 62 &#xb1; 12 years) who received TAE for post-PTNB bleeding between May 2007 and March 2022 were included. The observed types of bleeding were hemothorax (n = 3), hemoptysis (n = 2), and a combination of both (n = 2). In patients with active bleeding, the technical success of TAE was defined as superselective embolization of the target artery with no active bleeding visible on post-TAE angiography. Clinical success was defined as sustained cessation of bleeding without hemodynamic instability, requirement of repeat TAE, or the need for post-TAE hemostatic surgery during the initial admission. The metrics analyzed included technical and clinical success rates, complications, and 30-day mortality.
RESULTS: All seven patients achieved technical success, with a clinical success rate of 86% (6/7). Six patients were discharged alive, while one patient died of respiratory failure accompanied by hemothorax 19 days post-biopsy. The angiographic findings associated with bleeding were contrast media extravasation or pseudoaneurysm (n = 3) and vascular hypertrophy with tortuosity (n = 2). The implicated bleeding arteries included the intercostal artery (n = 2), bronchial artery (n = 2), and internal thoracic artery (n = 1). In two cases, no clear bleeding foci were identified; nonetheless, prophylactic embolization was performed on the right intercostal artery (n = 1) and right intercostobronchial trunk (n = 1). The embolic agents utilized included microcoils (n = 1), gelatin sponge particles (n = 2), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with gelatin sponge particles (n = 1), PVA with microcoils (n = 1), microcoils with gelatin sponge particles (n = 1), and microcoils with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and gelatin sponge particles (n = 1). The 30-day mortality rate was 14% (1/7). No ischemic complications related to TAE were observed.
CONCLUSION: The study suggests that TAE is safe and effective for controlling hemodynamically unstable bleeding following a PTNB.

### PMID 37598489 (2023) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Is intraoperative embolization with n-butyl cyanoacrylate an alternative option in carotid body tumors surgery? A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2023.108636 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: The risk of intraoperative bleeding is relatively considerable because carotid body tumors (CBT) have rich vascular structures. Aim is to reduce intraoperative bleeding with preoperative embolization. We present a unique technique for the successful surgical removal of a challenging CBT using intraoperative direct percutaneous intratumoral n-butyl cyanoacrylate (n-BCA) embolization in a patient whose preoperative embolization failed and the operation could not be continued due to intraoperative bleeding.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A 67-year-old female patient presented with 7&#xa0;cm Shamblin class 3 CBT on her right neck. Due to the failure of the preoperative embolization, bleeding developed during the operation. In the case of Shamblin class 3 CBT, the primary concern was not the volume of bleeding, but the difficulty in seeing the dissection line due to hemorrhage. Intraoperative n-BCA straight embolization totally controlled the bleeding. The CBT was then readily removed.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: Effective management of intraoperative hemorrhage is essential to ensure successful progression of surgical procedures of CBT. Hemorrhage causes complete disappearance of the dissection line, which is already difficult to detect due to adventitia invasion. It is clear that another method is needed when preoperative embolization or covered stenting fails. n-BCA has been used in the endovenous treatment of varicose veins for a long time, but to the best of our knowledge, there is no other case of its use in intraoperative CBT embolization.
CONCLUSION: Direct intraoperative embolization with n-BCA may be an alternative when other techniques are insufficient.

### PMID 37545182 (2023) — Acta radiologica (Stockholm, Sweden : 1987)
TITLE: Unraveling the enigma of Adamkiewicz: exploring the prevalence, anatomical variability, and clinical impact in spinal embolization procedures for bone metastases.
DOI: 10.1177/02841851231191761 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The artery of Adamkiewicz (AKA) is vital for spinal cord blood supply. Its role in embolization procedures for bone metastases can cause serious complications. We explored its prevalence, anatomical variation, and effect on spinal embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) in patients with bone metastases.
PURPOSE: To understand the impact and variability of AKA in spinal embolizations in cases of bone metastases to reduce complications and improve patient outcomes.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We examined data from 454 patients who underwent spinal embolization with NBCA between 2009 and 2018. The presence, anastomoses, and tumor features of AKA were assessed via pre-procedure imaging and angiography. Complications were classified per the CIRSE Classification System.
RESULTS: AKA was found in 22.8% of patients, predominantly left-sided and originating from T8 to L1. Direct and indirect anastomoses were present in 66.6% and 33.4% of patients, respectively. Extra-compartmental invasion was linked with direct anastomosis (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.004). High-grade complications were rare but included one instance of bilateral lower limb paralysis. Partial embolization was necessary in 22.8% of cases due to AKA.
CONCLUSION: The study underscores the need for rigorous preoperative evaluation of AKA origin and anastomoses in patients undergoing spinal embolization for bone metastases. Given the significant presence of AKA and related anastomoses, especially with renal extra-compartmental tumors, caution is advised to reduce complications and optimize patient outcomes. Further research is required for best practice guidelines involving bone metastases and AKA.

### PMID 37388261 (2023) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Transcatheter arterial embolization of a type 2 endoleak through the dorsal pancreatic artery after the hybrid repair of a thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2023.05.047 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 83-year-old woman with a history of hybrid repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm presented with enlargement of the aneurysm due to a type 2 endoleak from the celiac artery. The endoleak cavity was accessed via the dorsal pancreatic artery, and embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate and coils was successfully performed. When celiac artery branches are embolized during hybrid repair of a thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm, attention should be paid to the dorsal pancreatic artery to appropriately determine which branches are to be embolized, because a nonembolized dorsal pancreatic artery may lead to type 2 endoleaks.

### PMID 37109448 (2023) — Life (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Endovascular Aneurysm Sac Embolization for Treatment of Ruptured Aneurysms in the Aortoiliac Segment Using N-Butyl-Cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.3390/life13040919 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background Aneurysmal rupture in the aortoiliac segment is a severe, life-threatening condition. Nowadays, in addition to surgical treatment, the implantation of a covered stent graft constitutes a feasible, minimally invasive treatment option. A novel approach is the add-on of transarterial aneurysm sac embolization with N-butyl-cyanoacrylate (NBCA). Here, we report our experience of performing this add-on embolization procedure after endovascular aneurysm repair for complex ruptured aneurysms of the aortoiliac segment. Material and Methods We describe six patients (mean age of 75.2 years; all male) with ruptured aneurysms in the visceral aortic and aortoiliac segment in whom a high-volume transarterial aneurysm sac embolization was performed as an add-on therapy to the implantation of an aortic prosthesis. The aim of this add-on intervention was to achieve the definite embolization of the aneurysmal rupture site and to ensure the best possible aneurysmal sealing. We report the feasibility, technical success, and considerations of using NBCA as well as clinical and follow-up imaging results, given their availability. Results Technical success was achieved in all cases. Clinical success was achieved in four cases. No periprocedural complications or reinterventions were reported. The mean full procedure time was 107.8 min. The mean radiation dose was 12,966.1 cGy/cm2. A mean amount of 10.7 mL of NBCA mixed with lipiodol in a 1:3 to 1:5 ratio was used for all patients. Available follow-up imaging up to 36 months after the procedure showed no aneurysm progression or endoleaks. In two patients, the NBCA cast had almost fully dissolved over the course of follow-up. Conclusions Our study underscores the notion that aneurysm sac embolization using high volumes of NBCA with ethiodized oil as an embolic agent is a feasible and add-on treatment option for optimizing the exclusion of the aneurysm from patients with ruptured aneurysms in the aortoiliac segment.

### PMID 36894006 (2023) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Left Distal Transradial Approach for the Treatment of a Sacral Extradural Arteriovenous Fistula: A Technical Note and Literature Review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.02.141 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016454">Review, Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Sacral extradural arteriovenous fistula (SEAVF) is relatively rare, and its etiology is unknown. They are mostly fed by the lateral sacral artery (LSA). For endovascular treatment, both the stability of the guiding catheter and accessibility of the microcatheter to the fistula, distal to the LSA are required for sufficient embolization of the fistulous point. Cannulation of these vessels requires either crossover at the aortic bifurcation or retrograde cannulation using the transfemoral approach. However, atherosclerotic femoral and tortuous aortoiliac vessels can make the procedure technically difficult. Although the right transradial approach (TRA) can reduce this difficulty by straightening the access route, a potential risk remains for cerebral embolism because it passes the aortic arch. Herein, we present a case of successful embolization of a SEAVF using a left distal TRA.
METHODS: We report a case of a 47-year-old man with SEAVF treated with embolization using a left distal TRA. Lumbar spinal angiography showed a SEAVF with an intradural vein through the epidural venous plexus fed by the left LSA. A 6-French guiding sheath was cannulated into the internal iliac artery via the descending aorta using the left distal TRA. A microcatheter could be advanced into the extradural venous plexus over the fistula point from the intermediate catheter placed at the LSA. Embolization with coils and n-butyl cyanoacrylate was successfully performed.
RESULTS: The SEAVF completely disappeared on neuroimaging, and the patient gradually recovered.
CONCLUSIONS: Left distal TRA could be a useful, safe, and less invasive option for the embolization of SEAVF, especially for patients with high-risk factors for aortogenic embolism or puncture site complications.

### PMID 36675400 (2023) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Horner's Syndrome and Lymphocele Following Thyroid Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm12020474 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Horner&#x2019;s syndrome (HS), caused by lesions of the 3-neuron oculosympathetic nerve pathway (ONP), includes the triad: blepharoptosis, miosis and anhidrosis (ipsilateral with ONP damage). Thyroid&#x2212;related HS represents an unusual entity underling thyroid nodules/goiter/cancer&#x2212;HS (T-HS), and post-thyroidectomy HS (Tx-HS). We aim to overview Tx-HS. This is a narrative review. We revised PubMed published, full-length, English papers from inception to November 2022. Additionally, we introduced data on post-thyroidectomy lymphocele/chylous leakage (Tx-L), and introduced a new pediatric case with both Tx-HS and Tx-L. Tx-HS: the level of statistical evidence varies from isolated case reports, studies analyzing the large panel of post-thyroidectomy complications reporting HS among the rarest side effects (as opposite to hypocalcemia), or different series of patients with HS due to various disorders, including T-HS/Tx-HS. Tx-HS is related to benign or malignant thyroid conditions, regardless the type of surgery. A pre-operatory rate of T-HS of 0.14%; a post-operatory rate of Tx-HS between 0.03% and 5% (mostly, 0.2%) are identified; a possible higher risk on endoscopic rather than open procedure is described. Incomplete HS forms, and pediatric onset are identified, too; the earliest identification is after 2 h since intervention. A progressive remission is expected in most cases within the first 2&#x2212;6 months to one year. The management is mostly conservative; some used glucocorticoids and neurotrophic agents. One major pitfall is an additional contributor factor like a local compression due to post-operatory collections (hematoma, cysts, fistula, Tx-L) and their correction improves the outcome. The prognostic probably depends on the severity of cervical sympathetic chain (CSC) lesions: indirect, mild injury due to local compressive masses, intra-operatory damage of CSC like ischemia and stretching of CSC by the retractor associate HS recovery, while CSC section is irreversible. Other iatrogenic contributors to HS are: intra-operatory manipulation of parathyroid glands, thyroid microwave/radiofrequency ablation, and high-intensity focused ultrasound, and percutaneous ethanol injection into thyroid nodules. Tx-L, rarely reported (mostly &lt;0.5%, except for a ratio of 8.3% in one study), correlates with extended surgery, especially lateral/central neck dissection, and the presence of congenitally&#x2014;aberrant lymphatic duct; it is, also, described after endoscopic procedures and chest-breast approach; it starts within days after surgery. Typically low-fat diet (even fasting and parental nutrition) and tube drainage are useful (as part of conservative management); some used octreotide, local sealing solutions like hypertonic glucose, Viscum album extract, n-Butyl-2-cyanoacrylate. Re-intervention is required in severe cases due to the risk of lymphorrhoea and chylothorax. Early identification of Tx-HS and Tx-L improves the outcome. Some iatrogenic complications are inevitable and a multifactorial model of prediction is still required, also taking into consideration standardized operatory procedures, skillful intra-operatory manipulation, and close post-operatory follow-up of the patients, especially during modern era when thyroid surgery registered a massive progress allowing an early discharge of the patients.

### PMID 36653826 (2023) — BMC pulmonary medicine
TITLE: Cyanoacrylate glue foreign body after CT-guided localization of a pulmonary nodule during video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s12890-023-02321-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A tracheal foreign body is a common airway aspiration that creates an emergency, which often causes unobserved respiratory problems and requires management. Iatrogenic tracheal foreign bodies are rarely observed, which results in tracheal obstruction. If the foreign body were removed from the tracheobronchial system, it would save lives. A similar case of a tracheal foreign body was focused on, which was caused by medical glue used during preoperative computed tomography localization of pulmonary nodules.
CASE PRESENTATION: The foreign body was deposited in the right upper bronchi, accidentally discovered after anesthesia when a double-lumen tube was located by fiber bronchoscopy. Following a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, the foreign body was removed using a respiratory endoscopy without subsequent adverse consequences for the patient.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a risk of complications from iatrogenic airway foreign bodies for preoperative localization of pulmonary nodules by injecting cyanoacrylate glue.

### PMID 37109201 (2023) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: A Comparison of Tissue Adhesive Material and Suture as Wound-Closure Techniques following Carpal Tunnel Decompression: A Single-Center Randomized Control Trial.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm12082864 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is the most common peripheral neuropathy caused by compression of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel. The presented study aimed to evaluate clinical outcomes by comparing two techniques of wound closure following carpal tunnel surgery in subjects randomized to the application of tissue adhesive or sutures.
METHODS: From April 2022 to December 2022, a single-center randomized prospective trial was conducted at the University Hospital of Split in Croatia. The study participants consisted of 100 patients (70 females) aged 61.56 &#xb1; 12.03 years, randomly assigned to suture-based wound closure (n = 50) or tissue adhesive-based wound closure (n = 50) with two-component skin adhesive Glubran Tiss 2&#xae;. The outcomes were assessed postoperatively during the follow-up period at intervals of 2, 6, and 12 weeks. A scar assessment was performed using the POSAS (Patient and Observer Scar Assessment Scale) and cosmetic VAS (Visual Analog Scale). The VNRS (Verbal Number Rating Scale) was used to assess pain.
RESULTS: There were significant differences between glue-based wound closure and suture-based wound closure at 2-week and 6-week intervals after the surgery on the POSAS and cosmetic-VAS scales (better aesthetic effect with glue-based wound closure technique where noticed), with less postoperative pain at the same intervals. With the 12-week interval, differences in outcomes were insignificant.
CONCLUSIONS: This trial demonstrated that cyanoacrylate-based adhesion mixtures might be possibly superior in the short term in terms of cosmetic appearance and discomfort compared to conventional skin suturing techniques for the closing of surgical wounds following open CTS decompression, but there was no difference between both procedures in the long term.

### PMID 36949182 (2023) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Venous Leak Embolization in Patients with Venogenic Erectile Dysfunction via Deep Dorsal Penile Vein Access: Safety and Early Efficacy.
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-023-03412-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This all-comers registry aimed to assess safety and early efficacy of venous embolization in patients with venogenic erectile dysfunction due to venous leak in an unselected cohort.
METHODS: Between October 2019 and September 2022, patients with venogenic erectile dysfunction resistant to phosphodiesterase-5-inhibitors were treated with venous embolization using ultrasound-guided anterograde access via a deep dorsal penile vein in a single center. A mix of ethiodized oil and modified cyanoacrylate-based glue n-butyl 2 cyanoacrylate (NBCA) monomer plus methacryloxy-sulpholane monomer (Glubran-2, GEM, Italy) was used as liquid embolic agent. Prior to embolization, venous leak had been verified based on penile duplex sonography and computed tomography cavernosography. Procedural success was defined as technically successful and complete target vein embolization. The primary safety outcome measure was any major adverse event 6&#xa0;weeks after the procedure. The primary feasibility outcome measure was IIEF-15 (International Index of Erectile Function-15) score improvement&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;4 points in&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;50% of subjects on 6&#xa0;weeks follow-up post intervention.
RESULTS: Fifty consecutive patients (mean age 61.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;10.0&#xa0;years) with severe erectile dysfunction due to venous leak underwent venous embolization. Procedural success was achieved in 49/50 (98%) of patients with no major adverse events on follow-up. The primary feasibility outcome measure at 6&#xa0;weeks was reached by 34/50 (68%) of patients.
CONCLUSION: Venous leak embolization via deep dorsal penile vein access using a liquid embolic agent was safe for all and efficacious in the majority of patients with severe venogenic erectile dysfunction on 6&#xa0;weeks follow-up.

### PMID 36800489 (2023) — The Cochrane database of systematic reviews
TITLE: Drugs to reduce bleeding and transfusion in major open vascular or endovascular surgery: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD013649.pub2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review, Network Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Vascular surgery may be followed by internal bleeding due to inadequate surgical haemostasis, abnormal clotting, or surgical complications. Bleeding ranges from minor, with no transfusion requirement, to massive, requiring multiple blood product transfusions. There are a number of drugs, given systemically or applied locally, which may reduce the need for blood transfusion.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness and safety of anti-fibrinolytic and haemostatic drugs and agents in reducing bleeding and the need for blood transfusion in people undergoing major vascular surgery or vascular procedures with a risk of moderate or severe (&gt; 500 mL) blood loss.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched: Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials; MEDLINE; Embase; CINAHL, and Transfusion Evidence Library. We also searched the WHO ICTRP and ClinicalTrials.gov trial registries for ongoing and unpublished trials. Searches used a combination of MeSH and free text terms from database inception to 31 March 2022, without restriction on language or publication status.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in adults of drug treatments to reduce bleeding due to major vascular surgery or vascular procedures with a risk of moderate or severe blood loss, which used placebo, usual care or another drug regimen as control.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard Cochrane methods. Our primary outcomes were units of red cells transfused and all-cause mortality. Our secondary outcomes included risk of receiving an allogeneic blood product, risk of reoperation or repeat procedure due to bleeding, risk of a thromboembolic event, risk of a serious adverse event and length of hospital stay. We used GRADE to assess certainty of evidence.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 22 RCTs with 3393 participants analysed, of which one RCT with 69 participants was reported only in abstract form, with no usable data. Seven RCTs evaluated systemic drug treatments (three aprotinin, two desmopressin, two tranexamic acid) and 15 RCTs evaluated topical drug treatments (drug-containing bioabsorbable dressings or glues), including fibrin, thrombin, collagen, gelatin, synthetic sealants and one investigational new agent. Most trials were conducted in high-income countries and the majority of the trials only included participants undergoing elective surgery. We also identified two ongoing RCTs. We were unable to perform the planned network meta-analysis due to the sparse reporting of outcomes relevant to this review. Systemic drug treatments We identified seven trials of three systemic drugs: aprotinin, desmopressin and tranexamic acid, all with placebo controls. The trials of aprotinin and desmopressin were small with very low-certainty evidence for all of our outcomes. Tranexamic acid versus placebo was the systemic drug comparison with the largest number of participants (2 trials; 1460 participants), both at low risk of bias. The largest of these included a total of 9535 individuals undergoing a number of different higher risk surgeries and reported limited information on the vascular subgroup (1399 participants). Neither trial reported the number of units of red cells transfused per participant up to 30 days. Three outcomes were associated with very low-certainty evidence due to the very wide confidence intervals (CIs) resulting from small study sizes and low number of events. These were: all-cause mortality up to 30 days; number of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion up to 30 days; and risk of requiring a repeat procedure or operation due to bleeding. Tranexamic acid may have no effect on the risk of thromboembolic events up to 30 days (risk ratio (RR) 1.10, 95% CI 0.88 to 1.36; 1 trial, 1360 participants; low-certainty evidence due to imprecision). There is one large ongoing trial (8320 participants) comparing tranexamic acid versus placebo in people undergoing non-cardiac surgery who are at high risk of requiring a red cell transfusion. This aims to complete recruitment in April 2023. This trial has primary outcomes of proportion of participants transfused with red blood cells and incidence of venous thromboembolism (DVT or PE). Topical drug treatments Most trials of topical drug treatments were at high risk of bias due to their open-label design (compared with usual care, or liquids were compared with sponges). All of the trials were small, most were very small, and few reported clinically relevant outcomes in the postoperative period. Fibrin sealant versus usual care was the topical drug comparison with the largest number of participants (5 trials, 784 participants). The five trials that compared fibrin sealant with usual care were all at high risk of bias, due to the open-label trial design with no measures put in place to minimise reporting bias. All of the trials were funded by pharmaceutical companies. None of the five trials reported the number of red cells transfused per participant up to 30 days or the number of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion up to 30 days. The other three outcomes were associated with very low-certainty evidence with wide confidence intervals due to small sample sizes and the low number of events, these were: all-cause mortality up to 30 days; risk of requiring a repeat procedure due to bleeding; and risk of thromboembolic disease up to 30 days. We identified one large trial (500 participants) comparing fibrin sealant versus usual care in participants undergoing abdominal aortic aneurysm repair, which has not yet started recruitment. This trial lists death due to arterial disease and reintervention rates as primary outcomes.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Because of a lack of data, we are uncertain whether any systemic or topical treatments used to reduce bleeding due to major vascular surgery have an effect on: all-cause mortality up to 30 days; risk of requiring a repeat procedure or operation due to bleeding; number of red cells transfused per participant up to 30 days or the number of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion up to 30 days. There may be no effect of tranexamic acid on the risk of thromboembolic events up to 30 days, this is important as there has been concern that this risk may be increased. Trials with sample size targets of thousands of participants and clinically relevant outcomes are needed, and we look forward to seeing the results of the ongoing trials in the future.

### PMID 36441022 (2023) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Volumetric analysis of effectiveness of embolization for preventing type II endoleaks following endovascular aortic aneurysm repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2022.10.033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The presence of endoleak was associated with the failure of endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) treatment. The key to eliminating type II endoleak has shifted from reintervention to prevention. This study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of applying fibrin sealant to prevent type II endoleak in conjunction with EVAR.
METHODS: All patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm who underwent EVAR from June 2019 to July 2021 were reviewed. Patients were grouped as Group A: standard EVAR with preemptive embolization and Group B: standard EVAR alone. The primary endpoint was the incidence of type II endoleak. The secondary endpoints were aneurysm sac regression, the inferior mesenteric artery patency, the numbers of patent lumbar arteries, and all-cause mortality.
RESULTS: A total of 104 patients were included in Group A, and 116 were included in Group B. Technical success rate was 100%. The overall incidence of type II endoleak in Group A was significantly lower than that in Group B (4.8% vs 19.0%). The mean time of freedom from type II endoleak was 22.71&#xa0;months for Group A (95% confidence interval, 21.59-23.83&#xa0;months) and 19.89&#xa0;months for Group B (95% confidence interval, 18.08-21.70&#xa0;months). The Kaplan-Meier estimate of freedom from type II endoleak showed a significantly longer duration of freedom from type II endoleak in Group A (81.0% vs 95.2%). Group A showed a continuous sac regression tendency. In Group B, the sac volume decreased within 12&#xa0;months but increased by 3.07&#xa0;cm3 at 24&#xa0;months. No complications were noted in both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Nonselective preemptive embolization with porcine fibrin sealant during EVAR was safe and effective in preventing type II endoleak in the short and mid-term. Preemptive embolization can lead to a significantly higher sac regression rate. Larger patient populations and longer follow-ups with randomized control designed trials are expected to verify the long-term effectiveness and safety of preemptive embolization in preventing type II endoleak.

### PMID 31502478 (2023) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Post-surgical thoracic spinal cord herniation following an unrepaired dural defect: a rare complication.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2019.1661966 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgery for ossification of the ligamentum flavum (OLF) comes with a relatively high risk of dural tear. We report a 50-year-old woman, who presented with symptomatic spinal stenosis from OLF at T11-T12 and lower lumbar spondylosis for which a single stage posterior decompression and instrumented fusion of both sites was done. Removal of the OLF resulted in a small dural tear with intact arachanoid which was covered using a fibrin sealant. In the first post-operative day, the patient's neurology started deteriorating. An MR scan was done to look for hematoma. It showed the spinal cord herniating out of the thecal sac at the operated level. Emergency re-operation was done to reduce the herniation and the dural defect was repaired. The patient gradually recovered to her best functional status. Based on this experience, we advise primary repair of inadvertent durotomies.

### PMID 37427979 (2023) — Science progress
TITLE: Fibrin Sealant TISSEEL Lyo as a haemostatic agent in vascular surgery: Results of randomized, controlled, patient-blinded, multicentre clinical study in the Russian population.
DOI: 10.1177/00368504231182834 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Multicenter Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This phase III, controlled, patient-blinded, multicentre study in two parallel, equal-sized treatment groups compared the efficacy and safety of TISSEEL Lyo, fibrin sealant versus Manual Compression (MC) with surgical gauze pads for use as a haemostatic agent in patients who underwent vascular surgery in Russia.
METHODS: Adult patients, both genders, who received peripheral vascular expanded polytetrafluoroethylene conduits and had suture line bleeding after surgical haemostasis were enrolled. Patients were randomized to be treated with TISSEEL Lyo or MC. The bleeding needed additional treatment and had to be assessed as grade 1 or 2 bleeding according to the Validated Intraoperative Bleeding scale. The primary efficacy endpoint was the proportion of patients achieving haemostasis at 4&#x2005;min after treatment application (T4) at the study suture line, which was maintained until the closure of the surgical wound. The secondary efficacy endpoints included the proportion of patients achieving haemostasis at 6&#x2005;min (T6) and 10&#x2005;min (T10) after treatment application at the study suture line, which was maintained until closure of the surgical wound, as well as the proportion of patients with intraoperative and postoperative rebleeding. Safety outcomes included incidence of adverse events (AEs), surgical site infections and graft occlusions.
RESULTS: A total of 110 patients were screened; 104 patients were randomized: (TISSEEL Lyo: 51 [49%] patients; MC: 53 [51%] patients). T4 haemostasis was achieved in 43 (84.3%) patients in the TISSEEL Lyo group and in 11 (20.8%) patients in the MC group (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Significantly more patients in TISSEEL Lyo group achieved the haemostasis at T6 (relative risk (RR) of achieving haemostasis 1.74 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.37; 2.35]) and T10 (RR 1.18 [95% CI 1.05; 1.38]) versus MC. No one had intraoperative rebleeding. Postoperative rebleeding was reported only in one patient in the MC group. No treatment-emergent serious AEs (TESAEs) related to TISSEEL Lyo/MC, TESAEs leading to withdrawal and TESAEs leading to death were reported in patients during the study.
CONCLUSIONS: Data demonstrated TISSEEL Lyo had clinically and statistically significant superiority to MC as a haemostatic agent in vascular surgery at all measured time points including 4, 6 and 10&#x2005;min and had proven to be safe.

### PMID 36861575 (2023) — Neurology India
TITLE: Is Popularity of Fibrin Glue a Misrepresentation? A Comparative Study with Fibrin Glue and Suture Anastomosis in Rat Sciatic Nerve Injury Analysing Functional, Histological, Electrophysiological Parameters.
DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.370473 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin glue as an adjunct in peripheral nerve injuries has gained recent popularity. Whether fibrosis and inflammatory processes which are the major hindrances in repair reduce with fibrin glue has more of theoretical support than experimental.
METHODOLOGY: A prospective nerve repair study was conducted between two different species of rats as donor and recipient. Four comparison groups with 40 rats were outlined with or without fibrin glue in immediate post-injury period with fresh or cold preserved grafts were examined based on histological, macroscopic, functional, and electrophysiological criteria.
RESULTS: There was suture site granuloma along with neuroma formation and inflammatory reaction and severe epineural inflammation in allografts with immediate suturing (Group A), whereas suture site inflammation and epineural inflammation were negligible in cold preserved allografts with immediate suturing (Group B). Allografts with minimal suturing and glue (Group C) had less severe epineural inflammation with less severe suture site granuloma and neuroma formation as compared to first two groups. Continuity of nerve was partial in later group as compared to other two. In fibrin glue only group (Group D), suture site granuloma and neuroma were absent, with negligible epineural inflammation, but continuity nerve was partial to absent in most of the rats with some showing partial continuity. Functionally, microsuturing with or without glue demonstrated significant difference with better SLR and toe spread (p = 0.042) as compared with only glue. Electrophysiologically, NCV was maximum in Group A and least in Group D at 12 weeks. We report significant difference in CMAP and NCV between microsuturing group vs. only glue group (p &lt; 0.05) and also between microsuturing with glue group vs. only glue group (p &lt; 0.05).
CONCLUSION: There may be more data required with proper standardization for adept usage of fibrin glue. Though our results have shown partial success, it nonetheless highlights the lack of sufficient data for widespread glue usage.

### PMID 36149620 (2023) — International ophthalmology
TITLE: A comparative study of conventional intermarginal split lamella with labial mucous membrane graft versus sutureless procedure using fibrin sealant to manage major trichiasis.
DOI: 10.1007/s10792-022-02541-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: In the intermarginal split lamella with labial mucous membrane graft procedure to manage major trichiasis, the graft is usually sutured in the receptor bed using 6-0 polyglactin sutures. We aimed to compare the use of fibrin sealant to seal the graft to the receptor bed versus the conventional technique using sutures.
METHODS: This is a retrospective comparative study of patients who underwent conventional intermarginal split lamella with labial mucous membrane graft or sutureless procedure using fibrin sealant (Tisseel, Baxter Healthcare Corp) between 2016 and 2021. Etiology of the trichiasis, procedure duration, postoperative discomfort and edema, complications, and follow-up period were extracted from these patients' charts.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven eyelids from 19 patients underwent the procedure: twelve patients underwent the sutureless procedure, while seven underwent the conventional procedure. Mean follow-up was 8.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.9&#xa0;months and 13.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;6.5&#xa0;months for the sutureless and conventional groups, respectively. Patients who underwent the sutureless procedure reported no postoperative foreign body sensation, while 71.4% of patients who underwent the conventional procedure reported some degree of ocular discomfort. In the sutureless group, operating time and postoperative edema were significantly reduced. Labial mucous membrane graft dehiscence was observed in one eyelid (8.3%) on the first postoperative day in the sutureless group. No dehiscence was observed in the conventional technique group.
CONCLUSION: The use of fibrin sealant showed to be a good alternative to conventional absorbable sutures. Advantages include expedited operating time, decreased postoperative discomfort, and expedite postoperative recovery.

### PMID 33538190 (2023) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Use of tissue sealant patch (TachoSil) in the management of cerebrospinal fluid leaks after anterior cervical spine discectomy and fusion.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2021.1881444 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate a fast, sutureless technique to repair anterior cervical dural tears. Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) is a commonly performed procedure for the treatment of cervical degenerative diseases. Although uncommon, incidental durotomy with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak during ACDF is a potentially serious complication. Yet, its technical management for the prevention of CSF leak is controversial.
METHODS: Between September 2012 and June 2018 we encountered seven cases (2 female/5 male) presenting with intraoperative CSF leaks secondary to incidental dural tears during ACDF surgery. All the cases were surgically treated using a topical fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil) with high adesive strength and fibrin glue (Tisseel). Intraoperative source of leakage, time to leakage control, quantity of Sealant Sponge used and postoperative complications were evaluated.
RESULTS: Dural tears were tipically the result of dissection of adherent posterior longitudinal ligament and/or calcified disc from the cervical dural sac to allow full decompression of the spinal cord. Effective repair of dural tear defined as cessation of CSF leak after topical sealant agents application was achieved no later than one minute in all cases. Evident clinical and/or radiological postoperative CSF leak was used to determine the patient's postoperative result. Postoperative CSF leak was not evident during a minimum 6 months follow up.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we have reported our experience with a new sealing technique to manage CSF leaks from iatrogenic cervical dural lacerations. Tachosil tissue sealant patch is a rapid sutureless technique that may help in repairing introperatively incidental dural tears, thus reducing the risk of postoperative CSF leaks. To our knowledge, this is the first series to report the use of Tachosil adhesive sealant patch for the treatment of incidental dural tears during anterior cervical discectomy.

### PMID 32897107 (2023) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Cauda equina syndrome after use of dural sealant in revision lumbar decompression surgery.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2020.1817855 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We report a case of cauda equina syndrome related to the use of fibrin glue dural sealant "TISSEEL".
BACKGROUND: Incidental durotomy (ID) is not uncommon in revision spinal surgery. Augmentation of the dural repair after primary closure is gaining popularity. The use of dural sealants is not risk-free.
METHOD: A 65-year old man who underwent revision lumbar decompression surgery developed postoperative cauda equina syndrome. He had urinary retention, bilateral leg pain and perianal numbness on the third postoperative day. We believe this complication was related to the use of fibrin glue to manage an ID.
RESULT: After the urgent surgical removal of the fibrin glue patch, the patient fully recovered with no residual neurological deficit.
CONCLUSION: Cauda equina syndrome development is a potential complication after the use of fibrin glue to augment intraoperative ID. Surgeons should be aware of this potential risk so it can be managed in a timely fashion.

### PMID 37820076 (2023) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Validation of Efficacy and Safety of TachoSil &#xae; Tissue Sealant for Vessel Transposition in Microvascular Decompression.
DOI: 10.1227/ons.0000000000000844 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Use of TachoSil &#xae; as the transposition material of microvascular decompression (MVD) for hemifacial spasm (HFS) and trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is easy and safe to perform, but the efficacy and safety of this technique are unknown. This study attempted to validate the efficacy and safety of TachoSil &#xae; as a transposition material of MVD.
METHODS: A retrospective study of the surgical results and complications of 63 patients (35 HFS and 28 TN) treated by the TachoSil &#xae; technique between January 2011 and December 2021 was conducted. The efficacy of the treatment was evaluated by Kaplan-Meier survival analysis. Magnetic resonance imaging follow-up study was performed to detect any adverse events including a mass formation.
RESULTS: The rate of complete disappearance of HFS was 91.4% at 1 year and estimated to be 85.7% after a 10-year follow-up. The rate of no pain without medication for TN was 85.4% at 1 year and estimated to be 69.0% after a 9-year follow-up. These surgical results are comparable with those previously reported. Flaking of TachoSil &#xae; releasing the offending artery was only recognized in one case (1.6%). Therefore, TachoSil &#xae; can be considered as an effective transposition material for MVD. TachoSil &#xae; did not increase the rate of acute and subacute adverse events such as inflammation and delayed facial palsy. Magnetic resonance imaging follow-up identified no abnormalities including mass that suggested granuloma formation.
CONCLUSION: The efficacy of the TachoSil &#xae; technique for HFS and TN and the reliability of TachoSil &#xae; as an adhesive material in MVD were verified. No adverse events associated with TachoSil &#xae; use in MVD were found. We conclude that the TachoSil &#xae; technique has relatively long efficacy and safety for MVD.

### PMID 37680221 (2023) — Translational andrology and urology
TITLE: A study of the histopathology of collagen fleece (TachoSil) patching of tunica albuginea in the rat penis and a literature review of penile graft materials in experimental animals.
DOI: 10.21037/tau-23-229 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A penile tunica defect may arise during surgery in patients with Peyronie's disease. Collagen fleece (TachoSil) has recently gained popularity in penile surgery to cover the tunica albuginea (TA) defect associated with clinical success. However, it is not known what the histological outcomes of these grafts are in the penis. We aimed to study the histopathology of the TachoSil graft in an experimental animal model for the regeneration of TA, inflammation, fibrosis, and the underlying cavernous tissue.
METHODS: Six adult male Sprague Dawley rats were used. The penis was degloved through a circumferential subcoronal incision. A longitudinal 1 mm &#xd7; 10 mm defect was created at the base of the lateral aspect of the penis. A TachoSil patch (Takeda, Japan) was applied to the defect. The penile skin covering was then restored. At 2 months, the rat penis was excised and examined with hematoxylin, eosin, and trichrome stains. We conducted a literature review of penile grafts in animals for comparison.
RESULTS: Rats weighed 369.2 gm (standard deviation: 31.5). At 2 months, all rats showed normal-looking penis with complete healing, no scaring, tethering, or gross inflammatory features. Histopathology of the patch site showed fibrosis, chronic inflammation, and foreign body giant cell reaction. There was no generation of a new TA, or new vascularity. No inflammatory or pathological reaction affected the underlying corpus cavernous tissue. One rat died on the 6th postoperative day. Postmortem showed massive multiorgan hemorrhage consistent with disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC). Unlike some other reported grafts, there is no TA regeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: TachoSil patching of penile TA defect forms a distinctive barrier against inflammation, protecting the underlying corpus cavernosum. However, no regeneration of the tunica defect is observed at 2 months. DIC is a potential complication of systemic absorption of TachoSil.

### PMID 37641071 (2023) — BMC surgery
TITLE: NHS-POx-loaded patch versus fibrin sealant patch in a porcine robotic liver bleeding model.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-023-02159-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The management of bleeding is paramount to any surgical procedure. With the increased use of less invasive laparoscopic and robotic methods, achieving hemostasis can be challenging since the surgeons cannot manually apply hemostatic agents directly onto bleeding tissue. In this study, we assessed the use of a pliable hemostatic sealant patch comprising fibrous gelatin carrier impregnated with poly(2-oxazoline) (NHS-POx) for hemostasis in robotic liver resection in a porcine bleeding model.
METHODS: The NHS-POx-loaded patch (GATT-Patch), was first evaluated in a Feasibility Study to treat surgical bleeding in 10 lesions, followed by a Comparative Study in which the NHS-POx patch was compared to a standard-of-care fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil), in 36 lesions (superficial, resection, or deep injuries mimicking metastasectomies). For each lesion type, the NHS-POx and fibrin sealant patches were used in an alternating fashion with 18 lesions treated with NHS-POx and 18 with the fibrin patch. Animal preparation and surgical procedures were consistent across studies. The primary outcome was time to hemostasis (TTH) within 3&#xa0;min for the Feasibility Study and within 5&#xa0;min for the Comparative Study.
RESULTS: In the Feasibility Study, 8 of the 10 NHS-POx-treated lesions achieved hemostasis at 30&#xa0;s and 3&#xa0;min. In the Comparative Study, all 18 NHS-POx patch-treated lesions and 9 of the 18 fibrin sealant patch-treated lesions achieved hemostasis at 5&#xa0;min. Median TTH with NHS-POx vs fibrin sealant patch was 30 vs 300&#xa0;s (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In this animal study, hemostasis during robotic liver surgery was achieved faster and more often with the NHS-POx loaded vs fibrin sealant patch.

### PMID 37449221 (2023) — World journal of clinical cases
TITLE: Collagen fleece (Tachosil&#xae;) for treating testis torsion: A case report.
DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v11.i18.4306 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Testicular torsion is an emergent disease in urology, and there has been discussion of the treatment of testicular torsion. Testicular decompression has been established as a critical treatment for testicular compartment syndrome (TCS), which occurs after detorsion in a patient who is diagnosed with testis torsion. Until now, testicular fasciotomy and incision of tunica albuginea with tunica vaginalis flap (TVF) graft have been suggested for decompression, and some studies about the efficacy of TVF were reported. However, this method is time consuming and needs meticulous technique, so other methods such as orchio-septopexy are suggested. The objective of this clinical case report was to propose new surgical method using collagen fleece (Tachosil&#xae;) instead of tunica vagina flap.
CASE SUMMARY: A 5-year-old boy with scrotal pain visited our hospital 24 h after symptom onset. After history taking, physical examination, and scrotum ultrasonography, he was diagnosed with testis torsion. Emergency surgery was performed after diagnosis. Following the incision of scrotum and fasciotomy, we covered his tunica albuginea with collagen fleece called Tachosil&#xae; instead of covering with TVF.
CONCLUSION: Short-term follow-up showed normal blood flow in testis without a TCS. This is the first case report of using Tachosil&#xae; in testicular torsion surgery, and its advantages were already reported in other surgeries like Peyronie's disease. Our case suggests this new technique is an appropriate method because of its advantages including its cost-effective and time-saving characteristics. The main limitation is the short follow-up, so more studies are needed to provide a high level of evidence about its efficacy and safety.

### PMID 37870300 (2023) — Molecular imaging and radionuclide therapy
TITLE: Long-term Intense 18F-FDG Uptake by the Homeostatic Matrix-associated Inflammatory Response May Mimic Malignancy Recurrence.
DOI: 10.4274/mirt.galenos.2023.92499 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 70-year-old man underwent right upper lobectomy for lung adenocarcinoma. During the operation, hemostatic matrix (as known Floseal&#xae;) was used to prevent pulmonary laceration-associated bleeding. When 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography was performed for staging after surgery, intense 18F-FDG uptake was observed in the cicatricial fibrotic tissue in the operation area, and no significant change was observed in that area during the 4-year follow-up. Because it remained stable for several years without treatment, this finding was thought to be due to a foreign body reaction caused by the homeostatic material. Yetmi&#x15f; ya&#x15f;&#x131;nda bir erkek hastaya, akci&#x11f;er adenokarsinomu nedeniyle sa&#x11f; &#xfc;st lobektomi uyguland&#x131;. Operasyon s&#x131;ras&#x131;nda, pulmoner laserasyona ba&#x11f;l&#x131; kanamay&#x131; &#xf6;nlemek i&#xe7;in hemostatik matriks (Floseal&#xae;) kullan&#x131;ld&#x131;. Operasyon sonras&#x131;nda evreleme amac&#x131;yla 18F-florodeoksiglukoz (FDG) pozitron emisyon tomografisi/bilgisayarl&#x131; tomografi yap&#x131;ld&#x131;&#x11f;&#x131;nda giri&#x15f;im b&#xf6;lgesindeki skatrisyel fibrotik dokuda yo&#x11f;un 18F-FDG tutulumu saptand&#x131; ve 4 y&#x131;ll&#x131;k takibinde bu bulguda anlaml&#x131; bir de&#x11f;i&#x15f;iklik g&#xf6;zlenmedi. S&#xfc;recin bir b&#xf6;l&#xfc;m&#xfc;nde tedavi uygulanmayan ve stabil olarak izlenen bulgular&#x131;n homeostatik materyalin neden oldu&#x11f;u yabanc&#x131; cisim reaksiyonundan kaynakland&#x131;&#x11f;&#x131; d&#xfc;&#x15f;&#xfc;n&#xfc;ld&#xfc;.

### PMID 37636777 (2023) — Indian journal of otolaryngology and head and neck surgery : official publication of the Association of Otolaryngologists of India
TITLE: Epistaxis Treatment Options: Literature Review.
DOI: 10.1007/s12070-023-03824-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Epistaxis means bleeding from nostrils, nasal cavity or nasopharynx. To summarize the available epistaxis treatment options. Methods: 61 articles published in the last 20&#xa0;years were included. Duplicate records, irrelevant and inaccessible ones were excluded. &#xa0;Epistaxis can be treated with first aid measures such as external pressure and ice packing and applying topical agents, e.g. oxymetazoline that stops 65-75% of nosebleeds in A&amp;E. Also, with electrocautery which is more effective and has fewer recurrences (14.5% vs. 35.1%) than chemical cauterization and applying tranexamic acid that promotes hemostasis in 78% of patients, versus 35% and 31% respectively in patients treated with oxymetazoline and nasal packing. Furthermore, nasal packing can be applied with non-absorbable materials, e.g. petroleum jelly, BIPP gauze, PVA nasal tampons (Merocel), Foley catheter, balloons (Rapid-Rhino), absorbable materials, e.g. nasal tampon (Nasopore), and with newer hemostatic materials which are more effective and with fewer complications, e.g. hemostatic gauzes (Surgicel), thrombin matrix (Floseal), gelatin sponge (Spongostan) and fibrin glue. Moreover, epistaxis can be achieved with endoscopic ligation of arteries, mainly SPA, which is more effective than conventional nasal packing (97% vs. 62%), and with endoscopic cauterization&#xa0;which is more effective than ligation. Finally, for intractable cases embolization can be applied using gelatin sponge, foam, PVA and coils with 80% success rate and comparable efficacy and complications to surgical methods. Epistaxis can be dealt with various methods depending on patient's history and available resources. Newer hemostatic agents in combination with endoscopic methods have advantages over traditional methods.

### PMID 37321020 (2023) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Haemostatic efficacy and inflammatory response of a novel beta-chitin patch in a cerebral small vessel injury model - A pilot study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2023.06.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Rapid and efficacious haemostasis is paramount in neurosurgery. Assessing the efficacy and short- and long-term safety of haemostatic agents utilised within cerebral tissue is essential. This pilot study investigates the haemostatic efficacy and long-term safety of a novel beta-chitin patch against traditionally used agents, bipolar and Floseal, within cerebral tissue.
METHODS: Eighteen Merino sheep underwent standardised distal cortical vessel injury via temporal craniotomy. Sheep were randomised to receive 2 mls Floseal, 2&#xa0;cm novel beta-chitin patch, or bipolar cautery to manage bleeding. All sheep underwent cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at three months, before euthanasia and brain harvesting for histological assessment.
RESULTS: Beta-chitin demonstrated a trend towards a faster mean time to haemostasis (TTH) compared to Floseal (223.3&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;199&#xa0;s v. 259.8&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;186.4&#xa0;s), albeit non-significant (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.234). Radiologically, cerebrocortical necrosis (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.842) and oedema (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.368) were noted slightly more frequently in the beta-chitin group. Histologically, severe fibrotic (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.017) and granulomatous changes at the craniotomy sites were only present in the beta-chitin group (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.002). Neuronal degeneration was seen in all with Floseal, but beta-chitin showed a trend towards more severe reaction when present. Bipolar use predominantly showed an inflammatory cortical reaction with substantial microvascular proliferation, and Floseal showed worse severity and depth of subpial oedema, however no statistical significance was reached.
CONCLUSION: All haemostats controlled bleeding, with beta-chitin demonstrating a non-inferior TTH compared to Floseal. However, it resulted in intense granulomatous and fibrotic changes, including degenerative neuronal reactions. More extensive studies are needed to assess these trends, to make further clinical inferences.

### PMID 37148391 (2023) — European spine journal : official publication of the European Spine Society, the European Spinal Deformity Society, and the European Section of the Cervical Spine Research Society
TITLE: A prospective randomised controlled trial evaluating prophylactic Floseal, a gelatin and thrombin-based haemostatic matrix, in postoperative drain output and blood transfusion in transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00586-023-07748-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the prophylactic use of Floseal in reducing postoperative blood loss in patients undergoing Transforaminal Lumbar Interbody Fusion (TLIF). TLIF is a lumbar spine decompression and fusion procedure with potential for postoperative blood loss. Prophylactic application of Floseal, a gelatin and thrombin-based haemostatic matrix to the surgical wound before closure was shown to be effective in reducing postoperative drain output in anterior cervical discectomy and fusion. This study postulated that prophylactic use of Floseal before wound closure would reduce postoperative blood loss in patients who underwent TLIF.
METHODS: Randomised controlled trial comparing prophylactic use of Floseal and control in patients undergoing single level or two-level TLIF. Primary outcomes included postoperative drain output within 24 h&#xa0;and postoperative transfusion rate. Secondary outcomes included days of drain placement, length of stay and haemoglobin level.
RESULTS: A total of 50 patients was recruited. Twenty six patients were allocated to the Floseal group and 24 were allocated to the control group. There were no baseline characteristic differences between the groups. There were no statistically significant differences in primary outcomes which included postoperative drain output within 24 h&#xa0;and postoperative transfusion rate between patients who received prophylactic Floseal and control. There were no statistically significant differences in secondary outcomes which included haemoglobin level, days of drain placement and length of stay between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Prophylactic use of Floseal was not shown to reduce postoperative bleeding in single level or two-level TLIF.

### PMID 33906458 (2023) — Global spine journal
TITLE: Effectiveness of a Gelatin-Thrombin Matrix Sealant (Floseal&#xae;) for Reducing Blood Loss During Microendoscopic Decompression Surgery for Lumbar Spinal Canal Stenosis: A Retrospective Cohort Study.
DOI: 10.1177/21925682211008835 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effectiveness and safety of a gelatin-thrombin matrix sealant (GTMS) during microendoscopic laminectomy (MEL) for lumbar spinal canal stenosis (LSCS).
METHODS: This study included 158 LSCS cases on hemostasis-affecting medication who underwent MEL by a single surgeon between September 2016 and August 2020. Patients were divided into 2 groups depending on whether GTMS was used (37 cases, Group A) or not (121 cases, Group B). Perioperative data related to bleeding or postoperative spinal epidural hematoma (PSEH) was investigated. Clinical outcomes were evaluated using the Japanese Orthopedic Association (JOA) score for low back pain.
RESULTS: The mean intraoperative blood loss per level was greater in Group A (26.0 &#xb1; 20.3&#x2009;g) than in Group B (13.6 &#xb1; 9.0&#x2009;g), whereas the postoperative drainage volume was smaller in Group A (79.1 &#xb1; 42.5&#x2009;g) than in Group B (97.3 &#xb1; 55.6&#x2009;g). No revision surgeries for PSEH were required in Group A, while 2 (1.7%) revisions were required in Group B (P = .957). The median JOA score improved significantly from the preoperative period to 1-year postoperatively in both Group A and B (total score, 16.0-23.5 and 17.0-25.0 points, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of GTMS during MEL for LSCS may be associated with a reduction in postoperative drainage volume. The revision rate for PSEH was not affected significantly by the use of GTMS. Clinical outcomes (represented by the JOA score) were significantly improved after the surgery, regardless of GTMS use during MEL.

### PMID 37933349 (2023) — Cureus
TITLE: Surgicel&#xae; Granuloma Mimicking Recurrent Thyroid Tumor After Thyroidectomy: A Case Report and Literature Review.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.46587 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidized regenerated cellulose, commonly known by the brand name Surgicel&#xae;, is a hemostatic agent widely used in various surgical procedures. While it is generally considered safe and effective, there have been reports of complications associated with its use, including the formation of pseudotumoral lesions. This article presents a case of a patient who developed a Surgicel&#xae; granuloma in the thyroid bed, mimicking a recurrent tumor. Surgicel&#xae; is known to cause a chronic inflammatory reaction, leading to foreign body giant cell formation and fibroblastic proliferation. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology is a valuable diagnostic tool for identifying pseudotumoral lesions caused by oxidized cellulose. The characteristic appearance of oxidized cellulose fragments and the presence of a granulomatous reaction can help distinguish these lesions from tumor recurrence or abscesses. To prevent Surgicel&#xae; granuloma, it is recommended to use the minimal amount necessary to achieve hemostasis. It is also important to document its use in the operative report. In cases where a recurrent mass lesion is suspected postoperatively, a comprehensive medical history, imaging studies, and FNA are essential for accurate diagnosis and management. This case report highlights the importance of considering Surgicel&#xae;-induced granuloma in the differential diagnosis of recurrent thyroid-bed tumors. A correct diagnosis can help avoid unnecessary aggressive interventions, particularly in cancer patients.

### PMID 37727334 (2023) — Gland surgery
TITLE: The novel use and feasibility of hemostatic oxidized regenerated cellulose agent (SurgiGuard&#xae;): multicenter retrospective study.
DOI: 10.21037/gs-22-675 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: SurgiGuard&#xae; is an absorbent hemostatic agent based on oxidized regenerated cellulose. The efficacy, effects and safety of SurgiGuard&#xae; are equivalent to existing hemostatic agents in animal experiments. This study was designed to confirm that the use of SurgiGuard&#xae; alone is effective, safe and feasible compared to combination with other hemostatic methods.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed clinical data from 12 surgery departments in seven tertiary centers in South Korea nationwide. All surgeries were performed between January and December 2018.
RESULTS: A total of 807 patients were enrolled; 447 patients (55.4%) had comorbidities. The rate of major surgery (operative time &#x2265;4 hours) was 44% (n=355 patients). Regarding the type of SurgiGuard&#xae; used in surgery, more than 70% of minor surgeries used non-woven types. In major surgery, more than five SurgiGuards&#xae; were used in 7.3% (26 patients), and the proportion of co-usage (with four other hemostatic products) was 19.7% (70 patients). The effectiveness score was higher when SurgiGuard&#xae; was used alone in both major (5.3&#xb1;0.5 vs. 5.1&#xb1;0.6, P=0.048) and minor surgery (5.4&#xb1;0.6 vs. 5.2&#xb1;0.4, P&lt;0.001). Seven patients had immediate re-bleeding, and all of them used SurgiGuard&#xae; and other products together. Nine patients reported adverse effects, such as abscess, bleeding, or leg swelling, but we found no direct correlation with SurgiGuard&#xae;.
CONCLUSIONS: SurgiGuard&#xae; exhibited greater effectiveness when used alone. No direct adverse effects associated with SurgiGuard&#xae; use were reported, and SurgiGuard&#xae; had stable feasibility. Prospective comparative studies are needed in the future.

### PMID 37657582 (2023) — International journal of biological macromolecules
TITLE: Preparation of pH-responsive oxidized regenerated cellulose hydrogels compounded with nano-ZnO/chitosan/aminocyclodextrin ibuprofen complex for wound dressing.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.126628 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Recently, using oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) to build a hydrogel system on promoting healing in wounds has a fast-growing market. However, it remains a challenge to improve the degree of oxidation of regenerated cellulose (RC) and to prepare matrices that are uniquely responsive to the wound environment. Herein, highly oxidized aldehyde-based cellulose from porous RC was prepared by NaBH4-HCl swelling and then NaIO4 oxidation pathway. Chitosan (CS), ethylenediamine-cyclodextrin (EDA-CD) along with ORC have been used to construct hydrogel matrices that are pH-responsive and capable of controlled drug release for use as future wound dressings. And zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) with antimicrobial effect and ibuprofen (IBU) with analgesic effect were piggybacked into the hydrogel system. XRD was used to study the presence of ZnO. SEM was used to observe the surface structure of the prepared hydrogel. TEM was used to observe the particle size of the ZnO NPs. Meanwhile, the oxidation conditions of the ORC were explored. Furthermore, the mechanical, swelling, water retention, cytotoxicity, bacterial inhibition properties and treatment effect, which are closely related to the application of wound dressing, were carefully researched. The unique characteristics of prepared hydrogel, including pH-responsive degradability and sustained release properties of IBU, were also investigated.

### PMID 37636794 (2023) — Indian journal of otolaryngology and head and neck surgery : official publication of the Association of Otolaryngologists of India
TITLE: Oxidized cellulose-based reaction mimicking thyroidal recurrence of disease: a case report and literature review.
DOI: 10.1007/s12070-023-03556-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: Oxidized cellulose is a hemostatic agent currently used in surgery. Foreign body reactions have been described after its use. This paper describes a foreign body reaction caused by oxidized cellulose in a young woman who underwent thyroid surgery. A patient underwent two thyroid surgeries for treatment of papillary carcinoma. Five years after the last surgery, an asymptomatic mass was detected with a routine ultrasound in the left thyroid cavity. After surgical removal, the mass turned out to be a foreign body granuloma based on oxidized cellulose sheets used in the previous surgery. The patient was discharged from the hospital without complications. The follow-up period was uneventful. Oxidized cellulose is a useful tool in surgery to control and prevent intra and post-operative bleeding. Even if it is a biodegradable material, sometimes it persists in the human body causing foreign body reactions that can be misdiagnosed.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s12070-023-03556-0.

### PMID 37526076 (2023) — Expert review of medical devices
TITLE: A contemporary systematic review of the complications associated with SURGICEL.
DOI: 10.1080/17434440.2023.2242776 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This review aims to summarize the findings from recent literature (2010-2022) reporting on complications that resulted from the surgical use of SURGICEL for intraoperative hemostasis.
METHODS: A literature search was conducted using the MEDLINE (OVID), Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials - CENTRAL (OVID) databases. The studies were sorted into case reports and other study types for data extraction. Covidence was used for data extraction and statistics were descriptive.
RESULTS: Of the total 560 articles screened, 73 papers were selected for a full-text review and 70 studies were included in this review. A total of 7,242 participants were included in the studies (case studies n&#x2009;=&#x2009;93, others n&#x2009;=&#x2009;7149). 67/70 of the included studies reported complications when SURGICEL was used intraoperatively. Reported complications included: SURGICEL induced masses (granulomas, abscesses, hematomas, cysts) (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;25), hemorrhagic complications (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12), masses misdiagnosed as tumors, cardiovascular, nervous system, and hepatobiliary complications, pain, and infections. Other complications included: fistulas, erectile dysfunction, chorioamnionitis, swelling, urinary leak, renal failure, and anaphylaxis.
CONCLUSIONS: Publications reporting on complications associated with the use of SURGICEL intraoperatively have continued to emerge. Future studies should compare how the types and rates of complications compare between SURGICEL and alternative hemostatic agents.

### PMID 37436267 (2023) — Einstein (Sao Paulo, Brazil)
TITLE: Post-thoracotomy paraplegia after oxidized cellulose spinal compression.
DOI: 10.31744/einstein_journal/2023RC0078 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Post-thoracotomy paraplegia after non-aortic surgery is an extremely uncommon complication. A 56-year-old woman presented with a 1-year history of progressive shortness of breath. Computed tomography revealed a locally advanced posterior mediastinal mass involving the ribs and the left neural foramina. Tumor excision with a left pneumonectomy was performed. Post-resection, bleeding was noted in the vicinity of the T4-T5 vertebral body, and the bleeding point was packed with oxidized cellulose gauze (Surgicel&#xae;). Postoperatively, the patient complained of bilateral leg numbness extending up to the T5 level, with bilateral paraplegia. An urgent laminectomy was performed, and we noted that the spinal cord was compressed by two masses of Surgicel&#xae; with blood clots measuring 1.5 &#xd7; 1.5cm at T4 and T5 levels. The paraplegia did not improve despite the removal of the mass, sufficient decompression, and aggressive postoperative physiotherapy. Surgeons operating in fields close to the intervertebral foramen should be aware of the possible threat to the adjacent spinal canal as helpful hemostatic agents can become a preventable threat.

### PMID 37043146 (2023) — Emergency radiology
TITLE: Do not get stumped: multimodality imaging findings of early and late post-cholecystectomy complications.
DOI: 10.1007/s10140-023-02131-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Cholecystectomy is the most performed intra-abdominal surgical procedure in the US, with 1.2 million performed annually, and is predominantly performed laparoscopically. Although largely safe, laparoscopic cholecystectomy results in higher rates of abdominal symptoms consisting of abdominal pain and dyspepsia, which may persist or recur, collectively known as post-cholecystectomy syndrome. This article aims to (1) provide an overview of post-cholecystectomy syndrome with an emphasis on biliary complications and emergent imaging findings, (2) illustrate the spectrum of imaging findings of early and late post-cholecystectomy complications, (3) enumerate the role of various imaging modalities in evaluating post-cholecystectomy complications and address the role of selective trans-catheter coil embolization in managing bile leaks, and (4) discuss pearls and pitfalls in imaging following cholecystectomy. While common first-line imaging modalities for post-cholecystectomy complications include CT and sonography, ERCP and MRCP can delineate the biliary tree with greater detail. Scintigraphy has a higher sensitivity and specificity than CT or sonography for diagnosing bile leak and may preclude the need for ERCP. Post-operative complications include biliary duct injury or leak, biliary obstruction, remnant gallbladder/cystic duct stones and inflammation, biliary dyskinesia, papillary stenosis, and vascular injury. Subtle cases resulting in lethal outcomes, such as hemorrhage from the gallbladder bed without major vessel injury, have also been described. Cases presented will include biliary complications such as post-cholecystectomy stump cholecystitis, nonbiliary complications such as subcapsular hematoma, and normal post-surgical findings such as oxidized regenerated cellulose. Post-operative biliary complications can cause significant morbidity and mortality, and thus familiarity with the expected post-surgical appearance of the gallbladder fossa and biliary tract, as well as understanding the spectrum of complications and associated multimodality imaging findings, are essential for emergency radiologists and those practicing in the acute care setting to direct appropriate patient management. Furthermore, many of the postoperative complications can be managed by noninvasive percutaneous interventional procedures, from drain placement to cystic artery and cystic duct stump embolization.

### PMID 36816516 (2023) — Molecular imaging and radionuclide therapy
TITLE: Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose can be a Cause of False Tumor Recurrence on PET/CT in Patients with Lung Cancer Treated Surgically.
DOI: 10.4274/mirt.galenos.2022.20082 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Regular follow-up of patients with lung cancer treated surgically is crucial to detect local recurrence or distant metastasis of the tumor. Postoperative follow-ups are performed with thorax computed tomography (CT) and, if necessary, positron emission tomography (PET)/CT. Sometimes, inflammatory tissue reactions due to the materials used during the surgery for hemostasis may cause the appearance of tumor recurrence in imaging modalities. In this study, we presented that oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) used intraoperatively may cause false tumor recurrence on PET/CT.
METHODS: The records of patients who had local tumor recurrence after lung cancer surgery was reviewed retrospectively. Inclusion criteria were the presence of local recurrence of cancer on PET/CT, specification of using ORC in the surgical notes, and histopathological diagnosis of the recurrence site of tumor was reported as a foreign body reaction. Data of patients were collected according to age, gender, surgery performed, adjuvant therapy status, resolution status and time ORC, and standard uptake value of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose on PET/CT.
RESULTS: Eleven patients (1 female, 10 males) who met the criteria were included in the study. The median age was 64. Histopathological results of all patients were reported as foreign body reactions. The median detection time of PET/CT positivity after surgery was 139 days (range: 52-208 days). False tumor recurrence was resolved in 8 patients (72.7%) in their control radiological examinations and median resolution time was 334 days (range: 222-762 days). The median maximum standard uptake value of the lesions was 6.2 (1.7-11) on the PET/CT.
CONCLUSION: ORC used intraoperatively in patients undergoing surgery for lung cancer may cause false tumor recurrence in imaging modalities in postsurgical follow-ups. When tumor recurrence is suspected in the follow-up of these patients, histopathological confirmation is necessary to prevent unnecessary operations and treatments.
AMA&#xc7;: Cerrahi olarak tedavi edilen akci&#x11f;er kanserli hastalar&#x131;n d&#xfc;zenli takibi, lokal n&#xfc;ks ve uzak metastaz saptanmas&#x131;nda olduk&#xe7;a &#xf6;nemlidir. Postoperatif takipler toraks bilgisayarl&#x131; tomografi (BT) ve gerekirse pozitron emisyon tomografisi (PET)/BT ile yap&#x131;l&#x131;r. Bazen hemostaz sa&#x11f;lamak i&#xe7;in ameliyat s&#x131;ras&#x131;nda kullan&#x131;lan materyallere ba&#x11f;l&#x131; enflamatuvar doku reaksiyonlar&#x131; g&#xf6;r&#xfc;nt&#xfc;leme modalitelerinde t&#xfc;m&#xf6;r n&#xfc;ks&#xfc; g&#xf6;r&#xfc;n&#xfc;m&#xfc;ne neden olabilir. Bu &#xe7;al&#x131;&#x15f;mada intraoperatif kullan&#x131;lan oksitlenmi&#x15f; rejenere sel&#xfc;lozun (ORS), PET/BT&#x2019;de yalanc&#x131; t&#xfc;m&#xf6;r n&#xfc;ks&#xfc;ne neden olabilece&#x11f;ini g&#xf6;stermeyi ama&#xe7;lad&#x131;k.
Y&#xd6;NTEM: Akci&#x11f;er kanseri cerrahisi sonras&#x131; lokal t&#xfc;m&#xf6;r n&#xfc;ks&#xfc; geli&#x15f;en hastalar&#x131;n kay&#x131;tlar&#x131; geriye d&#xf6;n&#xfc;k olarak incelendi. Dahil edilme kriterleri, PET/BT&#x2019;de lokal kanser n&#xfc;ks&#xfc; varl&#x131;&#x11f;&#x131;, cerrahi notlarda ORS kullan&#x131;m&#x131;n&#x131;n belirtilmesi ve t&#xfc;m&#xf6;r&#xfc;n n&#xfc;ks b&#xf6;lgesinin histopatolojik tan&#x131;s&#x131;n&#x131;n yabanc&#x131; cisim reaksiyonu olarak bildirilmesiydi. Hastalara ait ya&#x15f;, cinsiyet, yap&#x131;lan cerrahi, adjuvan tedavi durumu, rezol&#xfc;syon durumu ve ORC s&#xfc;resi ve PET/BT&#x2019;deki 18F-florodeoksiglukoz standart uptake de&#x11f;eri verileri topland&#x131;.
BULGULAR: Kriterleri kar&#x15f;&#x131;layan 11 hasta (1 kad&#x131;n, 10 erkek) &#xe7;al&#x131;&#x15f;maya dahil edildi. Ortanca ya&#x15f; 64 idi. T&#xfc;m hastalar&#x131;n histopatolojik raporlar&#x131; yabanc&#x131; cisim reaksiyonu olarak rapor edildi. Ameliyattan sonra PET/BT pozitifli&#x11f;inin ortanca tespit s&#xfc;resi 139 g&#xfc;nd&#xfc; (da&#x11f;&#x131;l&#x131;m: 52-208 g&#xfc;n). Kontrol radyolojik incelemelerinde 8 hastada (%72,7) t&#xfc;m&#xf6;r g&#xf6;r&#xfc;n&#xfc;m&#xfc; d&#xfc;zeldi ve ortanca iyile&#x15f;me s&#xfc;resi 334 g&#xfc;nd&#xfc; (da&#x11f;&#x131;l&#x131;m: 222-762 g&#xfc;n). PET/BT&#x2019;de lezyonlar&#x131;n ortanca maksimum standard tutulum de&#x11f;eri 6,2 idi (da&#x11f;&#x131;l&#x131;m: 1,7-11).
SONU&#xc7;: Cerrahi olarak tedavi edilen akci&#x11f;er kanserli hastalar&#x131;n takibinde t&#xfc;m&#xf6;r n&#xfc;ks&#xfc;nden &#x15f;&#xfc;phelenildi&#x11f;inde, gereksiz operasyon ve tedavileri &#xf6;nlemek i&#xe7;in histopatolojik do&#x11f;rulama gereklidir.

### PMID 36950719 (2023) — Cureus
TITLE: A Case Report of Congenital Afibrinogenemia and Literature Review of Management of Post-circumcision Bleeding.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.36459 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a case of bleeding from circumcision in a full-term newborn male resulting from a rare coagulopathy, congenital afibrinogenemia, and a review of the literature regarding the management of bleeding after circumcision. Bleeding was managed with silver nitrate, suturing, thrombin powder,&#xa0;AristaTM AH&#xa0;(absorbable hemostatic particles; Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, USA), FFP (fresh frozen plasma), and cryoprecipitate. The Fibrinogen level was less than 30 mg/dl (ref 150-430 mg/dl). The diagnosis of congenital afibrinogenemia was confirmed by a gene test. The baby was found to have a heterozygous pathogenic variant (c.510+1G&gt;T) and a heterozygous likely pathogenic variant (c.1037del) in the&#xa0;FGA&#xa0;gene.

### PMID 36327703 (2023) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: A Comparative Study of the Resorption and Immune Response for Two Starch-Based Hemostat Powders.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2022.09.022 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Powder hemostats are valuable adjuncts to minimize intraoperative and postoperative complications. In addition to promotion of rapid coagulation, resorption, and biocompatibility are desirable attributes. Plant starch-based polysaccharide hemostat powders are effective and widely used hemostatic agents, however their source and/or processing can affect characteristics such as in&#xa0;vivo degradability. For example, Arista is a purified/hydrolyzed starch powder that is rapidly resorbed in&#xa0;vivo; whereas PerClot shows slow resorption and preservation of a crystalline form.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present study, we compared the cellular response to the hemostatic agents PerClot and Arista both in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo, and used potato starch and urinary bladder extracellular matrix (UBM-ECM) as high crystallinity/slowly resorbable and prohealing controls, respectively.
RESULTS: All test articles and their degradation products were cytocompatible in&#xa0;vitro as measured by cell viability and metabolic activity of bone-marrow macrophages. PerClot induced a stronger proinflammatory, M1-like macrophage response in&#xa0;vitro (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001) than Arista, likely due to differences in source composition. Histologic examination of the in&#xa0;vivo surgical site showed the almost complete degradation of Arista after 12&#xa0;h (day 0), whereas both PerClot and potato starch were still present at 28&#xa0;d with crystals identifiable with polarized light microscopy and periodic acid Schiff (PAS) staining. Macrophage phenotype in&#xa0;vivo showed no differences between PerClot and Arista. Collagen deposition and mononuclear cell accumulation consistent with an early foreign body response were present around PerClot and potato starch crystals, whereas no such cell or connective tissue deposition was noted at the site of Arista or UBM-ECM placement.

### PMID 36655482 (2023) — Journal of materials chemistry. B
TITLE: A self-gelling starch-based sponge for hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1039/d2tb02224a | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Uncontrolled bleeding remains one of the direct causes of high mortality. There is an urgent need for developing emergency hemostats capable of coping with uncontrolled bleeding. The commercial starch-based hemostatic powder (PerClot&#xae;) requires compression during application, which limits its application in hemostasis of irregular and non-compressed wounds. Herein, a boronic acid-modified thiol starch sponge (St-SP sponge) with self-gelling properties was developed for hemorrhage control. The results show that the St-SP sponge could quickly absorb blood, self-gel and self-heal to seal the bleeding sites. In addition, the St-SP sponge can rapidly initiate the coagulation cascade and promote the adhesion and aggregation of erythrocytes and platelets. The St-SP sponge exhibited significantly improved in vitro and in vivo hemostatic abilities as compared with PerClot. Notably, the St-SP sponge attained complete hemostasis without any compression in 61.5 s and made a great difference compared to PerClot (169 s) for the irregular wound constructed on the rabbit liver. In addition, the St-SP sponge had good hemocompatibility and cytocompatibility. It turns out that the newly developed St-SP sponge is a promising material for first-aid hemostasis of irregular and non-compressed wounds.

### PMID 37410600 (2023) — World journal for pediatric &amp; congenital heart surgery
TITLE: Invited Commentary: Achieving Post-Bypass Hemostasis in Young Children: At What Cost?
DOI: 10.1177/21501351231174826 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016448">Multicenter Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Young children requiring bypass often develop coagulopathy resulting in major postoperative blood loss. Increased post-bypass bleeding and donor exposures are independently associated with adverse outcomes. When transfusion of hemostatic blood products fails to reduce bleeding to an acceptable level, rescue therapies including prothrombin complex concentrates (PCCs), and/or recombinant activated factor VII are being given "off-label" with increasing frequency. A number of studies attempting to determine the safety and efficacy of PCCs in neonates and young children are being published. These studies are most commonly retrospective, observational, performed in a single center with varying doses, indications for, and timing of administration in a small number of patients with varying results. The results of these individual studies are questionable and are not to be generalized to other center's patients. Because factor VIII inhibitor bypassing activity (FEIBA) contains the activated form of factor VII and factor X there are concerns regarding the potential for thrombotic events in a population with a known risk of postoperative thromboembolism. Currently, there is no validated assay with which to measure the efficacy of FEIBA in vivo to determine dose titration. Well-designed multicenter randomized control trials are needed to determine the optimal dose and risk-benefit of PCCs after pediatric cardiac surgery. Until such data are available the decision to give a procoagulant to neonates and young children after bypass needs to be made when the consequences of blood loss and replacement pose more risk than the risk of thrombotic complications from the drug.

### PMID 37963740 (2023) — Zhonghua yi xue za zhi
TITLE: [Effect of recombinant human thrombin for hemostasis in liver resection: a randomized controlled phase &#x2162; clinical trial].
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.cn112137-20230911-00438 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Multicenter Study, Clinical Trial, Phase III, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Objective: To evaluate the hemostatic efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of recombinant human thrombin in the treatment of liver wounds that still ooze after conventional surgical hemostasis. Methods: A multicenter, stratified randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase &#x2162; trial with a planned enrollment of 510 subjects at 33 centers, with a 2&#x2236;1 randomization to the thrombin group versus the placebo group. An interim analysis will be conducted after approximately 70% of the subjects have completed the observation period. The primary efficacy endpoint was the rate of hemostasis within 6 minutes at the point of bleeding that could be evaluated. Safety analysis was performed one month after surgery, and the positive rates of anti-drug antibody (ADA) and neutralizing antibody were evaluated. Results: At the interim analysis, a total of 348 subjects had been randomized and received the study drug (215 were male and 133 were female). They were aged 19-69 (52.9&#xb1;10.9)years. Among them, 232 were in the thrombin group and 116 were in the placebo group, with balanced and comparable demographics and baseline characteristics between the two groups. The hemostasis rate at 6 minutes was 71.6% (95%CI:65.75%-77.36%) in the thrombin group and 44.0% (95%CI: 34.93%-53.00%) in the placebo group, respectively (P&lt;0.001). No grade&#x2265;3 drug-related adverse events and no drug-related deaths were reported from the study.No recombinant human thrombin-induced immunologically-enhanced ADA or immunologically-induced ADA was detected after topical use in subjects. Conclusion: Recombinant human thrombin has shown significant hemostatic efficacy and good safety in controlling bleeding during liver resection surgery, while also demonstrating low immunogenicity characteristics. &#x76ee;&#x7684;&#xff1a; &#x8bc4;&#x4ef7;&#x91cd;&#x7ec4;&#x4eba;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x9176;&#x5bf9;&#x7ecf;&#x5916;&#x79d1;&#x5e38;&#x89c4;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x540e;&#x4f9d;&#x7136;&#x6e17;&#x8840;&#x7684;&#x809d;&#x810f;&#x521b;&#x9762;&#x7684;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x7597;&#x6548;&#x3001;&#x5b89;&#x5168;&#x6027;&#x548c;&#x514d;&#x75ab;&#x539f;&#x6027;&#x3002; &#x65b9;&#x6cd5;&#xff1a; &#x91c7;&#x7528;&#x591a;&#x4e2d;&#x5fc3;&#x3001;&#x5206;&#x5c42;&#x968f;&#x673a;&#x3001;&#x53cc;&#x76f2;&#x3001;&#x5b89;&#x6170;&#x5242;&#x5bf9;&#x7167;&#x2162;&#x671f;&#x8bd5;&#x9a8c;&#xff0c;&#x8ba1;&#x5212;&#x5728;33&#x5bb6;&#x7814;&#x7a76;&#x4e2d;&#x5fc3;&#x5165;&#x7ec4;510&#x4f8b;&#x53d7;&#x8bd5;&#x8005;&#xff0c;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x9176;&#x7ec4;&#x4e0e;&#x5b89;&#x6170;&#x5242;&#x7ec4;&#x4e3a;2&#x2236;1&#x5206;&#x5c42;&#x968f;&#x673a;&#x5206;&#x914d;&#x3002;&#x5728;&#x5927;&#x7ea6;70%&#x53d7;&#x8bd5;&#x8005;&#x5b8c;&#x6210;&#x89c2;&#x5bdf;&#x540e;&#x8fdb;&#x884c;&#x671f;&#x4e2d;&#x5206;&#x6790;&#xff0c;&#x671f;&#x4e2d;&#x5206;&#x6790;&#x7ed3;&#x679c;&#x652f;&#x6301;&#x6709;&#x6548;&#x5219;&#x7814;&#x7a76;&#x63d0;&#x524d;&#x7ec8;&#x6b62;&#x3002;&#x4e3b;&#x8981;&#x7597;&#x6548;&#x7ec8;&#x70b9;&#x4e3a;&#x53ef;&#x8bc4;&#x4ef7;&#x51fa;&#x8840;&#x70b9;&#x7684;6 min&#x5185;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x7387;&#x3002;&#x672f;&#x540e;1&#x4e2a;&#x6708;&#x8fdb;&#x884c;&#x5b89;&#x5168;&#x6027;&#x5206;&#x6790;&#xff0c;&#x540c;&#x65f6;&#x8bc4;&#x4f30;&#x6297;&#x836f;&#x7269;&#x6297;&#x4f53;&#xff08;ADA&#xff09;&#x53ca;&#x4e2d;&#x548c;&#x6297;&#x4f53;&#x7684;&#x9633;&#x6027;&#x7387;&#x3002; &#x7ed3;&#x679c;&#xff1a; &#x622a;&#x6b62;&#x671f;&#x4e2d;&#x5206;&#x6790;&#xff0c;&#x5171;348&#x4f8b;&#x53d7;&#x8bd5;&#x8005;&#x63a5;&#x53d7;&#x968f;&#x673a;&#x4e14;&#x7ed9;&#x4e88;&#x7814;&#x7a76;&#x836f;&#x7269;&#xff0c;&#x5176;&#x4e2d;&#x7537;215&#x4f8b;&#xff0c;&#x5973;133&#x4f8b;&#xff0c;&#x5e74;&#x9f84;19~69&#xff08;52.9&#xb1;10.9&#xff09;&#x5c81;&#xff0c;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x9176;&#x7ec4;232&#x4f8b;&#xff0c;&#x5b89;&#x6170;&#x5242;&#x7ec4;116&#x4f8b;&#xff0c;&#x4e24;&#x7ec4;&#x57fa;&#x7ebf;&#x7279;&#x5f81;&#x5747;&#x8861;&#x53ef;&#x6bd4;&#x3002;6 min&#x5185;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x7387;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x9176;&#x7ec4;&#x548c;&#x5b89;&#x6170;&#x5242;&#x7ec4;&#x5206;&#x522b;&#x4e3a;71.6%&#xff08;95%CI&#xff1a;65.75%~77.36%&#xff09;&#x548c;44.0%&#xff08;95%CI&#xff1a;34.93%~53.00%&#xff09;&#xff0c;&#x7ec4;&#x95f4;&#x6bd4;&#x8f83;&#x5dee;&#x5f02;&#x6709;&#x7edf;&#x8ba1;&#x5b66;&#x610f;&#x4e49;&#xff08;P&lt;0.001&#xff09;&#x3002;&#x7814;&#x7a76;&#x4e2d;&#x65e0;&#x2265;3&#x7ea7;&#x836f;&#x7269;&#x76f8;&#x5173;&#x4e0d;&#x826f;&#x4e8b;&#x4ef6;&#x548c;&#x836f;&#x7269;&#x76f8;&#x5173;&#x6b7b;&#x4ea1;&#x62a5;&#x544a;&#x3002;&#x53d7;&#x8bd5;&#x8005;&#x5728;&#x4f7f;&#x7528;&#x91cd;&#x7ec4;&#x4eba;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x9176;&#x540e;&#xff0c;&#x65e0;&#x514d;&#x75ab;&#x589e;&#x5f3a;ADA&#x53d1;&#x751f;&#xff0c;&#x4e5f;&#x65e0;&#x514d;&#x75ab;&#x8bf1;&#x5bfc;ADA&#x53d1;&#x751f;&#x3002; &#x7ed3;&#x8bba;&#xff1a; &#x91cd;&#x7ec4;&#x4eba;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x9176;&#x7528;&#x4e8e;&#x809d;&#x810f;&#x5207;&#x9664;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x521b;&#x9762;&#x6e17;&#x8840;&#x7684;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x6548;&#x679c;&#x663e;&#x8457;&#xff0c;&#x5b89;&#x5168;&#x6027;&#x826f;&#x597d;&#xff0c;&#x4e14;&#x663e;&#x793a;&#x51fa;&#x4f4e;&#x514d;&#x75ab;&#x539f;&#x6027;&#x7279;&#x5f81;&#x3002;.

### PMID 36724509 (2023) — Blood advances
TITLE: Thrombogenic potential of picomolar coagulation factor XIa is mediated by thrombin wave propagation.
DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022008743 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S., Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Inhibitors of coagulation factor XIa (FXIa) are currently being investigated as potential anticoagulant therapies. We hypothesize that circulating FXIa could be a potential target for these therapies. Using previous analyses of FXIa impurities in immune globulin products involved in thrombotic adverse events, we estimated that picomolar levels of FXIa can be thrombogenic. In an in&#xa0;vitro clot-growth assay, 0.1-3 pM of FXIa did not, by itself, activate clotting but increased the size of growing clots. Spatio-temporal reconstruction of thrombin activity inside the clot revealed that FXIa's effect was limited to the clot-plasma interface, in which FXIa produced a taller than standard wave of thrombin. Factor-depleted plasma and a panel of selective anti-FXIa antibodies showed that exogenous FXIa effects are (1) blocked by anti-FXIa antibodies, (2) independent of FXI activation inside the clot, and (3) larger than the contribution of in situ FXIa. In a thrombin generation (TG) assay, picomolar FXIa did not initiate TG but rather promoted TG triggered by tissue factor or thrombin, suggesting that the effect of FXIa on the thrombin wave is mediated by the elevation of thrombin-triggered TG. In circulating bovine blood, low doses of human FXIa did not initiate clotting but increased the size of stenosis-triggered thrombi. FXIa injection in mice enhanced TG in plasma for at least 6 hours ex&#xa0;vivo, confirming the persistence of circulating FXIa. Our findings suggest that picomolar levels of circulating FXIa may not be able to initiate thrombosis but can facilitate thrombus growth through the facilitation of TG inside the clot.

### PMID 36710421 (2023) — International journal of laboratory hematology
TITLE: The combination of emicizumab and recombinant factor VIII in plasma: Which assays can we use for accurate measurement?
DOI: 10.1111/ijlh.14021 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The bispecific antibody, emicizumab, is a prophylactic therapy used for the treatment of haemophilia A (HA). Patients may require additional replacement factor VIII (FVIII) to ensure adequate haemostasis. This study investigated the laboratory measurement of severe HA (SHA) plasma spiked with 36 combinations of emicizumab plus recombinant (r) FVIII concentrates.
METHOD: FVIII assays were performed by one stage assay (OSA) using eight APTT reagents from three manufacturers and chromogenic assays (CSA) using seven kits. CSA kits comprised a range of bovine FX/FIXa, bovine FX/human FIXa or human FX/FIXa. Thrombin generation (TG) was assessed by CAT and ST-Genesia.
RESULTS: Emicizumab-calibrated modified OSA and human FX CSA both overestimated rFVIII in the presence of emicizumab; median FVIII:C of up to 89% higher was observed in plasma spiked with both drugs compared to just rFVIII. In bovine FX CSA assays, there was a FVIII:C increase of up to 11% in plasmas spiked with both drugs compared to rFVIII alone. TG parameters were not all normalized by the presence of emicizumab however addition of rFVIII increased TG. ETP and peak thrombin were normalized at 50&#x2009;&#x3bc;g/ml emicizumab using ST-Genesia but were still reduced at 75&#x2009;&#x3bc;g/ml with CAT. Addition of rFVIII further normalized results.
CONCLUSION: Modified OSA and human FX CSA could not distinguish between rFVIII or emicizumab. The presence of both emicizumab and rFVIII increased thrombin generation to normal levels compared to each drug alone. Bovine FX CSA can be used to accurately determine FVIII activity of rFVIII in plasma which also contains emicizumab.

### PMID 36696203 (2023) — Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
TITLE: The effect of a next generation factor VIII mimetic bispecific antibody (Mim8) on assays of factor VIII activity and thrombin generation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtha.2022.12.023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Mim8 is a next generation bispecific antibody developed for the prophylactic treatment of hemophilia A. The sensitivity of activated plasma thromboplastin time (APTT), assays measuring factor VIII activity (FVIII:C) and thrombin generation to plasma containing Mim8 was assessed.
METHODS: Congenital severe hemophilia A plasma was spiked with Mim8 at 0 &#x3bc;g/mL to 20 &#x3bc;g/mL. APTT was measured with 4 reagents, one-stage FVIII with 9 reagents, and chromogenic FVIII with 6 assays. Thrombin generation was assessed in a low tissue factor system.
RESULTS: At 1-&#x3bc;g/mL Mim8, the APTT was shortened to within normal limits and one-stage FVIII:C was &gt;1.00 IU/mL with all APTT reagents. Modified one-stage assays calibrated with Mim8 reference material calibrated recovered within 20% of the target Mim8 concentration with most APTT reagents. Factor VIII:C of bovine only chromogenic assays was &lt;0.04 IU/mL at all Mim8 concentrations. Factor VIII:C of human only chromogenic assay was &gt;4.00 IU/mL at 20-&#x3bc;g/mL Mim8. Factor VIII:C of hybrid bovine FX, human FIXa chromogenic assays ranged from 0.076 to &gt;3.00 IU/mL at 20-&#x3bc;g/mL Mim8. Normal thrombin generation was restored at 5-&#x3bc;g/mL Mim8.
CONCLUSIONS: APTT-based assays are sensitive to Mim8 and should not be performed in the presence of the drug. Chromogenic assays containing human proteins or hybrid human/bovine proteins demonstrated variable sensitivity to Mim8. Bovine only chromogenic assays were largely insensitive to the presence of Mim8. Thrombin generation normalized at increased Mim8 concentrations. Modified one-stage and chromogenic assays could be used to quantify the Mim8 concentration in plasma.

### PMID 36842528 (2023) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: VertebralArtery Injury with Anterior Cervical Spine Operations: A Systematic Review of Risk Factors, Clinical Outcomes, and Management Strategies.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.02.078 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Anterior cervical spine operations are commonly performed on cervical spine pathologies and to a large extent are safe and successful. However, these surgical procedures expose the vertebral artery, posing a risk of harm to it.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted using PubMed, Google Scholar, and Web of Science electronic databases according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines to critically assess primary articles discussing treatment strategies "vertebral artery injury" AND "anterior cervical spine" and develop a management strategy based on our experience and meta-analysis of the literature. In addition, we present an illustrative case of iatrogenic vertebral artery injury presenting with 6 to 7 months' history of progressive dysphagia was transferred to our care from an outside institution.
RESULTS: Included and analyzed were 43 articles that detailed 75 cases involving vertebral artery injury (VAI) in anterior cervical spine operations. Preoperatively, frequent clinical findings reported were sensory deficit (26 patients [63.41%]), motor deficit (20 patients [48.78%]), and pain (17 patients [41.46%]). In total, 32 patients (50.00%) endured injury of their left VA, and 30 patients had a right VAI. The 2 common causes of VAI were drilling (24 patients [40.00%]) and instrumentation (8 patients [13.33%]).
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our review recommends repair or tamponade packing with a hemostatic agent for primary management. Should tamponade packing with a hemostatic agent be used for primary management, secondary management should entail either repair, stenting occlusion, embolization, anticoagulants, or ligation. Further examination of this treatment strategy based on a larger cohort is necessary.

### PMID 36187312 (2022) — Journal of cardiology cases
TITLE: BioGlue cerebral embolism following acute type A aortic dissection repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jccase.2022.07.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: Surgical outcomes of acute Stanford type A aortic dissection (ATAAD) have significantly improved in recent decades due to advances in surgical techniques and adhesives such as BioGlue (Cryolife, Kennesaw, GA, USA). However, this convenient material can sometimes cause complications such as thrombotic embolism and pseudoaneurysm. Herein, we present the case of a 61-year-old man with ATAAD who successfully underwent total arch replacement. Five days after surgery, he collapsed due to right-sided hemiplegia. We immediately performed cerebral thrombectomy to remove thrombotic embolism caused by BioGlue, which was used to obliterate the false lumen of the dissected aorta during ATAAD repair.
LEARNING OBJECTIVE: Thanks to surgical techniques and adhesives such as BioGlue, surgical outcomes of acute Stanford type A aortic dissection have significantly improved recently. However, thromboembolic events due to adhesives such as BioGlue use can happen not only during surgery, but also a few days after it.

### PMID 36006958 (2022) — PloS one
TITLE: Safety and performance of surgical adhesives.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0271531 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tissue adhesives are an alternative to conventional surgical sutures to reduce the time and cost of wound closure and to improve patient comfort. The use of tissue adhesives does not require any subsequent intervention and significantly lowers the volume and rate of blood loss, and reduces the need for transfusions during and after surgery. However, based on their formulation, tissue adhesives' safety profile and functional properties may differ. Therefore, this study aimed to evaluate the basic safety and performance of NE'X Glue&#xae; Surgical Sealant, BioGlue&#xae; Surgical Sealant, and PREVELEAKTM Surgical Sealant in vitro.
METHODS: The basic safety of commercially available tissue adhesives was evaluated using MEM elution assay according to ISO 10993-5 and endotoxin level according to 85. USP. The in vitro performance was evaluated using lap-shear by tension loading test, burst strength test, degradation, and swelling assays.
RESULTS: NE'X Glue&#xae;, BioGlue&#xae;, and PREVELEAKTM did not cause cytotoxicity in MEM elution assay. All surgical adhesives are below the general limit of endotoxin contamination of 20 EU/device. NE'X Glue&#xae; and BioGlue&#xae; showed the highest and comparable strength properties in lap shear and burst strength tests compared to PREVELEAKTM. NE'X Glue&#xae; and PREVELEAKTM are characterized by lower degradation potential than BioGlue&#xae;. PREVELEAKTM is characterized by the highest swelling when compared to NE'X Glue&#xae; and BioGlue&#xae;.
CONCLUSIONS: NE'X Glue&#xae; is most versatile in terms of functional properties while maintaining the same safety profile as BioGlue&#xae; and PREVELEAKTM.

### PMID 36001029 (2022) — ACS nano
TITLE: Biomimetic Natural Silk Nanofibrous Microspheres for Multifunctional Biomedical Applications.
DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.2c06331 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Silk nanofibrils (SNFs) extracted from natural silkworm silk represent a class of high-potential protein nanofiber material with unexplored biomedical applications. In this study, a SNF-assembled microsphere with extracellular matrix (ECM)-mimicking architecture and high specific surface area was developed. The SNFs were exfoliated from silkworm silks through an all-aqueous process and used as the building blocks for constructing the microspheres. Inspired by the structure and bioactive composition of ECM, hyaluronic acid (HA) was used as a bio-glue to regulate SNF assembly. With the assistance of HA, the SNF microspheres with stable fluffy nanofibrous structures were synthesized through electrospray. The biomimetic structure and nature derived composition endow the microspheres with excellent biocompatibility and enhanced osteogenic differentiation-inducing ability to mesenchymal stem cells. As proof of versatility, the SNF microspheres were further functionalized with other molecules and nanomaterials. Taking the advantages of the excellent blood compatibility and modifiability from the molecular level to the nanoscale of SNF microspheres, we demonstrated their versatile applications in protease detection and blood purification. On the basis of these results, we foresee that this natural silk-based nanofibrous microsphere may serve as a superior biomedical material for tissue engineering, early disease diagnosis, and therapeutic devices.

### PMID 35756566 (2022) — Indian journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Cerebral embolic shower secondary to BioGlue use in triple valve surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s12055-022-01344-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemostasis is a crucial step in cardiac surgery which determines postoperative outcomes. Tissue sealants and glues are necessary to achieve hemostasis in situations where conventional methods are unsuccessful. BioGlue, a commonly used topical hemostatic agent, has been reported to cause systemic embolic complications. We report a case of cerebral embolic shower following the use of BioGlue for posterior aortic suture line bleeding in a 49-year-old lady who underwent triple valve surgery. This report brings to light a rare but devastating complication of BioGlue usage in the present era of complex aortic surgeries. We also postulate a mechanism for BioGlue embolization.

### PMID 34999798 (2022) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Surgical glue-induced left main trunk stenosis removed by directional coronary atherectomy.
DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivab227 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 55-year-old man underwent aortic repair for acute aortic dissection. The pseudolumen of the Valsalva sinus was reapproximated with BioGlue by placing a sponge inside of it to prevent the BioGlue from entering. Postoperative contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed stenosis of the left main trunk. Directional coronary atherectomy was performed; complete release of the stenosis was achieved. Various fragments retrieved from the left main trunk were pathologically consistent with BioGlue. When we reapproximated the dissected aortic wall, inserting a sponge into the aorta did not prevent the surgical glue from entering. Directional coronary atherectomy was a good therapeutic option to treat glue-induced coronary artery stenosis.

### PMID 36338214 (2022) — World journal of clinical cases
TITLE: Cauda equina syndrome caused by the application of DuraSealTM in a microlaminectomy surgery: A case report.
DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i30.11178 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The management of dural tears is important. While a massive dura can be repaired with absorbable suture lines, cerebrospinal fluid leakage can be attenuated by dural sealant when an unintended tiny durotomy occurs intraoperatively. DuraSeal is often used because it can expand to seal tears. This case emphasizes the need for caution when DuraSeal is used as high expansion can cause complications following microlaminectomy.
CASE SUMMARY: A 77-year-old woman presented with L2/3 and L3/4 lateral recess stenosis. She underwent microlaminectomy, foraminal decompression, and disk height restoration using an IntraSPINE&#xae; device. A tiny incident durotomy occurred intraoperatively and was sealed using DuraSealTM. However, decreased muscle power, urinary incontinence, and absence of anal reflexes were observed postoperatively. Emergent magnetic resonance imaging revealed fluid collection causing thecal sac indentation and central canal compression. Surgical exploration revealed that the gel-like DuraSeal had entrapped the hematoma and, consequently, compressed the thecal sac and nerve roots. While we removed all DuraSealTM and exposed the nerve root, the patient's neurological function did not recover postoperatively.
CONCLUSION: DuraSeal expansion must not be underestimated. Changes in neurological status require investigation for cauda equina syndrome due to expansion.

### PMID 36087335 (2022) — Journal of neurosurgery. Pediatrics
TITLE: Association between synthetic sealants and increased complication rates in posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty for Chiari malformations regardless of graft type.
DOI: 10.3171/2022.7.PEDS22231 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Dural sealants are commonly used in posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty (PFDD) for Chiari malformation type I (CMI). Prior evidence suggests that combining certain sealants with some graft material is associated with an increased rate of complications. In 2018, the authors noted an increased rate of symptomatic pseudomeningocele and aseptic meningitis after PFDD in CMI patients. The authors utilized retrospective and prospective analyses to test the hypothesis that complication rates increase with the use or combination of certain sealants and grafts.
METHODS: The analysis was split into 2 periods. The authors retrospectively reviewed patients who underwent PFDD for CMI at their center between August 12, 2011, and December 31, 2018. The authors then eliminated use of DuraSeal on the basis of the retrospective analysis and prospectively examined complication rates from January 1, 2019, to August 4, 2021. The authors defined a complication as symptomatic pseudomeningocele, bacterial or aseptic meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid leak, subdural hygroma, hydrocephalus, surgical site infection, or wound dehiscence.
RESULTS: From 2011 to 2018, complications occurred in 24.5% of 110 patients. Sealant choice was correlated with complication rates: no sealant (0%), Tisseel (6%), and DuraSeal (15.3%) (p &lt; 0.001). No difference in complication rate was noted on the basis of choice of graft material (p = 0.844). After eliminating DuraSeal, the authors followed 40 patients who underwent PFDD after 2018. The complication rate decreased to 12.5%. All complications after 2018 were associated with Tisseel.
CONCLUSIONS: At the authors' single center, use of sealants in PFDD surgery for CMI, especially DuraSeal, was correlated with a higher complication rate. Eliminating DuraSeal led to a significant decrease in the rate of symptomatic pseudomeningocele and aseptic meningitis.

### PMID 34866336 (2022) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
TITLE: Comparative study of hydrophobically modified gelatin-based sealant with commercially available sealants.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.37339 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Air leakage is one of the major complications related to pulmonary surgeries. To reduce this complication, we developed a decyl group (C10)-modified Alaska pollock gelatin (ApGltn) (C10-ApGltn) sealant and evaluated its practical performance against commercially available sealants, Beriplast&#xae; and DuraSeal&#xae;. C10-ApGltn was synthesized by reductive amination of the amino groups in ApGltn with decanal. C10-ApGltn was crosslinked with a poly(ethylene glycol)-based crosslinker to form a tissue sealant. The crosslinking time of the C10-ApGltn sealant was fast enough for curing on tissue and application as a spray system. Although the percent swelling of C10-ApGltn and DuraSeal was significantly greater than Beriplast, C10-ApGltn and DuraSeal exhibited excellent tissue sealing properties on pleura tissue under a long-term moist condition. Additionally, C10-ApGltn and DuraSeal did not cause severe inflammatory responses in a rat subcutaneous example. Therefore, C10-ApGltn sealant had comparable tissue sealing properties to DuraSeal under a moist condition, indicating the potential of C10-ApGltn sealant for pulmonary surgeries.

### PMID 36212098 (2022) — Plastic surgery (Oakville, Ont.)
TITLE: Reduction of Anastomotic Time Through the Use of Cyanoacrylate in Microvascular Procedures.
DOI: 10.1177/22925503211019619 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: Ever since the description of the first microvascular anastomosis, numerous alternative methods have been described to the classical approach. Tissue adhesive has shown promising result in previous studies and can be a fast and efficient alternative which still requires more studies to allow its clinical implementation. Methods: A randomized comparative experimental study was conducted on rats' femoral arteries and an end-to-end anastomosis was performed in order to compare 2 anastomosis techniques. In one group, a simple interrupted suture was utilized, whereas in the second group a combination between fewer sutures and tissue adhesive was used. The anastomotic time, total operative time, blood flow velocity before, immediately after and 48 hours after the procedure, as well as an independent grading of the anastomosis immediately after the procedure were performed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed in order to assess the degree of stenosis. After euthanasia, histology and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were performed on the vessels in order to assess possible complications. Results: A total of 24 anastomoses were performed, of which 12 with a classic technique and 12 with an adhesive technique. All the anastomoses were patent with a significant reduction of anastomotic and total operative time. The grading of the anastomoses showed better results in the classic suture group. The blood flow velocities were not statistically significant between the 2 groups. On MRI there was one stenotic anastomosis, whereas histology and SEM showed more complications on the adhesive group. Conclusion: Anastomotic times were significantly lower with a non-significant trend toward more thrombotic complications in the adhesive group. Further improvement of the glue properties and refinement of the technique will likely make it a viable alternative to interrupted suturing in the future. Historique: Depuis que la premi&#xe8;re anastomose microvasculaire a &#xe9;t&#xe9; d&#xe9;crite, de nombreuses m&#xe9;thodes ont &#xe9;t&#xe9; utilis&#xe9;es en plus de la m&#xe9;thode classique. L&#x2019;adh&#xe9;sif tissulaire a donn&#xe9; des r&#xe9;sultats prometteurs dans des &#xe9;tudes ant&#xe9;rieures et peut repr&#xe9;senter une solution rapide et efficace qui devra faire l&#x2019;objet de plus d&#x2019;&#xe9;tudes avant d&#x2019;&#xea;tre adopt&#xe9;e en clinique. M&#xe9;thodologie: Les chercheurs ont men&#xe9; une &#xe9;tude exp&#xe9;rimentale al&#xe9;atoire et comparative sur des art&#xe8;res f&#xe9;morales de rat. Ils ont effectu&#xe9; une anastomose de bout en bout pour comparer deux techniques d&#x2019;anastomose. Dans un groupe, une seule suture interrompue a &#xe9;t&#xe9; utilis&#xe9;e, et dans le second, une combinaison d&#x2019;un moins grand nombre de sutures et d&#x2019;adh&#xe9;sif tissulaire a &#xe9;t&#xe9; privil&#xe9;gi&#xe9;e. La dur&#xe9;e de l&#x2019;anastomose, la dur&#xe9;e totale de l&#x2019;intervention, la v&#xe9;locit&#xe9; du d&#xe9;bit sanguin avant, imm&#xe9;diatement apr&#xe8;s et 48 heures apr&#xe8;s l&#x2019;intervention, de m&#xea;me que le classement ind&#xe9;pendant de l&#x2019;anastomose imm&#xe9;diatement apr&#xe8;s l&#x2019;intervention. L&#x2019;imagerie par r&#xe9;sonance magn&#xe9;tique a permis d&#x2019;&#xe9;valuer le degr&#xe9; de st&#xe9;nose. Apr&#xe8;s l&#x2019;euthanasie, les chercheurs ont effectu&#xe9; l&#x2019;histologie et la microscopie &#xe9;lectronique sur les vaisseaux pour &#xe9;valuer les complications possibles. R&#xe9;sultats: Au total, 24 anastomoses ont &#xe9;t&#xe9; ex&#xe9;cut&#xe9;es, soit 12 avec la technique classique et 12 avec la technique d&#x2019;adh&#xe9;sion. Toutes les anastomoses &#xe9;taient perm&#xe9;ables et s&#x2019;associaient &#xe0; une r&#xe9;duction importante de la dur&#xe9;e de l&#x2019;anastomose et de l&#x2019;op&#xe9;ration totale. Le classement de l&#x2019;anastomose a r&#xe9;v&#xe9;l&#xe9; de meilleurs r&#xe9;sultats dans le groupe de suture classique. La v&#xe9;locit&#xe9; du d&#xe9;bit sanguin n&#x2019;&#xe9;tait pas statistiquement significative entre les deux groupes. On a constat&#xe9; une anastomose st&#xe9;nos&#xe9;e &#xe0; l&#x2019;imagerie par r&#xe9;sonance magn&#xe9;tique, tandis que l&#x2019;histologie et la microscopie &#xe9;lectronique ont r&#xe9;v&#xe9;l&#xe9; plus de complications dans le groupe d&#x2019;adh&#xe9;sion. Conclusion: La dur&#xe9;e de l&#x2019;anastomose &#xe9;tait beaucoup plus courte et pr&#xe9;sentait une tendance non significative vers un plus grand nombre de complications thrombotiques dans le groupe d&#x2019;adh&#xe9;sion. Des am&#xe9;liorations des propri&#xe9;t&#xe9;s de la coller et le raffinement des techniques en feront probablement une solution viable pour remplacer les sutures.

### PMID 35949828 (2022) — World journal of clinical cases
TITLE: Strategies and challenges in treatment of varicose veins and venous insufficiency.
DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i18.5946 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Patients with varicose veins can be treated with conservative or surgical approaches based on the clinical conditions and patient preferences. In the recent decade, the recommendations for managing symptomatic varicose veins have changed dramatically due to the rise of minimally invasive endovascular techniques. The literature was systematically searched on Medline without language restrictions. All papers on the treatment of varicose veins and venous insufficiency with different procedures were included and reviewed. Endovenous laser ablation (EVLA) and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) both are same safe and effective in terms of occlusion rate, and time to return to normal activity. In comparison with RFA or EVLT, Cure conservatrice et Hemodynamique de l'Insufficience Veineuse en Ambulatoire (CHIVA) may cause more bruising and make little or no difference to rates of limb infection, superficial vein thrombosis, nerve injury, or hematoma. In terms of recurrence of varicose veins, there is little or no difference between CHIVA and stripping, RFA, or EVLT. Great saphenous vein recanalization is highest in the ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy (FS) group (51%) during 1 year of follow-up. The 2013 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence clinical guidelines recommend surgery as a third-line therapeutic option after EVLA or RFA and sclerotherapy. Although the mechanochemical endovenous ablation (MOCA) is a non-thermal, non-tumescent option and appears to be of similar efficacy to stab avulsion with no potential risk of nerve damage, the overall success rate of MOCA is lower than those of other procedures such as EVLA, RFA, or high ligation and stripping. EVLA is the most cost-effective therapeutic option, with RFA being a close second for the treatment of patients with varicose veins. Endovenous thermal ablation (EVLA or RFA) is recommended as a first-line treatment for varicose veins and has substituted the high ligation of saphenofemoral junctional reflux and stripping of varicose veins. Ultrasound-guided FS is associated with a high recurrence rate and can be used in conjunction with other procedures. MOCA and cyanoacrylate embolization appear promising, but evidence of their effectiveness is required.

### PMID 35692101 (2022) — Veterinary surgery : VS
TITLE: Prospective evaluation of lymphatic embolization as part of the treatment in dogs with presumptive idiopathic chylothorax.
DOI: 10.1111/vsu.13825 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To describe the embolization technique and short-term clinical outcome in dogs undergoing lymphatic embolization (LE) as part of treatment for presumptive idiopathic chylothorax (IC). Additionally, to document findings in computed tomography lymphangiography (CTLa) following embolization.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective case series.
ANIMALS: Eight client-owned dogs.
METHODS: Dogs underwent CTLa followed by thoracic duct ligation (TDL), pericardiectomy (PC) and LE. A mixture of 3:1 lipiodol: n-butyl cyanoacrylate embolic solution was injected through a catheterized mesenteric lymphatic vessel via limited abdominal approach using intraoperative fluoroscopy. CTLa was scheduled for 12&#x2009;weeks postoperatively, and long-term follow-up was obtained via telephone contact.
RESULTS: LE was technically successful in six of the eight dogs; and clinically successful in five of the six dogs. In the unsuccessful dog, a diagnosis of lymphangiosarcoma was determined, and the owners elected for euthanasia. Five dogs who underwent successful LE underwent CTLa at 12&#x2009;weeks. Complete resolution of pleural effusion occurred in three dogs and scant pleural effusion in two dogs. A robust lymphatic embolus preventing antegrade continuation of radiocontrast was documented in all five dogs. Five of the six dogs that underwent LE, were alive and clinically normal at 358-960&#x2009;days postoperatively.
CONCLUSIONS: LE is a feasible part of treatment for dogs with IC. Additionally, a robust lymphatic embolus and lack of radiocontrast flow past the embolus was documented at 12&#x2009;weeks following surgery.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: LE has the potential to reduce surgical failure by reducing efferent lymphatic chyle flow, occluding missed lymphatic branches and preventing the development of collateral branches.

### PMID 35570602 (2022) — Experimental and clinical transplantation : official journal of the Middle East Society for Organ Transplantation
TITLE: Endovascular Management of Hematomas in Pediatric Transplant Patients.
DOI: 10.6002/ect.PediatricSymp2022.O19 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Transcatheter arterial embolization is used to control active hemorrhage at different anatomic locations. Because hematomas can suddenly deteriorate and become life threatening for transplant patients, they require prompt diagnosis and intervention rather than conservative management. Here, we evaluated computed tomography in treatment planning and transcatheter embolization effectiveness for hematoma management in pediatric liver transplant patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Between June 2012 and December 2021, 10 pediatric liver transplant patients were referred to our interventional radiology unit. Computed tomography and angiograms were reviewed for hematoma location and presence of extravasation. We analyzed correlations between computed tomography and angiography findings and technical and clinical success of the endovascular interventions.
RESULTS: Active leak of contrast material during arterial phase was detected on 9/10 CT scans. Although there was no active bleeding on CT in 1 patient, active arterial bleeding was detected on angiography. On the contrary, in 2 patients, although active bleeding was observed on computed tomography, it was not detected on angiography. Source of bleeding was superior mesenteric artery branches in 4, hepatic artery branch in 2, superior epigastric artery in 1, and phrenic artery in 1 patient. Six of 8 patients with active bleeding were treated with endovascular procedures. The remaining 2 patients received surgery: 1 had bleeding from liver cut surface originating from a hepatic artery branch and received open surgery because the bleeding branch was too thin for catheterization, and 1 was hemodynamically unstable and selective catheterization of the internal thoracic artery would take time. Two patients received embolization procedures with N-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate (glue) diluted with iodized oil, and 1 patient had coil and glue with iodized oil. Embolization with coils was performed in 3 patients. Rate of success with transcatheter arterial embolization was 75%. No complications related to patient comorbidities or embolization procedures were shown. No deaths occurred due to progression of the hematoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcatheter arterial embolization is effective and safe for treatment of pediatric liver transplant patients with hematomas. Computed tomography has value in identifying the bleeding source and its anatomic relationships and may enhance our intervention abilities to become quicker, more effective, and more secured.

### PMID 35290529 (2022) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: Treatment of massive hemoptysis after thoracic aortic aneurysm repair.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-022-00293-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Massive hemoptysis after thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) repair is a rare but potentially lethal condition. Endovascular management is a challenging treatment option due to the complexity of culprit vessel access.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 81-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with massive hemoptysis. She had a history of graft replacement and thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) for dissecting TAA. Computed tomography (CT) showed massive atelectasis with hematoma in the left lower lung lobe adjacent to the descending aortic aneurysm treated with TEVAR. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a pseudoaneurysm and proliferation of abnormal vessels at the peripheral side of the left pulmonary ligament artery (PLA) in the atelectasis. The PLA continued to the right subscapular artery via a complex collateral pathway. Diagnostic angiography of the right subcapsular artery revealed a pseudoaneurysm and abnormal vessels at the peripheral side of the left PLA with a systemic-pulmonary artery shunt. Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) for the left PLA via the collateral pathway with N-butyl cyanoacrylate achieved complete embolization. The patient's hemoptysis was controlled and she was discharged.
CONCLUSIONS: Here we presented a case of massive hemoptysis due to PLA disruption that occurred after TAA repair. TAE via a complex collateral pathway is a feasible and effective treatment for hemoptysis, even in patients who have undergone surgical or endovascular TAA repair.

### PMID 35038891 (2022) — Journal of investigative medicine high impact case reports
TITLE: Massive Chylous Ascites After Living Donor Nephrectomy Successfully Treated With Lymphatic Embolization.
DOI: 10.1177/23247096211065631 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chylous ascites may result from a variety of pathological conditions, most of them from nontraumatic causes, such as congenital defects of the lymphatic system, infections, liver cirrhosis, and malignancy. Rarely, chylous ascites occurs as an iatrogenic complication after left-sided laparoscopic donor nephrectomy (LDN). Injury to the cisterna chyli and its main lymphatic tributaries around the para-aortic region intraoperatively can cause the lymphatic fluid to accumulate. There is currently no standardized treatment for chylous ascites as there have only been 54 cases documented to date. Most patients can be managed with conservative therapy. Recommended guidelines include high-protein and low-fat diet with medium-chain triglycerides. Paracentesis is often used as a diagnostic and therapeutic first-line measure with total parenteral nutrition (TPN), bowel rest, and somatostatin analogue as adjunct therapies. We present a case of massive chylous ascites refractory to conservative therapy. The patient had progressive abdominal distention and unintentional weight gain 2 weeks postoperatively warranting multiple paracenteses of &gt;7 L of chylous fluid. Ultimately, the patient was successfully treated with lymphatic embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue.

### PMID 34977969 (2022) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Ischemic Lumbar Plexopathy After Transarterial Embolization of Type II Endoleak Using N-Butyl-2-cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-021-03019-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 34247962 (2022) — Journal of plastic, reconstructive &amp; aesthetic surgery : JPRAS
TITLE: Sutureless venous microanastomosis using thermosensitive poloxamer and cyanoacrylate: experimental study on a rat model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bjps.2021.05.072 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Sutureless microvascular anastomoses could simplify the microvascular field, shortening operative time and improving the final outcome. The use of thermosensitive poloxamers (TP407) together with the application of cyanoacrylate as an alternative method for conventional sutures was well-documented for arteries, but not for veins. The purpose of our study was to prove the feasibility of this technique for venous anastomoses and compare it with the traditional hand-sewn technique on a rat model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty male Sprague-Dawley rats that weighed between 265 and 310&#xa0;g were used. In the sutureless group (SG), 20 left external jugular veins (LEJV) end-to-end anastomoses were performed using a T704 and cyanoacrylate glue. They were compared to 20 right external jugular veins (REJV) anastomoses sutured with conventional 10-0 stitches (control group - CG). Diameters of veins, anastomosis time, and patency rate at 15 days were reported. Foreign body reaction was assessed histologically.
RESULTS: The mean diameter of the LEJV was 0.94&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.1&#xa0;mm and 0.95&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.09&#xa0;mm for the REJV. The mean anastomosis time was 11.9&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;1.37&#xa0;min for the SG and 27.75&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;3.31&#xa0;min for the CG. In the latter group, the immediate patency rate was 95% and 90% at 15 days. For the SG group, 90% of the anastomoses were patent immediately and 85% at 15 days.
CONCLUSION: TP407 and cyanoacrylate could offer a fast and reliable technique for sutureless venous anastomoses. Before human application, effectiveness of this method remains to be confirmed in larger animals in a long-term follow-up.

### PMID 34233127 (2022) — Vascular
TITLE: Percutaneous glue embolization of arteriovenous fistula of in situ saphenous vein bypass graft: Case report and literature review.
DOI: 10.1177/17085381211032044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs) of an in situ saphenous vein bypass can be managed surgically or through endovascular coil embolization. The complications associated with the surgical wounds required for side branch ligature can be minimized through selective vein ligature and interrupted small incisions, but endovascular methods are time-consuming and limited by vein size. In this case report, we describe percutaneous ultrasound (US)-guided balloon-assisted direct glue injection as an alternative treatment strategy for AVF closure.
METHODS: We treated a patient with a delayed AVF in a femoral-popliteal in situ saphenous vein bypass. The patient came to our attention for the recurrence of chronic limb-threatening ischemia (CTLI) 4&#xa0;years after the initial bypass creation. Ultrasound and computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed a double tandem graft in significant stenosis below an AVF connected with the deep venous system. Treatment included percutaneous angioplasty of the bypass stenosis and contemporary AVF closure via ultrasound-guided glue injection.
RESULTS: We successfully performed endovascular angioplasty with a drug-eluting balloon of the bypass stenosis and ultrasound-guided fistula embolization with cyanoacrylate Glubran 2. Angiography after the procedure showed bypass graft patency, no residual stenosis, and complete closure of the AVF. Results were confirmed with US.
CONCLUSIONS: Percutaneous embolization using glue could be a useful technique for AVF closure. It is a minimally invasive method that reduces the need for skin incisions during in situ saphenous grafting or endovascular revascularization.

### PMID 36289887 (2022) — Biomedicines
TITLE: X-ray Microtomography to Assess Determinants of In Vivo N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate Glubran&#xae;2 Polymerization: A Rabbit-Model Study.
DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10102625 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Although introduced decades ago, few cyanoacrylate glues have been approved for endovascular use, despite evidence of their usefulness, notably for complex procedures suchas hemostatic embolization. Indications include massive bleeding requiring emergent hemostasis and prevention of severe bleeding during scheduled surgery to remove a hypervascular tumor. Adding radiopaque Lipiodol Ultra Fluid&#xae; (LUF) modulates glue polymerization and allows fluoroscopic guidance, but few comparative in vivo studies have assessed the impact of the resulting change in glue concentration or of other factors such as target-vessel blood flow. In a rabbit model, we used ex vivo X-ray microtomography to assess the results of in vivo renal-artery embolization by various mixtures of N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA), metacryloxysulfolane, and LUF. Overall, penetration to the superficial interlobular arteries was achieved in about two-thirds of cases and into the capillaries in nearly half the cases, while cast fragmentation was seen in slightly more than half the cases. Greater NBCA dilution and the blocked-blood-flow technique were independently associated with greater distality of penetration. Blocked-blood-flow injection was independently associated with absence of fragmentation, capillary penetration, a shorter cast-to-capsule distance, and higher cast attenuation. A larger mixture volume was independently associated with higher indexed cast ratio and deeper penetration. Finally, microtomography is an adapted tool to assess ex vivo distribution of glue cast.

### PMID 35683341 (2022) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Imaging-Guided Percutaneous Puncture and Embolization of Visceral Pseudoaneurysms: Feasibility and Outcomes.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm11112952 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Visceral artery pseudoaneurysms (VAPAs) are the most frequently diagnosed pseudoaneurysms (PSAs). PSAs can be asymptomatic or symptomatic. The aim of our study was to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of percutaneous embolization of VAPAs performed on patients with an unfeasible trans-arterial approach. Fifteen patients with fifteen visceral PSAs, with a median dimension of 21 mm (IQR 20-24 mm), were retrospectively analyzed. No patients were suitable for trans-arterial catheterization and therefore a percutaneous approach was chosen. During percutaneous treatments, two embolic agents were used, either N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) (Glubran II, GEM Milan, Italy) mixed with Lipiodol (Lipiodol, Guerbet, France) or thrombin. The outcomes of this study were technical success, primary clinical success, and secondary clinical success. In our population the 15 PSA were located as follows: 2 in the left gastric artery, 1 in the right gastric artery, 3 in the right hepatic artery, 2 in a jejunal artery, 1 in left colic artery branch, 1 in a right colic artery branch, 1 in the gastroepiploic artery, 1 in the dorsal pancreatic artery, 1 in an ileocolic artery branch, 1 in an iliac artery branch, and 1 in a sigmoid artery branch. 80% of PSAs (12/15) were treated with a NBCA:lipiodol mixture and 20% of PSAs (3/15) were treated with thrombin. Technical, primary, and secondary clinical successes were obtained in 100% of the cases. No harmful or life-threatening complications were observed. Minor complications were registered in 26.6% (4/15) of the patients. Percutaneous embolization of visceral PSA is a safe and effective treatment and should be considered as an option when the endovascular approach is unsuccessful or unfeasible.

### PMID 35625930 (2022) — Biomedicines
TITLE: In Vitro Evaluation of Acrylic Adhesives in Lymphatic Fluids-Influence of Glue Type and Procedural Parameters.
DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines10051195 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To evaluate the embolic properties of different acrylic adhesive/iodized oil mixtures for lymphatic interventions. Polymerization of histoacryl (HA) (Bayer Healthcare) and glubran 2 (GL) (GEM) mixed with iodized oil (ratios 1:0-1:7) were investigated in lymphatic fluids with low and high triglyceride (low TG &amp; high TG) contents. Static polymerization time and dynamic polymerization experiments with different volumes of glucose flush (1, 2 and 5 mL) were performed to simulate thoracic duct embolization. For both glues, static polymerization times were longer when the iodized oil content was increased and when performed in high TG lymphatic fluid. In the dynamic experiments, the prolongation of polymerization due to the oil content and TG levels was less pronounced for both glue types. Increased lymphatic flow rates decreased embolization times for low glue/oil ratios while preventing embolization for high glue/oil ratios. Higher glucose flush volumes increased occlusion times. Polymerization times of acrylic glue in a lymphatic fluid are prolonged by increasing the iodized oil concentration and triglyceride concentration as well as by using larger volumes of glucose flush. Increased lymphatic flow rates decrease embolization times for low glue/oil ratios and may prevent embolization for high glue/oil ratios.

### PMID 35461995 (2022) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Transcatheter Arterial Embolization with N-Butyl-2 Cyanoacrylate Glubran 2 for the Treatment of Acute Renal Hemorrhage Under Coagulopathic Conditions.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2022.04.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) for acute renal hemorrhage (RH) under coagulopathic conditions with N-butyl-2 cyanoacrylate (NBCA) is rarely described in the literature, and a consensus on the efficacy and safety of NBCA under this condition has not been reached. The present study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of TAE using NBCA Glubran 2 in the treatment of acute RH under coagulopathic conditions.
METHODS: Eight patients who underwent TAE with NBCA Glubran 2 for acute RH under coagulopathic conditions were collected.
RESULTS: NBCA Glubran 2 was employed as the sole embolic material in 6 patients. In the remaining 2 patients, NBCA Glubran 2 was employed for secondary embolization. Under coagulopathic conditions, both technical success and clinical success were achieved in treating acute RH with NBCA Glubran 2 in all patients. During a mean follow-up time of 30.1&#xa0;months, neither persistent nor recurrent active hemorrhage required a repeated endovascular or surgical treatment for hemostasis. No Glubran 2-related complications occurred. In addition, there was no significant difference between the evaluated glomerular filtration rate level before and after one week of Glubran 2 embolization (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.88; CI, -32.4 to 37.4).
CONCLUSIONS: TAE with NBCA Glubran 2 may be a safe alternative treatment for the management of RH under coagulopathic conditions. In particular, this method appears to be a potentially attractive alternative when conventional embolic materials fail in patients with ongoing hemodynamic instability or even under severe coagulopathic conditions.

### PMID 35179702 (2022) — La Radiologia medica
TITLE: Fluid-dynamic control microcatheter used with glue: preliminary experience on its feasibility and safety.
DOI: 10.1007/s11547-022-01461-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate feasibility, safety, and success of peripheral embolization procedures carried out using anti-reflux microcatheter with N-butyl-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) as an embolic agent.
METHODS: We retrospectively described 11 patients that suffered from active bleeding in different body districts, who underwent embolization procedure using SeQure microcatheter (Guerbet, France) with NBCA glue (Glubran II, GEM Italy) as an embolic agent. The treatments required NBCA volumes ranged from 0.1 to 0.6&#xa0;mL, with different dilutions with ethiodized oil (Lipiodol, Guerbet, France), depending on the entity of the bleeding. Technical success, clinical success, and complications were evaluated.
RESULTS: The procedures were successfully concluded in the totality of the patients, achieving full technical and clinical success. In one patient (9.1%), a small upstream of embolic material was encountered, without any consequence.
CONCLUSION: This preliminary experience shows that the use of SeQure is feasible and safe with NBCA.

### PMID 35093581 (2022) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Microvascular Decompression Through Cyanoacrylate Glue-Coated Teflon Sling Transposition Technique.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2022.01.086 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Video-Audio Media, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Vertebral artery dolichoectasia may produce a variety of clinical scenarios depending on the level of compression of several nervous structures along its course. Despite the fact that the pathophysiology is not fully clarified, it would seem that this pathologic elongation and dilation of the artery are acquired and determined by a thinning of the internal elastic lamina exposed to chronic arterial hypertension or as a result of degeneration and atherosclerosis of the arterial wall with age. When treatment is indicated, several techniques to relieve compression have been proposed, but they are usually challenging and nonstandardized. We present a case of a 78-year-old female with a 4-year history of left trigeminal neuralgia resistant to adequate dosage of multiple anticonvulsant medications and allergic to carbamazepine. She presented with a surgical history of a percutaneous microcompression of the Gasserian ganglion and 2 consecutive percutaneous radiofrequency thermorizotomies of the trigeminal nerve with transient benefit. The symptomatology was present for most of the day and impaired her quality of life, leading to severe mood decline. The patient underwent a left suboccipital retrosigmoid craniotomy (Video 1). A Teflon sling was wrapped around the vertebral artery. The 2 ends of the sling were anchored to the lateral dura by cyanoacrylate glue (Glubran 2, GEM Italy, Viareggio, Italy), pulling the vertebral artery away from the trigeminal nerve and brainstem. The patient reported complete suppression of facial pain. The case presentation, surgical anatomy, operative nuances, and postoperative course and outcome are reviewed. The patient gave written consent for participating in the procedure, surgical video, and publication of her images. Unfortunately, we did not take the picture of patient positioning for this specific case. For this reason, in order to better illustrate this surgical phase, we used the picture of another patient, who expressed her consent for publication and was operated on for a microvascular decompression with the same position as the one used for the patient described in this paper.

### PMID 33562997 (2022) — Acta radiologica (Stockholm, Sweden : 1987)
TITLE: Transcatheter arterial embolization for massive hemobilia with N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) Glubran 2.
DOI: 10.1177/0284185121992971 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Massive hemobilia is a life-threatening condition and therapeutic challenge. Few studies have demonstrated the use of N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) for massive hemobilia.
PURPOSE: To investigate the efficacy and safety of transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) using NBCA Glubran 2 for massive hemobilia.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Between January 2012 and December 2019, the data of 26 patients (mean age 63.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;12.6 years) with massive hemobilia were retrospectively evaluated for TAE using NBCA. The patients' baseline characteristics, severities of hemobilia, and imaging findings were collected. Emergent TAE was performed using 1:2-1:4 mixtures of NBCA and ethiodized oil. Technical success, clinical success, procedure-related complications, and follow-up outcomes were assessed.
RESULTS: Pre-procedure arteriography demonstrated injuries to the right hepatic artery (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;24) and cystic artery (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;2). Initial coil embolization distal to the lesions was required in 5 (19.2%) patients to control high blood flow and prevent end-organ damage. After a mean treatment time of 11.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;5.3&#x2009;min, technical success was achieved in 100% of the patients without non-target embolization and catheter adhesion. Clinical success was achieved in 25 (96.2%) patients. Major complications were noted in 1 (3.8%) patient with gallbladder necrosis. During a median follow-up time of 16.5 months (range 3-24 months), two patients died due to carcinomas, whereas none of the patients experienced recurrent hemobilia, embolic material migration, or post-embolization complications.
CONCLUSION: NBCA embolization for massive hemobilia is associated with rapid and effective hemostasis, as well as few major complications. This treatment modality may be a promising alternative to coil embolization.

### PMID 35019201 (2022) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: Balloon-assisted injection of fibrin sealant for the treatment of postintervention access-site bleeding complications.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.30068 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study sought to evaluate a new method that uses injection of fibrin sealant under simultaneous balloon occlusion for the treatment of postinterventional access site bleeding complications.&#xa0;With the rising complexity of interventional procedures, iatrogenic false aneurysms and active bleeding has become more common. In general, these complications are associated with increased morbidity and mortality, especially if surgical repair is required. Although high success rates are reported for ultrasound-guided compression and ultrasound-guided thrombin injection, these methods are not always feasible.&#xa0;All procedures of fibrin sealant injection under simultaneous balloon occlusion for the treatment of postinterventional access site bleeding complications or pseudoaneurysm were prospectively collected. Additional data were retrospectively obtained and analyzed for all patients treated by this new method.&#xa0;In total, 53 patients were included from 2018 to 2021. Most of the access site complications were related to transcatheter aortic valve replacement (40%) or percutaneous coronary intervention (21%), but also to a wide variety of other procedures. Of the 53 patients, 30 had to be treated for false aneurysms and 23 for active bleeding. A high primary success rate of 94% was achieved. Recurrences of false aneurysms occurred in six patients, of which only one needed open surgical repair. Regarding complications, two&#xa0;peripheral embolisms, thereof one requiring additional stent implantation occurred.&#xa0;Balloon-assisted thrombin injection seems to be feasible and safe. It provides a new alternative to prevent surgery for patients where common techniques are unavailable or have failed.

### PMID 35647964 (2022) — Indian journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Repeated use of fibrin sealants kept at room temperature in conjunctival autografting: An animal study.
DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_2588_21 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: In this study, our aim was to investigate if fibrin adhesives used in conjunctival wound surgery with autologous conjunctival grafts could be used repeatedly at different times after surgical opening.
METHODS: 40 New Zealand rabbits were used in the study. These animals were divided into four groups, each consisting of 10 rabbits, and hence 20 eyes. In the first group (control group), Tisseel fibrin sealant was used on the day the eye was first opened surgically; in the second group, it was used on the seventh day; on the third group, it was used on the 14th day; and in the fourth group, it was used 28 days after surgical opening. The graft from the inferior bulbar conjunctiva was attached using Tisseel fibrin glue to the superior scleral bed at the location where the superior bulbar conjunctiva was excised in the same eye.
RESULTS: No microbial growth was detected in the cultures of the samples tested. There were two partial graft loss in group 2 and there was one partial graft loss in each group of the other groups, and further total graft loss was present in one rabbit in group 3. None of the rabbits had any complications like granuloma, Corneal dellen or infection.
CONCLUSION: Based on these results, fibrin sealants can be used repeatedly by storing them at room temperature. Repeated use of fibrin adhesives will reduce the cost of ophthalmologic surgeries and non-ophthalmologic surgeries.

### PMID 35032753 (2022) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Diagnosis and surgical repair of delayed tracheal perforation post thyroidectomy in context of previous cranio-spinal radiotherapy - A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2022.106761 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: This is the first case of delayed tracheal perforation post total thyroidectomy in the context of previous radiotherapy to the neck. Such a presentation can be easily misdiagnosed and managed as a seroma at significant risk to the patient, as the latter had no precipitating factors and cardiorespiratory compromise. There are nineteen previously described cases of delayed tracheal injury post thyroidectomy of variable severity and variable intervention.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 51-year-old man presented with non-tender anterior neck surgical emphysema initially diagnosed on bedside ultrasound and plain X-ray, 22&#xa0;days following total thyroidectomy and central neck dissection. His background was significant for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia requiring chemotherapy and cranio-spinal radiotherapy. He underwent total thyroidectomy, for multiple bilateral thyroid nodules found on cranio-spinal MRI surveillance concerning for follicular neoplasm. There were significant amount of adhesions tethering the thyroid secondary to prior radiotherapy but no tracheal injury intra-operatively.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: At presentation, no source of air leak was identified on Computer Tomography. He failed conservative management. During surgical exploration, a 2&#xa0;mm tracheal perforation at the right cricothyroid joint was closed with the right sternothyroid muscle due to the proximity of the perforation with the recurrent right laryngeal nerve. Tisseel was applied over the repair. He recovered without further complications.
CONCLUSION: Sudden onset neck swelling post thyroidectomy in the context of significant scaring from radiotherapy, should raise the suspicion of surgical emphysema in the neck patients and confirmed with plain x-ray. Such patients should have multidisciplinary tertiary care.

### PMID 35436081 (2022) — Brazilian journal of cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Experimental Evaluation of Chitosan Membrane and Collagen Sponge (TachoSil&#xae;) as Sealants in Cardiovascular Surgery.
DOI: 10.21470/1678-9741-2021-0432 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The objectives of this study are to experimentally evaluate the haemostatic effects of two organic substances, a membrane of chitosan and a collagen sponge coated with thrombin and human fibrinogen (TachoSil&#xae;), in sealing 7-0 needle stitches holes on the femoral arteries of rats as well as to evaluate local histological reactions.
METHODS: Twenty-four rats were included, and four holes were made in each common femoral artery. In the control group, haemostasis was achieved only by compression with gauze sponge; and in the two other groups, haemostasis was achieved with application of one of these two substances.
RESULTS: Membrane of chitosan and TachoSil&#xae; showed a power to reduce the time to achieve haemostasis compared with the control group (P=0.001), and the haemostatic effects of these two substances were comparable. There was lower blood loss in the groups where these two substances were used when compared with the control group, but no difference was found comparing the two substances.
CONCLUSION: The use of these sealants did not promote more adhesion or local histological reactions when compared to the control group. Since chitosan is easy to find in nature, has a positive effect to promote haemostasis, and did not bring considerable local reactions, it might be used as a sealant in cardiovascular surgery.

### PMID 36545840 (2022) — The Journal of international medical research
TITLE: Treatment of dural tear with nerve root herniation after unilateral biportal endoscopic decompression using an epidural blood patch: a case report.
DOI: 10.1177/03000605221144147 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a case of a dural tear associated with nerve root herniation following unilateral biportal endoscopic decompression (UBED) that was successfully treated using a computed tomography-guided epidural blood patch. A 60-year-old man underwent UBED for radicular pain because of spinal stenosis at L4-5. A left partial hemilaminectomy and flavectomy were performed; however, the left dorsolateral side dura mater was torn during the procedure. TachoComb&#xae; was applied at the dural tear site, and the pain was relieved following UBED. However, 3 weeks post-UBED, the patient reported severe pain with an electric shock-like sensation in the left buttock and posterior thigh region with no other neurologic symptoms. The pain was aggravated by standing and spinal motion. Follow-up lumbar spinal magnetic resonance imaging was performed. Axial images indicated protrusion of the left S2 nerve root through the left dorsolateral side of the dura mater. The patient was further diagnosed with nerve root herniation following a dura mater tear. A computed tomography-guided epidural blood patch was performed, with successful therapeutic results. The outcome of this study indicates that a small dural tear that occurs during minimally invasive spinal surgery can be efficiently treated using an epidural blood patch prior to open surgery.

### PMID 34400026 (2022) — International journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Prospective study examining the use of thrombin-gelatin matrix (Floseal) to prevent post dental extraction haemorrhage in patients with inherited bleeding disorders.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijom.2021.07.018 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The bleeding risk in individuals with inherited bleeding disorders (IBDs) during exodontia is traditionally managed with perioperative coagulation factors and/or desmopressin, in conjunction with systemic and topical perioperative tranexamic acid and meticulous primary closure. Factor replacement is costly, requires specialist input, and carries a risk of developing factor VIII (FVIII) inhibitors. This prospective study was performed to determine whether the use of a standardized Floseal and anti-fibrinolytic protocol could reduce postoperative bleeding in patients with IBDs undergoing dental extraction, as compared to factor replacement. All patients &gt;18 years old attending Queensland Haemophilia Centre between November 2014 and July 2019 who required dental extractions were referred to the Oral and Maxillofacial Unit. Patients were consented for intraoperative Floseal administration instead of factor replacement. All other operative measures remained the same. The bleed rate was assessed against a historical control cohort. There were 34 extraction events in 32 patients. Four of the patients reported postoperative bleeding requiring factor supplementation or desmopressin; the bleeding rate was 11.8%. While not statistically significant, this was a reduction in the bleed rate compared to the traditional protocol (P = 0.35). Third molar extractions were 10.33 times more likely to cause postoperative bleeding (P = 0.018). The Floseal protocol was equipotent to the traditional perioperative factor replacement protocol. Floseal use is more economical, eliminates the risk of peri-procedural FVIII inhibitor development, and provides a haemostatic option for patients with very rare factor deficiencies, pre-existing clotting factor inhibitors, and those with anaphylaxis to clotting concentrates.

### PMID 35855283 (2022) — NMC case report journal
TITLE: Aphagia Strongly Suspected to Be Caused by an Allergic Reaction to a Gelatin-based Hemostatic Agent after Anterior Cervical Decompression and Fusion for Central Cervical Cord Injury.
DOI: 10.2176/jns-nmc.2022-0017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Gelatin-based hemostatic agents are widely used in neurosurgery. This is a case of postoperative aphagia strongly suspected to be caused by an allergic reaction to a gelatin-based hemostatic agent after anterior cervical decompression and fusion for central cervical cord injury. A 55-year-old man underwent cervical anterior decompression and fusion at the C3/4 and 4/5 levels for central cervical cord injury. Immediately after the surgery, he could not swallow saliva at all, but his voice was not hoarse. Postoperative cervical computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging showed significant edema from the post-hypopharynx wall to the front of the vertebral body. The retropharyngeal space was remarkably enlarged to 15.8 mm with cervical spine X-rays. Without neurological symptom improvement, his condition was diagnosed as marked edema of the area where Surgiflo (porcine-derived gelatin-based hemostatic agent; Johnson &amp; Johnson Wound Management, Somerville, NJ, USA) had been applied during the operation. It was strongly suspected to be caused by an allergic response to the porcine-derived gelatin. When methylprednisolone 1000 mg was administered for 3 days from the 5th postoperative day, swallowing became almost normal within a few hours after the initial administration, and his neurological symptoms improved. The patient left the hospital on the 12th day after the operation. Before using porcine-derived gelatin products during surgery, special consideration should be given to patients with an allergy history before surgery.

### PMID 35464330 (2022) — Journal of medical cases
TITLE: Intraoperative Anaphylaxis Following Injection of a Bleomycin-Gelatin Solution for Sclerotherapy.
DOI: 10.14740/jmc3906 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: During the perioperative period, the most commonly identified agents that are responsible for acute allergic reactions include antibiotics, neuromuscular blocking agents, opioids, chlorhexidine, and iodinated dyes for radiologic imaging. However, whenever an allergic reaction is suspected, all of the agents to which the patient has been exposed must be considered. Although bleomycin is utilized as the primary agent for sclerotherapy in the treatment of vascular malformations, other substances such as Surgiflo&#xae; may be added to the bleomycin solution to increase its efficacy and promote thrombosis of the smaller vessels. These products are derived from animal collagen and contain gelatin which may lead to an allergic reaction. We present an 11-year-old girl undergoing sclerotherapy treatment of an extensive left lower extremity venous malformation who subsequently developed perioperative hemodynamic instability requiring intervention after receiving an injection of a bleomycin and Surgiflo&#xae; solution. Further investigation identified gelatin in the Surgiflo&#xae; as the causative agent of the allergic event. Previous reports of such reactions are reviewed and the perioperative care and treatment of patients who experience anaphylaxis is addressed.

### PMID 35154843 (2022) — Case reports in surgery
TITLE: Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose Mimicking a Retained Laparotomy Sponge.
DOI: 10.1155/2022/4718457 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) is an absorbable hemostat commonly used during gynecologic surgery. We present a case in which ORC was used in a patient undergoing posterior pelvic exenteration with ureteroneocystostomy for excision of a malignant pelvic mass. At the conclusion of these procedures, the laparotomy pad count was reported as incomplete likely due to the large number of laparotomy pads used and changes in nursing staff. Abdominal radiographs were obtained to verify no pads were retained in the abdominal cavity. These identified a poorly defined radiolucency deep in the patient's pelvis, requiring the surgical incision be reopened. Upon reexploration, no evidence of a retained surgical sponge could be identified. However, ORC was identified at the site of the radiolucency in question. Radiographs of this material, once removed, confirmed its radiolucent appearance. This experience clearly demonstrates that oxidized regenerated cellulose can mimic a retained surgical sponge on intraoperative radiographs. Dissemination of this knowledge will hopefully help to avoid radiographic misidentification of ORC in the perioperative window and minimizing the risk of unnecessary surgical interventions in the future.

### PMID 33534658 (2022) — Acta chirurgica Belgica
TITLE: Surgicel mimicking recurrent pelvic neuroblastoma in a 3-year-old boy.
DOI: 10.1080/00015458.2020.1846944 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Surgicel is a hemostatic agent that consists of oxidized regenerated cellulose and used in surgical procedures as an aid to bleeding control. It is left in the operation site for hemostasis, could cause an operation by mimicking the recurrence of tumor, as in our patient.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A 3-year-old boy was operated by us at the age of 40&#x2009;days and 2.5&#x2009;years, respectively, due to pelvic neuroblastoma. He was re-operated for mimicking recurrence or residue tumor secondary to the prior placement of Surgicel within the peritoneal cavity.
RESULTS: Re-laparotomy was performed and the mass approximately 2.8&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;2&#xd7;1&#x2009;cm in size in front of the right ureter and iliac vessels and behind the bladder was removed by blunt and sharp dissection without damaging these organs. While gelatinous content was evacuated from this mass, there was no apparent tumor appearance. Pathology report was reported as fibrotic tissue characterized by foreign body and foreign body giant cells. The postoperative period was uneventful and he was discharged on the 2nd postoperative day.
CONCLUSIONS: In the light of our case, the use of hemostatic agents should be kept to a minimum and should not be left in the body unless it is difficult. Thus, unnecessary examination or recurrent surgery can be avoided.

### PMID 35778274 (2022) — Surgery
TITLE: Hemostatic efficacy of composite polysaccharide powder (starch-chitosan) for emergency bleeding control: An animal model&#xa0;study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.surg.2022.04.054 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Blood clot formation or hemostasis is vital to minimize blood loss and mitigate the risk of death from severe bleeding. This study investigates the characteristics of a novel hemostatic composite containing chemically modified chitosan and starch for emergency bleeding control. The performance of this novel hemostatic powder was compared with commercially available starch-based (Arista AH) and chitosan-based (Celox) hemostats.
METHODS: Hemostatic composite was prepared according to the patent registered by the authors (Patent No. 100865, Iranian Intellectual Property Organization) in Bani Zist Baspar Healda, Inc. (Shiraz, Iran). The properties of the product were surveyed by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy and compared with Arista-AH and Celox as commercial counterparts. The cytocompatibility, hemolysis, platelet and red blood cells (RBCs) adhesion, biocompatibility, and biodegradability attributes were evaluated in in&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vitro studies. Hemostatic efficacy was evaluated in 24 healthy 6-month-old male New Zealand white rabbits in lethal and sublethal injuries of femoral artery and veins, respectively.
RESULTS: Modification and composition led to a fundamental development in physicochemical characteristics including swelling properties, water absorption, and platelet and RBC adhesion due to improved electrostatic and hydrophilic attributes. The significant superiority in clotting efficiency was confirmed after the application of the composite in 2 models of venous and arterial injury in comparison with common commercial hemostats.
CONCLUSION: Simultaneous use of water-absorbing compounds and introducing positively charged functional groups to hemostatic material led to a considerable control of femoral bleeding in emergency conditions. The introduced composite was biodegradable and biocompatible and prompts RBC aggregation and platelet adhesion.

### PMID 35198509 (2022) — Annals of surgical treatment and research
TITLE: In vivo study for the hemostatic efficacy and foreign body reaction of a new powder-type polysaccharide hemostatic agent.
DOI: 10.4174/astr.2022.102.2.65 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Various hemostatic agents have been introduced in therapy as postoperative bleeding is a poor prognostic factor for postoperative outcomes. These products can be divided into those that directly promote the hemostatic cascade and those that physically form a barrier by absorbing blood. The latter, powder-type hemostatic agents have the advantages of being inexpensive and more absorbable with less foreign body reactions (FBRs) and are applicable to a relatively wide area. This study was conducted to verify the safety and efficacy of a newly invented polysaccharide product (OOZFIX, Theracion Biomedical), which improves blood absorption and hemostatic effects.
METHODS: Two separate animal experiments were performed. The first evaluated FBRs histologically at 3 days, 2 weeks, and 4 weeks, after implantation of OOZFIX in rats, and the second compared hemostatic performance of OOZFIX and Arista AH (Bard) in the porcine liver punch biopsy model.
RESULTS: We found minimal FBRs in the 3-day group and no reactions in both the 2-week and 4-week groups after implantation of hemostatic agents. The time to hemostasis of OOZFIX was not significantly different from that of Arista AH (median [interquartile range]: 9 [6-10] minutes vs. 8 [6-10] minutes, respectively; P = 0.522). When comparing the serial bleeding grade tendency, there was no statistical difference between OOZFIX and Arista AH (P = 0.656).
CONCLUSION: OOZFIX caused a minimal FBR that disappeared within 2 weeks in vivo, and its hemostatic performance was comparable with that of an existing agent, Arista AH. Further clinical studies are required in the future.

### PMID 34464251 (2022) — Canadian Urological Association journal = Journal de l'Association des urologues du Canada
TITLE: PEG-coated patch parenchymal closure technique and initial outcomes during minimally invasive partial nephrectomy.
DOI: 10.5489/cuaj.7286 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The Hemopatch&#xae; is a novel polyethylene glycol-coated (PEG-coated) collagen patch that acts as a topical hemostatic agent. It has been applied to a variety of surgical techniques. Here, we present our series and technique using a PEG-coated patch for minimally invasive partial nephrectomy (MIPN).
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective chart review of all patients undergoing MIPN by a single surgeon at a tertiary Canadian medical center between July and December 2018. We included patients if a PEG-coated patch was used to close the renal parenchymal defect. We also describe in detail our technique for laparoscopic patch deployment.
RESULTS: A total of 17 patients met inclusion criteria, of whom 12 were male. Mean age was 63 years old. Median size of renal mass was 2.85 cm in largest dimension and median RENAL score was 6. Hilar clamping was carried out in 12 (70.9%) cases, with an average warm ischemic time of 16.1 minutes. The remainder of cases were performed off-clamp. Median estimated blood loss was 238 mL and the mean change in hemoglobin on postoperative day 1 compared to preoperatively was 21.2 g/L. The average length of stay was 1.76 days. No patient required blood transfusion or underwent angioembolization or re-operation for bleeding within 90 days. There were no Clavien-Dindo grade 3 or greater complications.
CONCLUSIONS: A PEG-coated patch can be used safely and effectively in lieu of traditional two-layer renorrhaphy with acceptable outcomes. Larger, prospective series are required to ascertain its true value and cost-effectiveness.

### PMID 36238531 (2022) — Endoscopy international open
TITLE: Hemostatic powders for gastrointestinal bleeding: a review of old, new, and emerging agents in a rapidly advancing field.
DOI: 10.1055/a-1836-8962 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Background and study aims&#x2002; Hemostatic powders are increasingly used to address limitations in conventional endoscopic techniques for gastrointestinal bleeding. Various agents exist with different compositions, characteristics, efficacy, and adverse events (AEs). We sought to review existing hemostatic powders, from preclinical to established agents. Methods&#x2002; A literature review on hemostatic powders for gastrointestinal bleeding was undertaken through a MEDLINE search from 2000-2021 and hand searching of articles. Relevant literature was critically appraised and reviewed for mechanism of action, hemostasis and rebleeding rate, factors associated with hemostatic failure, and AEs. Results&#x2002; The most established agents are TC-325 (Hemospray), EndoClot, and Ankaferd Blood Stopper (ABS). These agents have been successfully applied to a variety of upper and lower gastrointestinal bleeding etiologies, in the form of primary, combination, salvage, and bridging therapy. Few AEs have been reported, including visceral perforation, venous embolism, and self-limited abdominal pain. Newer agents include CEGP-003 and UI-EWD, which have shown results similar to those for the older agents in initial clinical studies. All aforementioned powders have high immediate hemostasis rates, particularly in scenarios not amenable to conventional endoscopic methods, but are limited by significant rates of rebleeding. Other treatments include TDM-621 (PuraStat) consisting of a liquid hemostatic agent newly applied to endoscopy and self-propelling thrombin powder (CounterFlow Powder), a preclinical but promising agent. Conclusions&#x2002; Rapid development of hemostatic powders and growing clinical expertise has established these agents as a valuable strategy in gastrointestinal bleeding. Further research will continue to refine the efficacy and applicability of these agents.

### PMID 35831797 (2022) — BMC musculoskeletal disorders
TITLE: Comparison of blood loss between tranexamic acid-soaked absorbable Gelfoam and topical retrograde injection via drainage catheter plus clamping in cervical laminoplasty surgery.
DOI: 10.1186/s12891-022-05626-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To compare the safety and efficacy of tranexamic acid (TXA)-soaked absorbable Gelfoam and the retrograde injection of TXA through a drain with drain-clamping in degenerative cervical laminoplasty patients.
METHODS: Patients were assigned into either TXA retrograde injection (TXA-RI), TXA-soaked absorbable Gelfoam (TXA-Gel), or control groups. The demographics, operative measurements, volume and length of drainage, length of hospital stay, complete blood cell count, coagulopathy, postoperative complications, and blood transfusion were recorded.
RESULTS: We enrolled 133 patients, with 44, 44, and 45 in the TXA-RI, TXA-Gel, and control groups, respectively. The baseline characteristics did not differ significantly among the three groups. The TXA-RI group exhibited a lower volume and length of postoperative drainage compared to the TXA-Gel and control groups (126.60&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;31.27 vs. 156.60&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;38.63 and 275.45&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;75.27&#x2009;mL; 49.45&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.70 vs 58.70&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;10.46 and 89.31&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.50&#x2009;hours, all P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). The TXA-RI group also had significantly shorter hospital stays compared to the control group (5.31&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.18 vs 7.50&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.25&#x2009;days, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) and higher hemoglobin and hematocrit levels (12.58&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.67 vs 11.28&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.76&#x2009;g/dL; 36.62&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.66% vs 33.82&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.57%, both P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05) at hospital discharge. In the TXA-RI and TXA-Gel groups, the D-dimmer (DD) and fibrinogen (FIB) were significantly lower than those in the control group after surgery (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). None of the patients required blood transfusion. No complications, including thromboembolic events, were reported.
CONCLUSION: Topical retrograde injection of TXA through a drain with drain-clamping at the conclusion of unilateral posterior cervical expansive open-door laminoplasty may effectively reduce postoperative blood loss and the length of hospital stays without increasing postoperative complications.

### PMID 35397405 (2022) — Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials
TITLE: Assessing the aneurysm occlusion efficacy of a shear-thinning biomaterial in a 3D-printed model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2022.105156 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Metallic coil embolization is a common method for the endovascular treatment of visceral artery aneurysms (VAA) and visceral artery pseudoaneurysms (VAPA); however, this treatment is suboptimal due to the high cost of coils, incomplete volume occlusion, poor reendothelialization, aneurysm puncture, and coil migration. Several alternative treatment strategies are available, including stent flow diverters, glue embolics, gelfoam slurries, and vascular mesh plugs-each of which have their own disadvantages. Here, we investigated the in vitro capability of a shear-thinning biomaterial (STB), a nanocomposite hydrogel composed of gelatin and silicate nanoplatelets, for the minimally-invasive occlusion of simple necked aneurysm models. We demonstrated the injectability of STB through various clinical catheters, engineered an in vitro testing apparatus to independently manipulate aneurysm neck diameter, fluid flow rate, and flow waveform, and tested the stability of STB within the models under various conditions. Our experiments show that STB is able to withstand at least 1.89&#xa0;Pa of wall shear stress, as estimated by computational fluid dynamics. STB is also able to withstand up to 10&#xa0;mL&#xa0;s-1 pulsatile flow with a waveform mimicking blood flow in the human femoral artery and tolerate greater pressure changes than those in the human aorta. We ultimately found that our in vitro system was limited by supraphysiologic pressure changes caused by aneurysm models with low compliance.

### PMID 35339592 (2022) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Methods and Outcomes of Endovascular False Lumen Embolization for Thoracic Aortic Dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2022.03.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To provide a contemporary review on endovascular false lumen (FL) embolization for thoracic aortic dissection (AD) and evaluate its early outcome.
METHODS: A systematic literature review on FL embolization for thoracic AD from January 2003 to December 2020 was performed under the instruction of Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement. Each article was analyzed using a standardized protocol including predefined demographic characteristics, perioperative mortality, and major complications.
RESULTS: A total of 29 papers with 229 patients were included into the analysis. The methods of FL occlusion used were the candy-plug technique, the knickerbocker technique, the "cork in the bottleneck" technique, and direct FL embolization with a combination of stent-grafts, coils, onyx, plugs, and glue. FL embolization procedure was performed in 79 patients (34.5%) with type A AD and 150 (65.5%) with type B AD. FL direct embolization was the most frequently used technique and it was applied in 198 (86.5%) patients. Candy-plug, knickerbocker, and "cork in the bottleneck" techniques were used in 26 (11.4%), 3 (1.3%), and 2 (0.9%) patients, respectively. Technical success was achieved in all patients except one (228/229, 99.6%) in which implantation of a stent to celiac trunk was not possible. There were 4 hospital deaths (1.7%). Neurological complications occurred in 6 patients (2.6%), including 4 (1.7%) spinal cord ischemia and 2 (0.9%) ischemic stroke. There were 1 (0.4%) iatrogenic retrograde dissection and 2 (0.9%) renal failure reported. The mean duration of follow-up was 16.5 months. There were 21 deaths (9.3%) during follow-up and 8 (3.6%) were aorta-related. Thirty three (14.7%) secondary interventions were performed. Five patients (2.2%) required an open completion thoracoabdominal procedure incorporating the stent-graft into the repair. Complete FL thrombosis was observed in 181 (80.4%) patients, 34 (15.1%) had partial thrombosis, and 10 (4.4%) had FL progression.
CONCLUSIONS: FL embolization of the distal thoracic aorta is a promising technique in a group of patients to promote FL thrombosis and aortic remodeling in thoracic aorta.

### PMID 34362276 (2022) — Vascular and endovascular surgery
TITLE: Penetration of Dissected Membrane for False Lumen Embolization in a Case of Chronic Aortic Dissection.
DOI: 10.1177/15385744211037513 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: Patent false lumens carry a high risk of aortic events including rupture. False lumen embolization is a useful method to promote thrombosis of false lumen. In the case presented here, direct penetration of the dissected membrane was employed to obtain access to the false lumen, enabling embolization. Case report: The case was a 64-year-old female who developed a Stanford type A acute aortic dissection. Replacement of ascending aorta and aortic arch with frozen elephant trunk technique was performed. After the operation, there was a residual flow through the false lumen in the descending thoracic and abdominal aorta. Twenty months later, the patient complained of sudden back pain, and a CT scan demonstrated another new dissection at the distal edge of the open stent. Additionally, the false lumen that had remained since the onset of the type A aortic dissection enlarged during the observation period. An endovascular procedure was planned to exclude the false lumen. Despite closing all communicating channels between true and false lumen using a vascular plug, coils, and stent grafts, the false lumen continued to expand due to the residual flow at the visceral segment. The origin responsible for the flow was not identified. To perform an embolization of the false lumen, access into the false lumen was obtained by penetration of the dissected flap using a trans-septal needle. Following the successful penetration of the flap, embolization of the false lumen was performed using coils and glue. After the embolization, an angiogram of the false lumen confirmed the significant reduction of leakage into the true lumen. The size of the aorta and false lumen decreased after the embolization. Conclusion: Direct penetration of the dissected membrane of the aorta was a safe and useful measure for regaining access to the false lumen and for the following endovascular intervention.

### PMID 35896064 (2022) — Acta cytologica
TITLE: Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose (Surgicel&#xae;) on Cytology/Histology.
DOI: 10.1159/000525857 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: In patients with a history of malignancy, follow-up surveillance of lymph nodes (LNs) is required to evaluate for potential malignancy or infection. In some cases, the lymphadenopathy may be secondary to an intraprocedural hemostatic agent and/or related granulomatous reaction.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present the case of an 80-year-old female with a remote past medical history of breast cancer status post-lumpectomy and chemoradiation. Twenty years later, a 2.4 cm pulmonary right middle lobe nodule was noted on imaging studies. She underwent bronchoscopy, cervical mediastinoscopy, and right middle lobe wedge resection. The final pathologic diagnosis was a pulmonary carcinoid tumor, and the excised mediastinal LN was negative for malignancy. A 10-month surveillance positron emission tomography scan showed new mildly avid mediastinal and right hilar LNs. The following endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration showed unremarkable lymphoid elements in the enlarged 4R LN, while the station 7 LN demonstrated ample dense hyaline-like foreign material. Subsequent review of the cell block/biopsy and communication with the thoracic surgeon revealed that Surgicel&#xae; (or oxidized regenerated cellulose) was placed during surgery at the station 7 site.
DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION: Assessment of the findings and based on the similar histologic appearance reported in previous cases associated with Surgicel&#xae; [Ann Thorac Med. 2017;12(1):55-6, Cancer Cytopathol. 2019;127(12):765-70, and Arch Bronconeumol. 2020;56(7):459-71], the station 7 acellular, amorphous, and hyaline-like exogenous material found in our case was interpreted as hemostatic agent compatible with Surgicel&#xae; (or oxidized regenerated cellulose). This case highlights the importance of cytologic/histologic recognition of hemostatic agents, specifically oxidized cellulose mesh.

### PMID 35867626 (2022) — The American journal of case reports
TITLE: Thoracic Duct Embolization for Delayed Chyle Leak After Lewis-Tanner Esophagectomy.
DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.936590 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND Radical esophagectomy for cancer is a potentially curative treatment that requires two/three-field lymphadenectomy. Serious complications can occur, including chyle leak (CL). CL has an incidence rate of 1-9% and is associated with a higher rate of postsurgical morbidity and mortality. It usually occurs in the early postoperative period; delayed CL is less common and is thought to be due to an occult leak or late diagnosis. CASE REPORT A 54-year-old man with adenocarcinoma of the esophagus underwent Lewis-Tanner esophagectomy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy with FLOT. During en bloc lymphadenectomy, the main thoracic duct was identified, clipped, and divided. The postoperative course was uneventful. One month after hospital discharge, he was readmitted with severe abdominal, scrotal, and lower-limb edema. A chest-abdomen CT scan revealed massive pleural effusion with left shift and compression of the mediastinum. The patient was initially treated with fasting and fat-free total parenteral nutrition, and the drain output was 2800-3000 mL/dL. Lymphoscintigraphy with ethiodized oil eventually revealed a thoracic duct leak, and lymphatic embolization was successfully performed with a 4-mm metallic spiral and glue. Drain output dramatically reduced, and after 11 days the thoracic drain was removed and the patient was safely discharged. CONCLUSIONS Thoracic duct embolization seems be an effective therapy in treating high-output (&gt;1000 mL/dL) CL that has occurred more than 2 weeks after esophagectomy. It can be considered as a first-line treatment due to its simplicity and effectiveness.

### PMID 35608519 (2022) — Monaldi archives for chest disease = Archivio Monaldi per le malattie del torace
TITLE: Unusual lymphadenopathy diagnosed by endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration.
DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2022.2306 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidized cellulose, used as hemostatic in thoracic surgery, may cause in some cases foreign body reactions, and simulate other diseases. We report the case of a 39-year-old man operated on a middle lobe lobectomy for atypical carcinoid. The follow up chest-CT showed enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes, so endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration was performed suspecting recurrence of the tumor. The cytology results showed amorphous fragments such as foreign body reaction secondary to Pahacel&#xae;, used as hemostatic during the surgery. A few days later, the patient was re-operated on suspicion of mediastinitis induced by the endoscopic procedure. The aim of this case is to consider the foreign body reaction to Pahacel&#xae;, in patients with postoperative thoracic lymphadenopathy. It is also important to remember that in these patients the endoscopic procedures allow the diagnosis but may cause mediastinitis.

### PMID 35452003 (2022) — Clinical nuclear medicine
TITLE: FDG PET/CT Features of Polysaccharide-Based Hemostatic Agent: Chronic Inflammatory Changes Can Mimic Metastatic Lesions.
DOI: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000004216 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To prevent hemorrhagic complications, hemostatic agents (HAs) have been widely used in recent years. The use of HAs can lead to false-positive results on postoperative imaging. There exists only 1 study in the literature evaluating these applications during surgical procedures. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate the postoperative imaging features of polysaccharide-based HAs in thoracic surgery patients who have had 18F-FDG PET/CT scans.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Two hundred nine consecutive patients who underwent thoracic surgery were enrolled in this study. A topical polysaccharide-based HA was applied to the surgical bed for all of the patients. The patients diagnosed with cancer were followed up with subsequent thoracic CT scans, and 42 of these patients were also imaged with 18F-FDG PET/CT, which then comprised the main study group. Due to suspicion of metastasis, 19/42 patients were reoperated or rebiopsied. The latest histopathological findings were accepted as criterion standard, and previous FDG PET/CT images were retrospectively reevaluated.
RESULTS: Polysaccharide-based HAs that appear as amorphous basophilic material were identified in histopathological samples of 11/19 patients. Lymphocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes, which formed foreign body reaction and/or foreign body granuloma, indicating the presence of chronic inflammation, were seen in all of the samples. 18F-FDG PET/CT showed increased FDG uptake in all of these lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the inconsistency of the literature, polysaccharide-based HAs can be demonstrated in human surgical specimens as amorphous basophilic materials even after a long time from the initial surgical procedure. These agents almost always cause chronic inflammatory changes. In addition, these agents may mimic "false-positive" findings on postoperative FDG PET/CT scans.

### PMID 33751255 (2021) — Journal of artificial organs : the official journal of the Japanese Society for Artificial Organs
TITLE: New hemostatic technique with combined use of Hydrofit&#xae; and Surgicel&#xae;: an in vitro and in vivo study.
DOI: 10.1007/s10047-021-01257-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We developed an effective hemostatic technique using Hydrofit&#xae; and Surgicel&#xae; simultaneously. The aim of this study was to demonstrate the hemostatic efficacy of the Hydrofit&#xae; and Surgicel&#xae; combination technique through an in vitro experiment and to elucidate mid-term consequences of the combined components through an in vivo experiment. For the in vitro experiment, a closed circuit using a heparin-coated cardiopulmonary bypass circuit and a prosthetic graft was created. The amount of bleeding from the prosthetic graft was measured, and the following three hemostatic methods were applied: only gauze compression in control group, Hydrofit&#xae; application in Hydrofit group, Surgicel&#xae; spread Hydrofit&#xae; application in Hydrofit and Surgicel (HS) group, respectively. In the in vivo experiment, Hydrofit&#xae; and/or Surgicel&#xae; were implanted under skin on the back of rats (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10) at 4 points. In the control group, only an incision was made; in the Hydrofit, Surgicel, and HS groups, Hydrofit&#xae; and/or Surgicel&#xae; was implanted. One and three months later, each of the five rats were killed and in each section histopathologic examination was carried out. In the in vitro experiment, the amount of bleeding was 7.84&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.08, 2.26&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.02, and 0.87&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.38&#xa0;ml in the control, Hydrofit, and HS groups, respectively. The amount of bleeding in the HS group was more suppressed than in the Hydrofit group (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.012). In the in vivo experiment, the maximal depth diameter of each remaining hemostatic sealant was measured. After 3&#xa0;months, the diameter was 0, 2289.0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;768.2, 3850.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;935.8&#xa0;&#x3bc;m in Surgicel, Hydrofit and HS groups, respectively. The diameter was significantly increased in the HS group compared with the Surgicel and Hydrofit groups (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001, respectively,). In conclusion, the combination of Hydrofit&#xae; and Surgicel&#xae; was effective in achieving hemostasis. The remnants of Hydrofit&#xae; and Surgicel&#xae; were present for a long time in the tissues which could compress the surrounding tissue.

### PMID 34700226 (2021) — Biomaterials
TITLE: Biocompatible therapeutic albumin/genipin bioglue for postoperative wound adhesion and residual tumor ablation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2021.121179 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Surgical adhesives have partly replaced traditional sutures to seal and reattach tissues due to their superiorities in preventing liquids leakage and avoiding secondary damage in the surrounding wound area. Most of the existing adhesives are committed to promoting wound healing and functional recovery. A therapeutic adhesive that assists in clearing the residual tumors in the surgical area is undoubtedly meaningful to obtain a better clinical outcome. Herein, enlightened by commercial BioGlue (albumin/glutaraldehyde sealant), a biocompatible therapeutic albumin/genipin bioglue is designed for postoperative wound adhesion and tumor ablation. The albumin/genipin bioglue is formed by simple mixing of bovine serum albumin (BSA) and genipin (GP) under a 35&#xa0;&#xb0;C water bath for 24&#xa0;h without further purification. The obtained dark-blue fluorescent adhesive exhibits a significant temperature increase accompanied by heating-induced curing once irradiated with an 808-nm laser. This unique characteristic allows BSA-GP a therapeutic adhesive for postoperative wound adhesion and photothermal elimination of residual tumors under laser irradiation. Moreover, its easy injectability and impressive photothermal efficacy also make it feasible for in situ tumor photothermal ablation. The ultrasimple synthetic strategy by mimicking BioGlue endows BSA-GP adhesive with large-scale production capacity and clinical transformation potential, which is a successful paradigm for reforming existing clinical products.

### PMID 34417129 (2021) — Journal of pediatric urology
TITLE: Can sealing promote healing?: A systematic review and meta-analysis highlighting the adjunctive role of tissue sealant application during urethroplasty for hypospadias.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpurol.2021.07.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A significant proportion of children require multiple surgeries for successful repair of hypospadias. This is not only a source of a financial burden to the family but also causes long-term social and psychosexual issues. Tissue sealant application can provide additional coverage to the suture line and subsequently prevents operative failure. However, a consensus statement regarding its usage during urethroplasty is lacking. This systematic review and meta-analysis aims to compare the outcomes of hypospadias surgery, in terms of its complications, in children with and without tissue sealant application.
METHOD: The authors systematically searched the databases PubMed, EMBASE, Web of Science and Scopus through September 2020. The occurrence of overall complications, and specific complications (including urethrocutaneous fistula, wound-related complications, flap-related complications, complications involving the neo-urethral tube and meatal stenosis) were the primary and secondary outcomes, respectively. Statistical analysis was performed using a random-effects model, and pooled risk ratio (RR) and heterogeneity (I2) were calculated. The methodological quality of the studies was assessed utilizing the Downs and Black scale.
RESULT: Four comparative studies were included in the meta-analysis. The different types of tissue sealants such as fibrin glue, cyanoacrylate glue, BioGlue and cryocalcium glue were used in these studies. As compared to without sealant application, hypospadias repair performed with sealant application showed no significant difference in the incidence of overall postoperative complications (RR 0.63; 95% CI 0.34-1.14, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.13). However, a significant reduction in some specific complications including urethrocutaneous fistula (RR 0.37; 95% CI 0.19-0.72, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.003), wound-related complications (RR 0.57; 95% CI 0.38-0.86, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.008) and complications involving the neo-urethra (RR 0.15; 95% CI 0.04-0.54, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.004) was observed with sealant usage. The average Downs and Black scale scores ranged from 16 to 18, with all studies having a moderate risk of bias. Kappa statistics showed a value of 0.962 (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001), highlighting an almost perfect agreement among the two observers.
CONCLUSION: The present meta-analysis revealed no additional benefit of the repair of hypospadias performed with tissue sealants as compared to without sealants in terms of reducing the overall postoperative complications. However, a significant reduction in the occurrence of some specific complications, including UCF, wound-related complications and complications involving the neourethra was observed with sealant application. The level of evidence of the published comparative studies is limited. Therefore, further studies need to be conducted for optimal comparison between the sealant and no sealant (or placebo), and different types of sealants.

### PMID 34317468 (2021) — JACC. Case reports
TITLE: Coronary Artery Embolism Caused by BioGlue Surgical Adhesive After Type A Acute Aortic Dissection Repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jaccas.2020.11.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Coronary artery embolism due to BioGlue surgical adhesive after repair of type A acute aortic dissection is a rare condition. We report a case of BioGlue coronary artery embolism after type A acute aortic dissection repair confirmed using intravascular ultrasound imaging and pathological examination. It was successfully treated with percutaneous coronary intervention. (Level of Difficulty: Advanced.).

### PMID 33853306 (2021) — Tuberkuloz ve toraks
TITLE: Can surgical adhesives may cause false positivity in follow-up positron emission tomography after lung cancer resection?
DOI: 10.5578/tt.20219907 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Postoperative complications following thoracic procedures are a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Alveolar air leaks and/or bronchopleural fistulas are associated with increased risk of infection, prolonged chest tube, and hospital stay duration and therefore generate economical concern for health care providers. A variety of surgical sealants or adhesives have been introduced to overcome this complication. Since intraoperative BioGlue&#xae; application can also cause an inflammatory reaction and mimic tumor recurrence on FDG PET-CT, in the present study we aimed to investigate its potential role in false-positive PET-CT results in patients operated for NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data of six patients who underwent resection for primary NSCLC at our institution (Department of Thoracic Surgery, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty) between January 2015 and December 2018 and had false positivity, due to BioGlue&#xae; application, at the bronchial stump in follow-up FDG PET-CT were retrospectively analyzed from a prospectively collected database.
RESULT: One of the 6 patients was female and 5 were male. The mean age was 68 years (range, 56-79 years). The average time interval between operation and postoperative FDG-PET imaging was 4.3 months (range, 4-6 months). Follow-up FDG-PET imaging SUVmax values ranged between 3.0 and 9.0 (median: 5.33). All patients have been evaluated by FDG-PET scan following the detection of soft tissue densities at the surgical site suspicious for recurrence at their follow-up chest CT scans. Four patients underwent a bronchoscopic examination, bronchial stumps were examined and multiple biopsies were taken from suspicious nodules or tissues and sent for pathologic examination. Histopathological results revealed inflammation which is compatible with foreign body granuloma, without any suspicion for malignancy, in all cases. Two patients were solely followed-up and subsequent FDG-PET imaging after 3 months revealed complete resolution of FDG uptake.
CONCLUSIONS: To avoid unnecessary biopsies or surgical procedures, the possibility of false-positive results due to surgical adhesive product use should be taken into account while interpreting follow-up FDG-PET imaging results and the operative reports should be written in detail, describing which surgical materials used and their exact application sites.

### PMID 33516693 (2021) — JACC. Cardiovascular interventions
TITLE: Intravascular Ultrasound Findings of BioGlue Surgical Adhesive Coronary Embolism After Ascending Aorta Replacement.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcin.2020.11.018 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 34977491 (2021) — Animal models and experimental medicine
TITLE: Safety and biodegradability of a synthetic dural sealant patch (Liqoseal) in a porcine cranial model.
DOI: 10.1002/ame2.12184 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Liqoseal consists of a watertight layer of poly(ester)ether urethane and an adhesive layer containing polyethylene glycol-N-hydroxysuccinimide (PEG-NHS). It is designed to prevent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage after intradural surgery. This study assessed the safety and biodegradability of Liqoseal in a porcine craniotomy model.
METHODS: In 32 pigs a craniotomy plus durotomy was performed. In 15 pigs Liqoseal was implanted, in 11 control pigs no sealant was implanted and in 6 control pigs a control dural sealant (Duraseal or Tachosil) was implanted. The safety of Liqoseal was evaluated by clinical, MRI and histological assessment. The degradation of Liqoseal was histologically estimated.
RESULTS: Liqoseal, 2&#xa0;mm thick before application, did not swell and significantly was at maximum mean thickness of 2.14 (&#xb1;0.37) mm at one month. The foreign body reaction induced by Liqoseal, Duraseal and Tachosil were comparable. Liqoseal showed no adherence to the arachnoid layer and was completely resorbed between 6 and 12&#xa0;months postoperatively. In one animal with Liqoseal, an epidural fluid collection containing CSF could not be excluded.
CONCLUSION: Liqoseal seems to be safe for intracranial use and is biodegradable. The safety and performance in humans needs to be further assessed in clinical trials.

### PMID 34596382 (2021) — ACS biomaterials science &amp; engineering
TITLE: Fish Gelatin-Based Absorbable Dural Sealant with Anti-inflammatory Properties.
DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.1c00734 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage from the dura mater during craniotomy is a common complication, which is associated with infection, meningitis, pneumocephalus, and delayed wound healing. In the present study, we developed an absorbable fish gelatin-based anti-inflammatory sealant for dura mater sealing to prevent CSF leakage. Gelatin derived from Alaska pollock (ApGltn) was modified with &#x3b1;-linolenic acid (ALA), an omega-3 fatty acid that exhibits anti-inflammatory properties, and cross-linked with a poly(ethylene glycol)-based cross-linker to develop ALA-ApGltn sealant (ALA-Seal). ALA-Seal demonstrated a higher storage modulus and tangent delta (tan &#x3b4;) compared with those of the original ApGltn sealant (Org-Seal). The swelling ratio of ALA-Seal was markedly lower than that of DuraSeal, a commercially available dural sealant. Ex vivo burst strength measurements using porcine dura mater indicated that there was no significant difference between DuraSeal and ALA-Seal, despite ALA-Seal having an order of magnitude lower storage modulus. The anti-inflammatory properties of ALA-Seal, evaluated using brain microglial cells, were considerably higher than those of DuraSeal and Org-Seal, with a minimal adverse effect on cell viability. Therefore, compared to DuraSeal, ALA-Seal is a potential dural sealant with a lower swelling ratio, similar burst strength, and higher anti-inflammatory properties, which may prevent CSF leakage.

### PMID 35079500 (2021) — NMC case report journal
TITLE: Intracranial Mycotic Aneurysm after Left Ventricular Assist Device Implantation Treated with Trans-arterial Embolization via the Brachial Artery: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2020-0259 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Implantation of left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is widely performed in patients with end-stage chronic heart failure. Infection and stroke are major complications after LVAD implantation. However, the incidence of intracranial mycotic aneurysm after LVAD implantation is rare, and with no standard of care. In this study, we describe a case of an intracranial mycotic aneurysm after LVAD implantation that was successfully treated with trans-arterial embolization (TAE) with N-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) via the brachial artery. A 49-year-old man with a history of implantation of LVAD for ischemic cardiomyopathy was admitted to our institution. He had infectious endocarditis and was administered systemic antibiotics. At 3 weeks after admission, intracranial mycotic aneurysm of the left posterior parietal artery was detected during a diagnostic examination for asymptomatic intracranial hemorrhage. Anticoagulant therapy was administered to prevent thromboembolic complications of LVAD implantation. Under local anesthesia, TAE with NBCA was performed via the brachial artery because of the tortuous anatomy of the origin of the innominate artery and implant of the aortic arch. The aneurysm was completely obliterated. The patient was discharged without neurological deficits. TAE using NBCA could be an effective modality for the treatment of intracranial mycotic aneurysm after LVAD implantation.

### PMID 34976970 (2021) — Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology
TITLE: A Liquid Hydrogel to Restore Long Term Corneal Integrity After Perforating and Non-Perforating Trauma in Feline Eyes.
DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.773294 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Purpose: To evaluate long-term in vivo functionality of corneas regenerated using a cell-free, liquid hydrogel filler (LiQD Cornea) after deep corneal trauma in the feline model. Methods: Two healthy cats underwent 4&#xa0;mm diameter stepwise 250/450&#xa0;&#xb5;m deep surgical corneal ablation with and without needle perforation. The filler comprising 10% (w/w) collagen-like peptide conjugated to polyethylene glycol (CLP-PEG) and 1% fibrinogen and crosslinked with 2% (w/w) 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium chloride (DMTMM), was applied to the wound bed previously coated with thrombin (250 U/ml). In situ gelation occurred within 5 min, and a temporary tarsorrhaphy was performed. Eyes were examined weekly for 1&#xa0;month, then monthly over 12&#xa0;months. Outcome parameters included slit-lamp, Scheimpflug tomography, optical coherence tomography, confocal and specular microscopy, and immunohistochemistry studies. Results: The gelled filler was seamlessly incorporated, supporting smooth corneal re-epithelialization. Progressive in-growth of keratocytes and nerves into the filler corresponding to the mild haze observed faded with time. The regenerated neo-cornea remained stably integrated throughout the 12&#xa0;months, without swelling, inflammation, infection, neovascularization, or rejection. The surrounding host stroma and endothelium remained normal at all times. Tomography confirmed restoration of a smooth surface curvature. Conclusion: Biointegration of this hydrogel filler allowed stable restoration of corneal shape and transparency in the feline model, with less inflammation and no neovascularization compared to previous reports in the minipig and rabbit models. It offers a promising alternative to cyanoacrylate glue and corneal transplantation for ulcerated and traumatized corneas in human patients.

### PMID 34454212 (2021) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Reversal of unstable atrial fibrillation after surgical correction of hiatus hernia: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2021.106316 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The presence of Atrial Fibrillation (AF) with herniation of abdominal content through the esophageal hiatus can be explained by the compression of the cardiac tissue by the viscera and, consequently, of its electrical transmission network, compromising the correct propagation of stimuli. Due to the causal relationship, hernia correction is almost always able to reverse the arrhythmic picture.
PRESENTATION OF THE CASE: A 75-year-old male with atrial fibrillation with a large hiatal hernia causing clinical decompensation was successfully treated after a laparocopic correction- primary closure of the defect was made with barbed surgical thread plus and placing a biological mesh (porcine small intestine submucosa, non-cross-linked), fixed with cyanoacrylate; after the procedure, he was discharged asymptomatic and with sinus heart rhythm.
DISCUSSION: It is noticed that for cases in which the patient presents with a type IV hiatal hernia associated with atrial fibrillation, the laparoscopic correction of hernia using a mesh for the correction of the defect has good results in the literature. In the present case, it is noted that despite the severity of the condition denoted by hemodynamic instability and the need for electrical cardioversion, the surgical correction of the hiatal hernia was able to reverse the arrhythmic picture definitively.
CONCLUSION: the concomitance of AF and hiatal hernia can explain the difficulty to control the arrhythmic picture and is necessary to consider, as soon as possible, the surgical correction of the defect as part of the treatment.

### PMID 34334601 (2021) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Successful Negative Pressure Wound Therapy for Pleural Empyema by Closing Bronchopleural Fistula with Cyanoacrylate Products].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 69-year-old man had experienced right upper lobectomy for inflammatory granuloma. Three months after surgery, he was diagnosed with pleural empyema due to bronchopleural fistula and open window thoracostomy was performed. Since we could not decrease the dead space and the amount of pleural effusion, we introduced negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT). Before applying, we closed the fistula with suturing and cyanoacrylate products. Four weeks later, we performed an operation to close the open window with muscle transposition. NPWT is reported to be useful to treat pleural empyema, but control the air leakage from fistulas is essential to introduce this treatment. We think cyanoacrylate products may be useful in closing fistulas temporarily to introduce NPWT.

### PMID 34197948 (2021) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Outcomes of translumbar embolization of type II endoleaks following endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2021.06.030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Presence of an endoleak can compromise aneurysm exclusion after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR). Type II endoleaks (T2Es) are most common and may cause sac expansion. We report outcomes of translumbar embolization (TLE) of T2Es following EVAR.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective chart review of patients with T2E after EVAR treated with TLE from 2011 to 2018 at a single academic institution. Treatment indications were the presence of persistent T2E and aneurysm growth &#x2265;5&#xa0;mm. Sac stabilization was defined as growth &#x2264;5&#xa0;mm throughout the follow-up period.
RESULTS: Thirty consecutive patients were identified. The majority were men (n&#xa0;= 24), with a mean age of 74.3&#xa0;years (95% confidence interval [CI], 70.9-77.6&#xa0;years). The most common comorbidities were hypertension (83.3%) and coronary artery disease (54.0%). The mean maximal sac diameter at T2E discovery was 5.8&#xa0;cm (95% CI, 5.4-6.2&#xa0;cm). The mean time to intervention from endoleak discovery was 33.7&#xa0;&#xb1; 28&#xa0;months with a mean growth of 0.84&#xa0;cm (95% CI, 0.48-1.2&#xa0;cm) during that time period. The mean follow-up time after TLE was 19.1&#xa0;months (95% CI, 11.1-27.2&#xa0;months). Twenty-eight patients were treated with cyanoacrylate glue (CyG) alone, and two were treated with CyG plus coil embolization (CE). There was immediate complete endoleak resolution as assessed intraoperatively, and sac stabilization in 15 cases (50.0%). Eleven patients (36.7%) had evidence of persistent T2E on initial imaging after the embolization procedure; additional follow-up revealed eventual sac stabilization at a mean of 21.3&#xa0;&#xb1; 7.2&#xa0;months, and therefore, these patients did not require further intervention. In the remaining four cases (13.3%), there was persistent T2E after the initial TLE, requiring a second intervention. Repeat TLE stabilized growth in three of these four patients after a mean of 17.6&#xa0;&#xb1; 12.9&#xa0;months. One patient required open sacotomy and ligation of lumbar vessels due to continued persistence of the T2E and continued aneurysm growth. There were no ischemic complications related to the embolization procedures. Factors associated with persistent endoleak after initial embolization were larger aneurysm diameter at the time of initial endoleak identification (P&#xa0;&lt; .001) and the use of antiplatelet agents (P&#xa0;&lt; .02). The use of anticoagulation was not a significant risk factor for endoleak recurrence or aneurysm growth after TLE.
CONCLUSIONS: TLE of T2E is a safe and effective treatment option for T2E with aneurysm growth following EVAR. Patients taking antiplatelet medication and those with larger aneurysms at the time of endoleak identification appear to be at increased risk for persistent endoleak and need for subsequent procedures following initial TLE. These patients may require more intensive monitoring and follow-up.

### PMID 33758636 (2021) — Polish journal of radiology
TITLE: Successful endovascular treatment of intralobar pulmonary sequestration - an effective alternative to surgery.
DOI: 10.5114/pjr.2021.103975 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Pulmonary sequestration is a rare congenital malformation characterised by the presence of non-functional and dysplastic pulmonary tissue that lacks communication with the tracheobronchial tree and has an aberrant non-pulmonary blood supply. Depending on its location, presence of the pleura covering, and venous drainage, 2 forms of pulmonary sequestration have been described: intra- and extralobar. Traditionally, surgical resection was performed; however, a growing number of cases have been treated with endovascular intervention.
CASE REPORT: A 38-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with severe haemoptysis for several hours. Examination at admission revealed tachycardia and tachypnoea. Computed tomography-examination disclosed the presence of an area of consolidation in the left lower lobe with a tortuous feeding artery arising from the descending aorta. Visible ground glass opacification indicated diffuse alveolar haemorrhage. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of intralobar sequestration of the left lung was made. The patient was consulted by a cardiothoracic surgeon and an interventional radiologist and qualified for endovascular treatment. In local anaesthesia femoral access was obtained and selective angiography of the common trunk of both bronchial arteries was performed. It depicted a dilated left bronchial artery supplying the sequestration and visible contrast extravasation. Embolisation of the vessel was performed with Glubran (n-butyl-cyanoacrylate). Control contrast injection showed complete elimination of the sequestration's blood supply with no residual capillary blush. Clinical improvement was observed. No complications were encountered, and the patient was discharged 7 days after the procedure.
CONCLUSIONS: Arterial embolisation is a promising alternative to surgery in the treatment of symptomatic pulmonary sequestration.

### PMID 33371728 (2021) — Canadian Association of Radiologists journal = Journal l'Association canadienne des radiologistes
TITLE: Factors Influencing Clinical Success Following Endovascular Treatment of Type II Endoleaks.
DOI: 10.1177/0846537120981100 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare long-term outcomes of transarterial (TA) and translumbar (TL) embolization of type II endoleaks (T2E) following EVAR, as well as factors that predict clinical success.
METHODS: 129 (mean age, 71.4y; range, 53-95) with T2E referred for embolization from August-2003 to December-2017 were retrospectively reviewed. One-hundred-eighty procedures were performed via TA (n = 139) and TL (n = 41) approaches, with 37 patients undergoing 51 reinterventions. Clinical success was defined as absence of endoleak and/or absence of aneurysm sac enlargement on follow-up imaging. Medical comorbidities, procedural data, embolic agents used, presence of successful sac embolization, and 30-day morbidity and mortality data were collected.
RESULTS: TL approaches had higher technical success (41/41 vs.122/139, p = .014). Clinical success rates were 52% (N = 58/111) and 62% (N = 23/37) for TA and TL procedures respectively (p = .34). Looking at all procedures, sac embolization using n-butyl cyanoacrylate glue had higher clinical success compared to other embolic agents (p = .017-.037). Successful sac access was a strong predictor of success for TA procedures (46/78 vs.12/33, p = .0379). 30-day complication rates were similar between TA (5.8%) and TL (4.9%) approaches. There was 1 death secondary to graft infection following TA embolization.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall clinical success of TA and TL embolization when considering re-interventions is high. n-butyl cyanoacrylate glue had significantly higher success than other embolic agents (p = .017-.037). Successful sac access was associated with success for TA procedures.

### PMID 33246735 (2021) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Comparative Outcome Analysis of N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate Embolization of the False Lumen Versus Thoracic Endovascular Aortic Repair in Aortic Dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2020.08.037 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the feasibility, safety, and effectiveness of N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) embolization for the treatment of aortic dissection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this single-center retrospective study conducted from February 2003 to June 2019, NBCA embolization of an aortic false lumen was attempted in 12 patients (median age, 59 y; range, 41-68 y) and thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) was performed in 53 patients (median age, 59 y; range, 37-70 y) for aortic dissection with one or more indications of persisting pain, malperfusion, rupture or impending rupture, maximal aortic diameter &#x2265; 55 mm, and/or rapid aortic enlargement. The main exclusion criterion for embolization was the presence of fast blood flow in the aortic false lumen on aortography. The efficacy of NBCA embolization and TEVAR was compared by evaluating technical and clinical outcomes, repeat intervention-free survival (RFS), and overall survival (OS).
RESULTS: Technical success was achieved in 11 of the 12 patients treated with NBCA embolization (91.7%), and clinical success was achieved in 9 of these 11 (81.8%). No significant difference was found between embolization and TEVAR in clinical success rates (embolization, 81.8%; TEVAR, 84.9%; P&#xa0;= .409) or procedure-related complications (embolization, 1 patient [8.3%]; TEVAR, 4 patients [7.5%]; P&#xa0;= .701). In addition, embolization showed comparable 5-y RFS (embolization, 82.5% &#xb1; 9.3; TEVAR, 85.5% &#xb1; 4.8; P&#xa0;= .641) and 5-y OS (embolization, 100%; TEVAR, 95.4% &#xb1; 3.2; P&#xa0;= .744) rates to TEVAR.
CONCLUSIONS: NBCA embolization of the false lumen in aortic dissection seems to be a safe and effective treatment modality for the closure of false lumen in selected patients.

### PMID 33208033 (2021) — Vascular and endovascular surgery
TITLE: Comparison of Cost and Efficacy of Trufill&#xae; vs Histoacryl&#xae; n-Butyl Cyanoacrylate for Translumbar Type 2 Endoleak Embolization.
DOI: 10.1177/1538574420973821 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The study aimed to compare the cost and efficacy of translumbar approach type 2 endoleak repairs using either Trufill&#xae; or Histoacryl&#xae; n-BCA liquid embolic.
METHOD AND MATERIALS: This was a retrospective review of patients who had translumbar approach type 2 endoleak repairs using either Trufill&#xae; or Histoacryl&#xae;. Patients were included if they underwent a technically successful type 2 endoleak repair via a translumbar approach with Trufill&#xae; or Histoacryl&#xae; n-BCA. A multivariable analysis was performed with the primary clinical outcome of percent change in aneurysm diameter per month compared. Procedure cost was calculated based on typical materials used.
RESULTS: 20 Trufill&#xae; and 14 Histoacryl&#xae; patients were included. The mean procedure cost was higher for Trufill&#xae; ($5,757.30 vs. $1,586.09, p &#x2264; 0.001). There was no significant difference between Trufill&#xae; or Histoacryl&#xae; patients for age at first embolization, gender, total number of embolizations, number of feeding branches, aneurysm sac size prior to embolization, or residual endoleak at first follow-up. Trufill&#xae; patients had more coils used (12.0 vs. 4.3, p = 0.0007), less glue used (0.9 vs. 2.1 mL, p &lt; 0.001), longer follow-up duration (33.5 vs. 13.2 months, p = 0.002), more follow-up CT angiograms (CTA) (3.7 vs. 1.9, p = 0.01), and larger excluded aneurysm sac size at most recent CTA (7.1 cm vs. 5.9 cm, p = 0.04). Percent change in sac diameter per month was not significantly different between Trufill&#xae; and Histoacryl&#xae; (0.21% vs. -0.25%/month, p = 0.06, respectively). There were no complications.
CONCLUSION: Use of Histoacryl&#xae; over Trufill&#xae; n-BCA resulted in significantly less procedural cost while maintaining safety and efficacy.

### PMID 33043841 (2021) — Vascular and endovascular surgery
TITLE: Outcomes of Type II Endoleak Treatment Using Ethylene Vinyl Alcohol Copolymer (OnyxTM).
DOI: 10.1177/1538574420964644 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: This study reports our experience with the use of an ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer (Onyx&#x2122;) for the treatment of type II endoleak after endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms (EVAR) in comparison to coils and cyanoacrylate glue.
METHODS: Clinical data of all patients treated for type II endoleak following EVAR between 2009 and 2017 were retrospectively analyzed. Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) diameter and AAA sac volume during follow-up were measured using computed tomography angiography (CTA). Treatment failure variables were created for the change in sac diameter and volume. An increase in sac diameter &#x2265; 5 mm was considered a failure, as was an increase &#x2265; 10% in AAA sac volume.
RESULTS: 35 patients underwent treatment for a persistent type II endoleak following EVAR. Of these patients, 18 (51.4%) were treated with Onyx and 17 (48.6%) were treated with coils &#xb1; cyanoacrylate glue embolization. There were no significant differences between the 2 groups with regard to demographics. The average volume of Onyx used per treatment was 13.4 ml (range 4.5 ml- 39 ml). There was no difference in efficacy between the Onyx and non-Onyx group. Complications were limited to 1 non-target embolization without significant clinical sequelae.
CONCLUSIONS: Ethylene vinyl alcohol copolymer (Onyx&#x2122;) embolization is similarly effective compared to traditional cyanoacrylate glue or coil embolization in the treatment of type II endoleak after EVAR.

### PMID 32551870 (2021) — Acta radiologica (Stockholm, Sweden : 1987)
TITLE: Management of life-threatening aortoesophageal fistula: experiences learned from eight patients.
DOI: 10.1177/0284185120933228 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Aortoesophageal fistula (AEF) is a rare but fatal condition causing massive upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
PURPOSE: To report our experiences in the management of life-threatening AEF.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of eight patients (seven men, one woman; mean age&#x2009;=&#x2009;59.4 years; age range&#x2009;=&#x2009;43&#x2012;76 years) presenting with AEF between 2005 and 2018 were recruited from three different Korean hospitals. The medical records of these patients were reviewed for patient demographics, clinical features, diagnostic and therapeutic modalities, and outcomes.
RESULTS: Two patients died as a result of massive hemorrhage before endovascular or surgical treatment could be undertaken. Of the six patients who were treated, five underwent endovascular interventions: embolization of the fistula using n-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) and subsequent thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) in two patients; TEVAR alone in two patients; and NBCA embolization alone in one patient. Among them, three patients who received TEVAR with or without NBCA embolization in a timely fashion recovered and were discharged. One patient who received delayed TEVAR died of disseminated intravascular coagulation, and one who received NBCA embolization alone died of hemorrhagic shock, both dying within three days of treatment. The remaining patient who underwent surgical aortic repair is alive after 13 years.
CONCLUSION: Rapid identification and surgical treatment are necessary to increase the likelihood of survival, if emergency surgery is feasible. TEVAR in a timely fashion facilitates hemodynamic stabilization by rapidly controlling hemorrhage and saves the patient's life.

### PMID 34977140 (2021) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: Ovarian Vein Embolization With N-butyl-2 Cyanoacrylate Glubran-2&#xae; for the Treatment of Pelvic Venous Disorder.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2021.760600 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: There are few reports in the literature on the use of Glubran-2 for the embolization of ovarian veins in patients with pelvic venous disorder (PeVD). In addition, a consensus on the efficacy and safety of Glubran-2 has not been reached. Purpose: To investigate the safety and efficacy of ovarian vein embolization (OVE) with N-butyl-2 cyanoacrylate (NBCA) Glubran-2 for the treatment of PeVD. Material and Methods: Between January 2013 and January 2020, 21 women (mean age, 43.9 &#xb1; 13.3 years) with PeVD who underwent OVE with Glubran-2 were evaluated. Of those patients, ovarian vein or pelvic venous plexus insufficiency was verified by duplex ultrasound and/or multislice computer tomography (MSCT). The symptoms and signs of PeVD included chronic pelvic pain (CPP) (21/21; 100%), dyspareunia (12/21; 57.1%), dysmenorrhea (10/21; 47.6%), and vulvar varices (3/21; 14.3%). The medical data were retrospectively reviewed. Results: Glubran-2 was employed as the sole embolic material in 18 cases (85.7%) and used to perform rescue embolization in 3 cases (14.3%) due to CPP recurrence 1 month after initial embolization using microcoils. Technically successful embolization was achieved using Glubran-2 in all patients. No Glubran-2 related complications were noted. Neither persistent nor recurrent CPP was observed during follow-up, for which the mean was 62 &#xb1; 38 months (range, 12-102 months). Clinical efficacy was evaluated, and all patients exhibited complete or slight improvement of CPP after embolization. The visual analog scale (VAS) score significantly decreased from pre-intervention to post-intervention (p &lt; 0.001). Six patients (28.6%) gave birth to healthy babies during follow-up after embolization with Glubran-2. Conclusions: Ovarian vein embolization with Glubran-2 is a feasible and safe treatment for CPP secondary to PeVD. This treatment may represent a potential and attractive alternative when patients desire symptom relief and want to continue reproducing. Larger studies are warranted to confirm the findings of this study.

### PMID 34680539 (2021) — Biomedicines
TITLE: Relevant Biological Effects of Varicocele Embolization with N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate Glue on Semen Parameters in Infertile Men.
DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9101423 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgical treatment or varicocele embolization (VE) with sclerosing or mechanical embolic agents have been shown to improve the semen parameters of infertile men. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of VE using N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue on semen parameters in infertile men. From January 2014 to June 2018, infertile adult patients with stage 3 varicocele and an initial semen analysis showing at least one abnormal semen parameter, and who were successfully embolized with NBCA Glubran&#xae;2 glue, were retrospectively recruited. The availability of a second semen analysis after VE was mandatory for patient inclusion. The primary endpoint was the change in total sperm number (TSN) after VE. The other parameters of interest were progressive and total sperm motilities (Smot) at 1 h (H1), sperm vitality (SV) and morphology (SMor). One hundred and two patients were included. Eight patients presented null TSN before and after VE. Among the remaining 94 patients, a significant improvement in the median TSN after VE was shown (31.79 &#xd7; 106/ejaculate [IQR: 11.10-127.40 &#xd7; 106/ejaculate] versus 62.24 &#xd7; 106/ejaculate [IQR: 17.90-201.60 &#xd7; 106/ejaculate], p = 0.0295). Significant improvement in TSN was found for the 60 oligo- or azoospermic patients (p = 0.0007), whereas no significant change was found for the 42 patients with normal initial TSN (p = 0.49). Other parameters, such as progressive and total SMot, SV and SMor, also significantly improved after VE (p = 0.0003, 0.0013, 0.0356 and 0.007, respectively). The use of NBCA glue as an embolic agent for VE in infertile men with stage 3 varicocele significantly improves the semen parameters.

### PMID 34300327 (2021) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Prostate Artery Embolization Using N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate Glue for Urinary Tract Symptoms Due to Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia: A Valid Alternative to Microparticles?
DOI: 10.3390/jcm10143161 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Our goal was to evaluate the feasibility, safety, and short-term outcomes of prostate artery embolization (PAE) with N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue as the only embolic agent in patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)-related lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTSs). A two-center retrospective study of 50 patients (mean age, 67.6 &#xb1; 7.4 years; range, 54-85 years) treated with NBCA between 2017 and 2020 was conducted. PAE was performed using a mixture of Glubran 2 glue and Lipiodol in a 1:8 ratio, under local anesthesia, on an outpatient basis, after cone-beam computed tomography vascular mapping. Mean total injected NBCA/Lipiodol volume was 0.9 &#xb1; 0.3 mL, total injection time was 21.9 &#xb1; 7.8 s, and total radiation dose was 18,458 &#xb1; 16,397 mGy&#xb7;cm. Statistically significant improvements over time occurred for the International Prostate Symptoms Score (9.9 &#xb1; 6.8 versus 20.5 &#xb1; 6.7, p = 0.0001), quality-of-life score (2.2 &#xb1; 1.5 versus 4.9 &#xb1; 1.0, p = 0.0001), prostate-specific antigen level (4.6 &#xb1; 3.0 versus 6.4 &#xb1; 3.7, p = 0.0001), and prostate volume (77.3 &#xb1; 30.5 versus 98.3 &#xb1; 40.2, p = 0.0001) at a median of 3 months versus baseline. Minor adverse events developed in 11/50 (22%) patients, but no major complications occurred. The International Index of Erectile Function did not change significantly. PAE with NBCA is feasible, safe, fast, and effective for patients with BPH-related LUTSs. Prospective comparative studies with longer follow-ups are warranted.

### PMID 34096394 (2021) — Vascular and endovascular surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous Trans-Hepatic Embolization of an Iatrogenic Extra-Hepatic Pseudoaneurysm of the Right Hepatic Artery in a Patient With Previous Occlusion of the Proper Hepatic Artery: An Endovascular Procedure to Avoid a Difficult Surgical Repair.
DOI: 10.1177/15385744211022591 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case of successful percutaneous transhepatic, embolization of an iatrogenic extra-hepatic pseudoaneurysm (PsA) of the right hepatic artery (RHA) under combined fluoroscopic and ultrasonographic guidance. A 73-year-old man underwent percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage placement in another hospital, complicated by haemobilia and development of a RHA PsA. Endovascular embolization was attempted, resulting in coil embolization of the proper hepatic artery, and persistence of the PsA. At this point, the patient was referred to our hospital. Computed tomography and direct angiography confirmed the iatrogenic extra-hepatic PsA of the RHA, refilled by small collaterals from the accessory left hepatic artery (LHA) and coil occlusion of the proper hepatic artery. Attempted selective catheterization of these vessels was unsuccessful due to the tortuosity and very small caliber of the intra-hepatic collaterals, the latter precluding endovascular treatment of the PsA. Percutaneous trans-hepatic combined fluoroscopic and ultrasound-guided embolization of the PsA was performed with Lipiodol&#xae; and cyanoacrylate-based glue (Glubran&#xae;2). Real time fluoroscopic images and computed tomography confirmed complete occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm. Surgical repair, although feasible, was considered at high risk. In our patient, we decided to perform a percutaneous trans-hepatic combined fluoroscopic and ultrasound-guided embolization of the PsA using a mix of Lipiodol&#xae; and Glubran&#xae;2 because of the fast polymerization time of the glue allowing the complete occlusion of the PsA in few seconds, thus eliminating the risk of coil migration, reducing the risk of PsA rupture and avoid a difficult surgical repair.

### PMID 34037882 (2021) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: Combined simultaneous embolization of the portal vein and hepatic vein (double vein embolization) - a technical note about embolization sequence.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-021-00230-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Simultaneous portal vein embolization (PVE) and hepatic vein embolization (HVE) has been shown to be feasible, safe and lead to a faster growth of future liver remnant (FLR) than PVE alone. The objective of this study is to highlight different technical aspects as well as importance of embolization order.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seven patients were treated with simultaneous PVE and HVE. In three cases, HVE was performed first followed by PVE and in four cases the other way around. Portal vein branches were embolized using Glubran-Lipiodol mixture in all cases. Hepatic veins were embolized using Amplatzer II plugs sized 8-20&#x2009;mm. Specific consideration was given to depth of glue penetration in the portal vein defined by visible branch order on the treated side.
RESULTS: Six of seven patients were discharged home the same day. One patient with infected tumor necrosis died of liver failure 40&#x2009;days later, otherwise there were no periprocedural clinical complications. Median glue penetration was to the 5th order (4th - 5th) when PVE was performed first and 3rd order (2nd - 4th) when PVE was performed after HVE. In one PVE first case, glue spillage was seen due to marked reduced flow in the right portal vein. There was sufficient FLR growth for subsequent surgical resection in the remaining six patients.
CONCLUSION: PVE should be performed prior to HVE because the reduced flow in the portal vein after HVE leads to less deep glue penetration with presumably increased risk of contralateral spillage.

### PMID 33912264 (2021) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Delayed superior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm following percutaneous radiologic gastrostomy: Treatment by percutaneous embolization with N-butyl cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2021.03.050 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Percutaneous radiologic gastrostomy (PRG) is a widely used procedure with a low rate of serious complications and with comparable short-term outcomes with percutaneous endoscopy. Hemorrhagic complications are rare (1.4%), and occur usually immediately after the procedure due to direct arterial punctures. We report on the case of a 62-year-old male patient with a diagnosis of multi-systemic atrophy disease that was referred to our tertiary center for PRG. The procedure was performed without early complications. He presented a slight bleeding 3 weeks of the procedure. A CT angiogram revealed a pseudoaneurysm of the left superior epigastric artery, in contact with the gastrostomy tube. After a failed surgical treatment, the patient was successfully treated by percutaneous embolization using a mixture of Glubran 2 and Lipiodol, under ultrasound and fluoroscopic control. This case study suggested that a slight hemorrhage following PRG may suggest a pseudoaneurysm and a CT angiogram should be performed.

### PMID 33410706 (2021) — Ear, nose, &amp; throat journal
TITLE: Contribution of Interventional Radiologist in the Management of Pseudoaneurysm and Neck Hemorrhages in COVID-19 patients.
DOI: 10.1177/0145561320987030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Patients with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) may have endothelial inflammation, pseudoaneurysm, and an increasing risk of bleeding, especially during surgical procedures. In this article, we reported 2 cases of COVID-19 patients with neck vascular lesions. The first patient had pseudoaneurysm of the cricothyroid artery, which was treated by percutaneous glue injection through ultrasonography guidance. The second patient presented lateral neck hematoma in front of the left superior thyroid artery, which was managed by coil endovascular embolization. In the context of pandemic, the management of vascular lesions may be performed through interventional radiological procedures that may reduce the risk of virus aerosolization and health care provider contamination.

### PMID 33128601 (2021) — European radiology
TITLE: Ten-year experience with arterial embolization for peptic ulcer bleeding: N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue versus other embolic agents.
DOI: 10.1007/s00330-020-07427-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To compare our experience with N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue as the primary embolic agent versus other embolic agents for transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) in refractory peptic ulcer bleeding and to identify factors associated with early rebleeding and 30-day mortality.
METHODS: Retrospective study of 148 consecutive patients comparing the clinical success rate in 78 patients managed with Glubran&#xae;2 N-butyl cyanoacrylate metacryloxysulfolane (NBCA-MS) alone or with other agents and 70 with other embolic agents only (coils, microspheres, ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer, or gelatin sponge) at a university center in 2008-2019. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses were done to identify prognostic factors.
RESULTS: The technical success rate was 95.3% and the primary clinical success was 64.5%. The early rebleeding and day-30 mortality rates were 35.4% and 21.3%, respectively. Rebleeding was significantly less common with than without Glubran&#xae;2 (OR, 0.47; 95% CI, 0.22-0.99; p&#x2009;=&#xa0;.047) and significantly more common with coils used alone (OR, 20.4; 95% CI, 10.13-50.14; p&#x2009;=&#xa0;.024). The only other factor independently associated with early rebleeding was having two or more comorbidities (OR, 20.14; 95% CI, 10.01-40.52; p&#x2009;=&#xa0;.047). Day-30 mortality was similar in the two treatment groups. A lower initial hemoglobin level was significantly associated with higher day-30 mortality (OR, 10.38; 95% CI, 10.10-10.74; p&#x2009;=&#xa0;.006). Fluoroscopy time was significantly shorter with Glubran&#xae;2 (20.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;11.5&#xa0;min vs. 35.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;23.4&#xa0;min, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.002). Both groups (Glubran&#xae;2 vs. other agents) had similar rates of overall complications (10.7% vs. 9.1%, respectively, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.786).
CONCLUSIONS: Glubran&#xae;2 NBCA-MS as the primary agent allowed for faster and better clinical success compared to other embolic agents when used for TAE to safely stop refractory peptic ulcer bleeding.
KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Choice of embolic agent for arterial embolization of refractory peptic ulcer bleeding is still debated. We compared our experience with N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue vs. other embolic agents. &#x2022; The use of Glubran&#xae;2 NBCA glue in the endovascular management of refractory peptic ulcer bleeding was significantly faster and more effective, and at least as safe compared to other embolic agents. &#x2022; NBCA glue offers several advantages compared to other embolic agents and provides rapid hemostasis when used for arterial embolization to treat refractory peptic ulcer bleeding. It should be the first-line therapy.

### PMID 34233632 (2021) — BMC neurology
TITLE: Evaluation of the hemostatic effect of a combination of hemostatic agents and fibrin glue in a rabbit venous hemorrhage model.
DOI: 10.1186/s12883-021-02272-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: In neurosurgery, it is important to use local hemostatic agents. We have explored a more powerful method of hemostasis by the combination of commercially available hemostatic agents with fibrin glue in the hopes of synergistic effects.
METHOD: A bleeding model was constructed by puncturing the rabbit posterior vena cava with a needle. After applying the sample to the bleeding point, compression was performed for 10&#xa0;s. If temporary hemostasis was achieved after pressure release, a 30&#xa0;s wash was performed to confirm that ultimate hemostasis was achieved. Up to three hemostasis attempts were performed on the same bleeding point until hemostasis was achieved, and the number of attempts required for hemostasis was counted. If hemostasis was not achieved after three attempts, it was counted as four times. Four groups were evaluated: (1) gelatin sponge alone, (2) gelatin sponge&#x2009;+&#x2009;fibrin glue, (3) oxidized cellulose alone, and (4) oxidized cellulose&#x2009;+&#x2009;fibrin glue; each group was tested 16 times.
RESULTS: The median value (range minimum value-maximum value) of the number of hemostatic attempts in Group 1 to Group 4 was 3 (1-4), 1 (1-1), 4 (4-4), and 4 (2-4). In Group 2, there were two test exclusions owing to deviations of the test procedure.
CONCLUSIONS: The compatibility of gelatin sponge and fibrin glue was very good, with a very strong and rapid hemostatic effect compared to other methods, showed its usefulness. This combination method may be effective for a variety of venous hemorrhages in neurosurgery.

### PMID 33552820 (2021) — Plastic and reconstructive surgery. Global open
TITLE: Recalcitrant Anaphylaxis Associated with Fibrin Sealant: Treatment with "TISSEEL-ectomy".
DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000003382 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Here, we present the case of an adolescent male who developed a severe allergic reaction 10 minutes after application of TISSEEL fibrin sealant to control bleeding during a gynecomastia revision surgery. Conventional treatments of acute hypersensitivity were ineffective. After a "tisseel-ectomy," the patient's condition improved and symptoms resolved. Besides oral tranexamic acid, and topical and local anaesthesia, no other medications besides TISSEEL were administered preceding the allergic reaction. After TISSEEL was identified as the allergen upon its removal, his clinical status improved. The patient had been exposed to TISEEL 15 months before the anaphylactic episode. This case can aid in decision-making for surgical re-exposure to fibrin sealants in the setting of acute anaphylaxis.

### PMID 33425351 (2021) — Annals of medicine and surgery (2012)
TITLE: Comparison of fibrin sealants in peripheral vascular surgery: A systematic review and network meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2020.12.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Evidence comparing fibrin sealants (FSs) in surgery are limited. This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of FSs, and manual compression in peripheral vascular surgery.
METHODS: A systematic review of randomized trials was conducted in Medline, Embase, and Cochrane databases within the last 15 years. Data were available to conduct a network meta-analysis (NMA) in peripheral vascular surgery. Fibrin sealant treatment arms were further broken-down and assessed by clotting time (i.e., 2-min [2C] or 1-min [1C]). The primary efficacy outcome was the proportion of patients achieving hemostasis by 4&#xa0;min (T4). Treatment-related serious and non-serious adverse events (AEs) were qualitatively assessed.
RESULTS: Five studies (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;693), were included in the NMA. Results predicted VISTASEAL 2C, followed by EVICEL 1C, had the highest probability of achieving T4. Compared with manual compression, significant improvements in T4 were found with VISTASEAL 2C (relative risk [RR]&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.67, 95% CrI: 2.13-3.34), EVICEL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.58, 95% CrI: 2.04-3.23), VISTASEAL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.00, 95% CrI: 1.45-2.65), and TISSEEL 2C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.99, 95% CrI: 1.48-2.60). TISSEEL 1C was not significantly different than manual compression (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.40, 95% CrI: 0.70-2.33). Among FSs, VISTASEAL 2C was associated with a significant improvements in T4 compared with VISTASEAL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.33, 95% CrI: 1.02-1.82), TISSEEL 2C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.34, 95% CrI: 1.05-1.77), and TISSEEL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.90, 95% CrI: 1.18-3.74). Treatment-related serious and non-serious AE rates were typically lower than 2%.
CONCLUSIONS: In peripheral vascular surgeries, VISTASEAL 2C and EVICEL 1C were shown to have the highest probabilities for achieving rapid hemostasis among the treatments compared. Future studies should expand networks across surgery types as data become available.

### PMID 33900986 (2021) — International journal of spine surgery
TITLE: Dural Tears During Lumbar Spinal Endoscopy: Surgeon Skill, Training, Incidence, Risk Factors, and Management.
DOI: 10.14444/8038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Incidental dural tears during lumbar endoscopy can be challenging to manage. There is limited literature on their appropriate management, risk factors, and the clinical consequences of this typically uncommon complication.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To improve the statistical power of studying durotomy with lumbar endoscopy, we performed a retrospective survey study among endoscopic spine surgeons by email and chat groups on social media networks, including WhatsApp and WeChat. Descriptive and correlative statistics were done on the surgeons' recorded responses to multiple-choice questions. Surgeons were asked about their clinical experience with spinal endoscopy, training background, the types of lumbar endoscopic decompression they perform by approach, the decompression instruments they use, and incidental durotomy incidence with routine lumbar endoscopy.
RESULTS: There were 689 dural tears in 64&#x2009;470 lumbar endoscopies, resulting in an incidental durotomy incidence of 1.07%. Seventy percent of the durotomies were reported by 20.4% of the surgeons. Eliminating these 19 outlier surgeons yielded an adjusted durotomy rate of 0.32. Endoscopic stenosis decompression (54.8%; P &lt; .0001), rather than endoscopic discectomy (44.1%; 41/93), was significantly more associated with durotomy. Medium-sized dural tears (1-10 mm) were the most common (52.2%; 48/93). Small pinhole durotomies (less than 1 mm) were the second most common type (46.7%; 43/93). Rootlet herniations were seen by 46.2% (43/93) of responding surgeons. The posterior dural sac injury during the interlaminar approach (57%; 53/93) occurred more frequently than traversing nerve-root injuries (31.2%) or anterior dural sac (23.7%; 22/93). Exiting nerve-root injuries (10.8%;10/93) were less common. Over half of surgeons did not attempt any repair or closure (52.2%; 47/90). Forty percent (36/90) used sealants. Only 7.8% (7/90) of surgeons attempted an endoscopic repair or sutures (11.1%; 10/90). DuralSeal was the most commonly used brand of commercially available sealant used (42.7%; 35/82). However, other sealants such as Tisseal (15.9%; 13/82), Evicel (2.4%2/82), and additional no-brand sealants (38; 32/82) were also used. Nearly half of the patients (48.3%; 43/89) were treated with 24-48 hours of bed rest. The majority of participating surgeons (64%; 57/89) reported that the long-term outcome was unaffected. Only 18% of surgeons reported having seen the development of a postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-fistula (18%;16/89). However, the absolute incidence of CSF fistula was only 0.025% (16/64&#x2009;470). Severe radiculopathy with dysesthesia; sensory loss; and motor weakness in association with an incidental durotomy were reported by 12.4% (11/89), 3.4% (3/89), and 2.2% (2/89) of surgeons, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of dural tears with lumbar endoscopy is about 1%. The incidence of durotomy is higher with the use of power drills and the interlaminar approach. Stenosis decompression that typically requires the more aggressive use of these power instruments has a slightly higher incidence of dural tears than does endoscopic decompression for a herniated disc. Most dural tears are small and can be successfully managed with mechanical compression with Gelfoam and sealants. Two-thirds of patients with incidental dural tears had an entirely uneventful postoperative course. The remaining one-third of patients may develop a persistent CSF leak, radiculopathy with dysesthesia, sensory loss, or motor function loss. Patients should be educated preoperatively and reassured.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 3.

### PMID 33978197 (2021) — Turkish neurosurgery
TITLE: Comparison of TachoComb and TissuDura in Terms of Adverse Effects and Complications in Duraplasty in Rats.
DOI: 10.5137/1019-5149.JTN.30444-20.2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: To compare two synthetic graft materials, TachoComb&#xae;, a fibrin sealant composed of collagen, fibrinogen, thrombin and aprotinin and TissuDura&#xae;, a collagen-based biomatrix.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thirty Sprague?Dawley rats were randomly divided into three groups with 10 animals in each group. A dural defect was created on the left parietal bone of each animal, and the dural defect was repaired using either TachoComb&#xae; (TachoComb group) or TissuDura&#xae; (TissuDura group). Sham animals did not receive any dural graft. After 21 days of follow-up, the brain was dissected, and inflammation, oedema, gliosis and foreign body reaction in the bone and parenchymal tissue were investigated histopathologically.
RESULTS: The TachoComb group showed significantly greater inflammation, gliosis and parenchymal foreign body reaction compared with the sham group. By contrast, the TissuDura group had significantly lower gliosis and insignificantly less inflammation in the bone and parenchymal foreign body reaction compared with the TachoComb group.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our results suggest that TissuDura&#xae; may be considered more biocompatible than TachoComb&#xae; in duraplasty.

### PMID 34246825 (2021) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Efficacy and Safety of a Thrombin-Containing Collagen-Based Hemostatic Agent in Spinal Surgery: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2021.07.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: When common hemostatic methods, such as suturing, cautery, and compression, fail to arrest bleeding during surgery, various local hemostatic agents are used. We aimed to evaluate the hemostatic efficacy and safety of CollaStat (Dalim Tissen Co. Ltd., Seoul, Korea), a novel thrombin-containing, collagen-based topical haemostatic agent used in spinal surgery, by comparing it with Floseal (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, Illinois, USA).
METHODS: We performed a randomized controlled trial in 78 patients who underwent spinal surgery. The participants were randomly assigned to either an intervention group (use of CollaStat) or a control group (use of Floseal). We compared successful haemostasis rate, time to hemostasis, length of hospital stay, amount of fluid drainage, and rate of adverse events between the 2 groups.
RESULTS: The hemostasis success rate was 94.87% in the intervention group and 97.44% in the control group. The hemostatic efficacy and safety of CollaStat were found to be noninferior to those of Floseal since the higher limit (11.09%) of the confidence interval (CI) for the difference with Floseal was greater than the prespecified noninferiority margin of&#xa0;-13%. There were no statistically significant differences at the 5% level in hemostasis time, number of hemostatic agents used, hospitalization period, and amount of drainage between the 2 groups. Also, there was no incidence of medical device-related serious adverse events or adverse events in both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The hemostatic efficacy and safety of CollaStat were found to be noninferior to those of Floseal. Therefore CollaStat can be safely and effectively used in spinal surgery.

### PMID 33682323 (2021) — ANZ journal of surgery
TITLE: Review of topical gelatin-based haemostatic agents; an insidious culprit of intraoperative anaphylaxis?
DOI: 10.1111/ans.16716 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An under-recognized complication of gelatin-based haemostatic agents is their potential to cause anaphylactic reactions. This review aims to collate and analyse case in the literature of intraoperative anaphylaxis secondary to locally applied haemostatic agents.
METHODS: An electronic search was performed on databases Medline, Embase, Pubmed and ProQuest. A total of 7671 articles were reviewed from title and abstract. After exclusion criteria and duplicates removed, 19 articles with 21 cases were included for analysis. Data extracted from each of the articles included patient demographics, haemostatic agent used, surgery type, known allergies and any objective evidence of hypersensitivity post anaphylactic episode, that is tryptase levels, IgE levels, skin prick testing.
RESULTS: Fifty-seven percent of cases involved patients &lt;18&#x2009;years of age; 57% of cases involved spinal surgery; 100% of cases displayed objective evidence of hypersensitivity (tryptase levels, bovine or porcine IgE levels, or skin prick testing). Thirty-three percent of patients had exposure preoperatively to a known agent causing anaphylaxis or allergy which would preclude the use of a gelatin-based haemostat. These products included vaccines, spam meats, red meat, Jell-O and CollaPlug. Gelatin-based haemostat agents included Floseal, Gelfoam, Surgiflo, fibrin glue, Avitene, haemofibrine sponge, topical bovine thrombin and thrombin-soaked gelatin.
CONCLUSION: Increased awareness of allergy to gelatin-based haemostats for surgical and anaesthetic is imperative, with 33% of cases having a known contraindication to gelatin-based haemostat. This review highlights important aspects in the pre-operative patient history and post-event patient investigation that could assist anaesthetists and surgeons in the prevention of future events.

### PMID 33511201 (2021) — BioMed research international
TITLE: Comparison of Effects of a Thrombin-Based Hemostatic Agent and Topical Tranexamic Acid on Blood Loss in Patients with Preexisting Thromboembolic Risk Undergoing a Minimally Invasive Total Knee Arthroplasty. A Prospective Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.1155/2021/2549521 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The efficacy of a thrombin-based hemostatic agent (Floseal&#xae;) on reducing postoperative blood loss after total knee arthroplasty (TKA) was still unclear. The aim of our study was to conduct a prospective randomized controlled study to compare the blood conservation effects of Floseal&#xae; and topical TXA in patients with preexisting thromboembolic risk undergoing primary minimally invasive TKA.
METHODS: Our power analysis of this study was based upon the following description, to obtain a statistical power of 0.90 and an alpha error of 0.05, 30 patients were required in each group. Therefore, we enrolled a total of 103 patients with at least one of the risk factors for thromboembolism who underwent unilateral primary minimally invasive TKA, and the participants were randomly divided into the topical TXA group (n = 34), receiving intra-articular injection of 3&#x2009;g of TXA in 100&#x2009;mL saline after TKA, the topical Floseal&#xae; group (n = 34), receiving 10&#x2009;mL of Floseal&#xae; intra-articularily during surgery, and the placebo group (n = 35), receiving an intra-articular saline injection only. The total blood loss (TBL) and hemoglobin (Hb) drop were compared among the 3 groups.
RESULTS: The TXA group had a lower TBL of 645&#x2009;mL (227 to 1090) in comparison with 1145&#x2009;mL (535 to 1942) in the Floseal&#xae; group and 1103&#x2009;mL (424 to 1711) in the placebo (p &lt; 0.001, respectively). The TBL was similar between the Floseal&#xae; group and the placebo group (p = 0.819). No patients in any group had symptoms of venous thromboemblism.
CONCLUSION: Our prospective randomized controlled study showed that intra-articular application of TXA was superior to hemostatic matrix (Floseal&#xae;) in terms of blood conservation in patients with preexisting thromboembolic risk undergoing minimally invasive TKA. This trial is registered with Clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02865174) on 08/09/2016.

### PMID 33074840 (2021) — The American journal of forensic medicine and pathology
TITLE: Two Cases of Cerebral Infarcts Caused by Topical Hemostatic Agent Embolism.
DOI: 10.1097/PAF.0000000000000630 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Resorbable topical hemostatic agents are widely used in surgical procedures to control intraoperative bleeding. There have been multiple reports of complications from use of these agents, including pulmonary vasculature thromboembolism, cerebral venous sinus occlusion, and postoperative inflammatory mass lesions each containing the hemostatic agent. We report 2 cases of inadvertent intra-arterial embolization of hemostatic agent. Both cases followed elective surgical cervical spinal procedures, during which gelatin-based local hemostatic agents were used to control unanticipated bleeding. Postoperatively, both patients exhibited neurologic defects and were found to have infarcts of the brain. At autopsy, vertebrobasilar thromboemboli containing foreign material grossly and microscopically consistent with hemostatic matrix material were found in both cases. These are the first reports of hemostatic agent embolization resulting in cerebral infarcts and leading to death.

### PMID 33864658 (2021) — ANZ journal of surgery
TITLE: Surgiflo embolism during pelvic surgery: a rare but potentially life-threatening complication.
DOI: 10.1111/ans.16875 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 33487190 (2021) — The Journal of laryngology and otology
TITLE: Revision cricotracheal resection: our experience.
DOI: 10.1017/S0022215121000062 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The incidence of recurrent stenosis after cricotracheal resection is 3-9.5 per cent. Management of such patients is challenging. This study aimed to review our experience in revision cricotracheal resection.
METHODS: The study was conducted in the Otorhinolaryngology Department, Mansoura University Hospitals, Egypt, on nine patients with recurrent stenosis following cricotracheal resection. Revision cricotracheal resection was performed in all patients. Surgiflo was applied on the site of anastomosis to enhance healing.
RESULTS: No intra-operative complications were recorded. Minor post-operative complications occurred in two patients (surgical emphysema and temporary choking); no major complications were reported. Re-stenosis occurred in one patient. Successful decannulation was achieved in eight of the nine patients.
CONCLUSION: Revision cricotracheal resection is the definitive curative treatment for recurrent stenosis after previous unsuccessful resection. It has high success rates, provided that careful pre-operative assessment and meticulous operative technique are performed.

### PMID 34657024 (2021) — Nigerian journal of clinical practice
TITLE: The sole and combined effects of gelatin-thrombin matrix and freeze-dried bone allograft on early bone healing.
DOI: 10.4103/njcp.njcp_41_21 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIMS: Gelatin-thrombin matrix (GTM) is a hemostatic agent with applications in maxillofacial surgery consisting of human-derived thrombin and bovine-derived gelatin matrix. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of GTM alone or with freeze-dried bone allograft (FDBA) in improving early bone healing.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-six adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were used. All animals were randomly assigned to a control group (n = 4) and three study groups (n = 14). Each group was divided into two subgroups for histomorphometric and histological analyses at weeks 1 and 4. The new bone formation, inflammation, fibrosis, necrosis, foreign body reaction, and bone healing scores were evaluated based on the histopathological findings. Multiple comparisons were performed using the Kruskal-Wallis test. Variables that were not normally distributed were evaluated using the Mann-Whitney U test.
RESULTS: At 1 week, the GTM + FDBA group showed less bone formation (mean &#xb1; SD: 0.08 &#xb1; 0.03 mm2), compared with the study and control groups (FDBA: 0.15 &#xb1; 0.06 mm2; GTM: 0.13 &#xb1; 0.06 mm2). At 4 weeks, the GTM group (0.48 &#xb1; 0.1 mm2) showed more bone formation than the GTM + FDBA group (0.33 &#xb1; 0.17 mm2). Foreign body reactions were observed at weeks 1 and 4 in all GTM-containing groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Within the limitations of this study, GTM group did not show a significant difference in bone formation compared with the control group. GTM did not inhibit bone healing at 1 and 4 weeks, and no significant difference was observed compared with the control groups. GTM was more effective for bone healing when administered without FDBA. GTM is considered safe when bone hemorrhage is encountered.

### PMID 33189909 (2021) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: Does prophylactic use of topical gelatin-thrombin matrix sealant affect postoperative drainage volume and hematoma formation following microendoscopic spine surgery? A randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2020.11.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Microendoscopic spinal surgery has demonstrated efficacy and is increasingly utilized as a minimally invasive approach to neural decompression, but there is a theoretical concern that bleeding and postoperative epidural hematoma (PEH) may occur with increased frequency in a contained small surgical field. Hemostatic agents, such as topical gelatin-thrombin matrix sealant (TGTMS), are routinely used in spine surgery procedures, yet there has been no data on whether PEH is suppressed by these agents when administered in microendoscopic spine surgery.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of TGTMS on bleeding and PEH formation in lumbar micoroendoscopic surgery.
STUDY DESIGN: This is a randomized controlled trial (RCT) with additional prospective observational cohort.
PATIENT SAMPLE: Patients were registered from July 2017 to September 2018 and a hundred and three patients undergoing microendoscopic laminectomy for lumbar spinal stenosis at a single institution were enrolled in this study.
OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was the drainage volume within 48 hours after surgery. Secondary outcomes were the numerical rating scale (NRS) of leg pain on the second (NRS2) and seventh day (NRS7) after surgery and the hematoma area ratio (HAR) in horizontal images on magnetic resonance image (MRI).
METHODS: In the RCT, 41 cases that received TGTMS (F group) were compared with 41 control group cases (C group) that did not receive TGTMS at the end of the procedure. Drainage volume, NRS2, NRS7, and HAR on MRI were evaluated. Nineteen cases were excluded from the RCT (I group) due to difficulty of hemostasis during surgery and the intentional use of TGTMS for hemostasis. I group was compared with C group in the drainage volume and NRS of leg pain as a prospective observational study.
RESULTS: The RCT demonstrated no statistically significant difference in drainage volume between those receiving TGTMS (117.0&#xb1;71.7; mean&#xb1;standard deviation) and controls (125.0&#xb1;127.0; p=.345). The NRS2 and NRS7 was 3.5&#xb1;2.6 and 2.8&#xb1;2.5 in the F group, respectively, and 3.1&#xb1;2.6 and 2.1&#xb1;2.3 in the C group, respectively. The HAR on MRI was 0.19&#xb1;0.19 in the F group and 0.17&#xb1;0.13 in the C group. There was no significant difference in postoperative leg pain and HAR (p=.644 for NRS2, p=.129 for NRS7, and p=.705 for HAR). In the secondary observational cohort, the drainage volume in the I group was 118.3&#xb1;151.4, and NRS2 and NRS7 was 3.5&#xb1;2.0 and 2.6&#xb1;2.6, respectively. There were no statistically significant differences in drainage volume (p=.386) or postoperative NRS of leg pain between these two groups (p=.981 and .477 for NRS2 and NRS7, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The prophylactic use of TGTMS in patients undergoing microendoscopic laminotomy for lumbar spinal stenosis did not demonstrate any difference in postoperative bleeding or PEH. Nonetheless, for patients that had active bleeding that required the use of TGTMS, there was no evidence of difference in postoperative clinical outcomes relative to controls.

### PMID 34020706 (2021) — Journal of medical case reports
TITLE: Posttraumatic bronchobiliary fistulae due to foreign body remnants after &#xa0;a&#xa0;road traffic injury: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s13256-021-02859-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Bronchobiliary fistula is an extremely rare disease that involves abnormal communication between a hepatic segment and bronchial tree. It is mostly caused by untreated hydatid cyst, liver abscess, iatrogenic stenosis, and, rarely, trauma.
CASE PRESENTATION: We experienced an extremely rare case of bronchobiliary fistula after motor vehicle accident. A 15-year-old Persian boy visited our clinic with chief complaints of persistent pleuritic chest pain, productive cough, weight loss, and fever for 2&#xa0;months. Coronavirus disease 2019 reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction test was negative. Chest X-ray revealed hazy opacification of right lower lobe. Bronchoalveolar lavage for acid-fast bacillus came back negative. Thoracoabdominal computed tomography scan revealed a collection in segment VIII of the liver communicating with another 13&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;5&#xa0;cm multiloculated collection in the lower lobe of the right lung, with air foci within the collection. Right posterolateral thoracotomy was performed with the impression of bronchobiliary fistula. Drainage of hepatic collection with debridement, diaphragmatic repair, and open decortication of lung followed by resection of the involved segment of the right lung was performed. Histopathologic evaluations revealed abscess formation in pulmonary tissue, and many multinucleated giant cells were seen that appear to be due to foreign body remnants after previous laparotomy surgery. The foreign body seemed to be the remnants of Surgicel absorbable hemostat.
CONCLUSIONS: Herein, we report an extremely rare case of a posttraumatic bronchobiliary fistula caused by remnants of Surgicel hemostatic agent. Bronchobiliary fistula is mainly caused by untreated hydatid cyst, liver abscess, iatrogenic stenosis, and, rarely, trauma. Migration and erosion of oxidized regenerated cellulose through the diaphragm seems to be the causative factor of bronchobiliary fistula in this patient.

### PMID 34551881 (2021) — Transfusion medicine reviews
TITLE: Roles of Four-Factor Prothrombin Complex Concentrate in the Management of Critical Bleeding.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tmrv.2021.06.007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate (4F-PCC) is the term used to describe a pathogen-reduced, lyophilized concentrate that contains therapeutic amounts of at least 4 coagulation factors: Factor II (FII), Factor VII (FVII), Factor IX (FIX), and Factor X (FX). 4F-PCC has proven to be an effective hemostatic agent compared to plasma transfusion in several prospective randomized trials in acute warfarin reversal. In recent years, 4F-PCC has been used in various acquired coagulopathies including post-cardiopulmonary bypass bleeding, trauma-induced coagulopathy, coagulopathy in liver failure, and major bleeding due to anti-FXa (anti-Xa) inhibitors (eg, rivaroxaban and apixaban). As transfusion of frozen plasma (FP) has not been found efficacious in the above critical bleeding scenarios, there is increasing interest in expanding the use of 4F-PCC. However, efficacy, safety, and clinical implications of expanded use of 4F-PCC have not been fully elucidated. Prothrombin time and international normalized ratio are commonly used to assess dose effects of 4F-PCC. Prothrombin time/international normalized ratio are standardly use for warfarin titration, but they are not suited for real-time monitoring of complex coagulopathies. Optimal dosing of 4F-PCC outside of the current approved use for vitamin K antagonist reversal is yet to be determined. In this review, we will discuss the use of 4F-PCC in four critical bleeding settings: cardiac surgery, major trauma, end-stage liver disease, and oral anti-Xa reversal. We will discuss recent studies in each area to explore the dosing, efficacy, and safety of 4F-PCC.

### PMID 33970364 (2021) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: Intrabronchial migration of hemostatic agent through a bronchial fistula after lung transplantation: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s40792-021-01200-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A bronchial fistula is a relatively rare and potentially fatal complication after lung transplantation. Thoracic surgeons and pulmonologists often face challenges when selecting treatment options. We herein report an exceptional case of intrabronchial migration of a nonabsorbable hemostatic agent, which had been placed around the pulmonary artery at the time of lung transplantation, through a bronchial fistula.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 61-year-old man developed respiratory distress 1&#xa0;year after left single-lung transplantation for idiopathic interstitial pneumonia. Bronchoscopic examination revealed an apparent foreign body protruding from the mediastinum into the distal site of the bronchial anastomosis. The foreign body was easily removed bronchoscopically and appeared to be a hemostatic agent that had been placed during the previous lung transplantation. The patient developed a similar clinical episode and finally developed hemoptysis. Computed tomography revealed a foreign body located between the bronchus and pulmonary artery, partially protruding into the bronchial lumen. Given the possibility of a bronchopulmonary arterial fistula, surgical treatment was performed. The foreign body was located between the bronchus and left pulmonary artery and was easily removed. Multiple bronchial fistulas were found, and all were closed with direct sutures. Bypass grafting of the left pulmonary artery was then performed, initially with a homograft but eventually with an extended polytetrafluoroethylene graft. The patient was finally discharged 5&#xa0;months after the surgery.
CONCLUSION: We experienced an extremely rare case of intrabronchial migration of hemostatic agents used during the previous lung transplantation through a bronchial fistula, which were successfully managed by direct bronchial closure and bypass grafting of the left pulmonary artery.

### PMID 32592848 (2021) — Journal of shoulder and elbow surgery
TITLE: Intravenous tranexamic acid vs. topical thrombin in total shoulder arthroplasty: a comparative study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jse.2020.05.039 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Blood loss and transfusions have been highlighted as a significant predictor of postoperative morbidity. Tranexamic acid (TXA) has been shown to decrease blood loss and transfusion in shoulder arthroplasty. However, the utility of topical thrombin in total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA) is unknown. The purpose of this study was to assess the utility of topical thrombin in TSA&#xa0;and compare the effectiveness of topical thrombin to intravenous (IV) TXA.
METHODS: An institutional database was used to query shoulder arthroplasty patients from January 2017 to July 2019. Patients undergoing TSA&#xa0;were identified with CPT (Current Procedural Terminology) code (23742). After excluding reverse shoulder arthroplasty, arthroplasty for fracture or revision, the study groups were stratified based on intervention with IV TXA, topical thrombin, or neither. Patient demographics, American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) class, baseline coagulopathy, preoperative and postoperative hemoglobin levels, operative time, transfusion, length of stay, and 90-day readmission for each treatment group was obtained.
RESULTS: A total of 283 TSA cases were included for final analysis. There was no statistically significant difference in the baseline characteristics with age, body mass index, or ASA class. The postoperative hemoglobin level (mg/dL) was higher in the group that received either IV TXA or thrombin compared with no hemostatic agents (P = .001). Calculated blood loss in TSA was significantly higher in the group without hemostatic agents, 369.8 mL (standard deviation [SD] 59.5), compared with IV TXA or topical thrombin, 344.3 mL (SD 67.1) and 342.9 mL (SD 65.6) (P = .03). Operative time was highest in the group that received no hemostatic agents, 2.3 hours (SD 0.6) (P = .01). The transfusion rate for TSA treated with IV TXA or topical thrombin was equivalent (2.2%) but significantly lower than the no intervention group (12%) (P = .01). The odds ratio for transfusion with IV TXA was 0.16 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.07-0.40, P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.001)&#xa0;and for topical thrombin, 0.1 (95% CI 0.02-0.42, P = .02).
CONCLUSION: Topical thrombin is an effective adjunct to reduce blood loss and transfusion risk after TSA&#xa0;and a reasonable intraoperative alternative for TXA for patients with contraindication to IV TXA.

### PMID 33460023 (2021) — Spine deformity
TITLE: Anaphylaxis after injecting a hemostatic agent containing gelatin into vertebral bone under pressure-a warning.
DOI: 10.1007/s43390-020-00273-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Case series.
PURPOSE: The use of topical hemostatic agents is common in spinal deformity surgery. While beneficial, emerging case data shows gelatin-containing agents causing intra-operative complications. We present two patients who developed anaphylaxis after injection of these gelatin-containing hemostatic agents into the vertebral body using manual pressure. In the literature, while anaphylactic reactions associated with the use of animal-derived gelatin has been implicated; the risk of injecting these products into the closed vascular cavity of the vertebral body with subsequent embolization into systemic circulation bears emphasis. This report is to meant to make the surgical team aware of the risks of injecting hemostatic agents using manual pressure into the vertebral body and to highlight a plausible mechanism for the phenomenon.
METHODS: Two children with spinal deformity undergoing posterior spinal fusion procedures with the use of gelatin-containing hemostatic agents injected into the vertebral body through the pedicle are described.
RESULTS: Both patients had gelatin-containing hemostatic agent solution injected under manual pressure through the vertebral pedicle to prevent excessive bleeding. Anaphylaxis occurred soon thereafter, resulting in emergent cessation of the surgery and initiation of medical resuscitation. In both cases, tryptase levels obtained just after the event were elevated.
CONCLUSION: Patients with an allergy to or prior history of exposure to zoologic products undergoing spine surgery may be at risk of anaphylaxis if the gelatin-containing hemostatic agent is injected under manual pressure into the closed space of the vertebral body. This allows rapid entry into the venous circulation. We recommend that the surgeon perform a thorough history of a patient's allergies and use extreme caution when injecting these topical hemostatic products into the vertebral body.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: IV.

### PMID 33567467 (2021) — Endoscopy
TITLE: Endoscopic diagnosis and management of nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage (NVUGIH): European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline - Update 2021.
DOI: 10.1055/a-1369-5274 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Practice Guideline
ABSTRACT: 1: ESGE recommends in patients with acute upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage (UGIH) the use of the Glasgow-Blatchford Score (GBS) for pre-endoscopy risk stratification. Patients with GBS&#x200a;&#x2264;&#x200a;1 are at very low risk of rebleeding, mortality within 30 days, or needing hospital-based intervention and can be safely managed as outpatients with outpatient endoscopy.Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence. 2: ESGE recommends that in patients with acute UGIH who are taking low-dose aspirin as monotherapy for secondary cardiovascular prophylaxis, aspirin should not be interrupted. If for any reason it is interrupted, aspirin should be re-started as soon as possible, preferably within 3-5 days.Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence. 3: ESGE recommends that following hemodynamic resuscitation, early (&#x2264;&#x200a;24 hours) upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy should be performed. Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 4: ESGE does not recommend urgent (&#x2264;&#x200a;12 hours) upper GI endoscopy since as compared to early endoscopy, patient outcomes are not improved. Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 5: ESGE recommends for patients with actively bleeding ulcers (FIa, FIb), combination therapy using epinephrine injection plus a second hemostasis modality (contact thermal or mechanical therapy). Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 6: ESGE recommends for patients with an ulcer with a nonbleeding visible vessel (FIIa), contact or noncontact thermal therapy, mechanical therapy, or injection of a sclerosing agent, each as monotherapy or in combination with epinephrine injection. Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 7 : ESGE suggests that in patients with persistent bleeding refractory to standard hemostasis modalities, the use of a topical hemostatic spray/powder or cap-mounted clip should be considered. Weak recommendation, low quality evidence. 8: ESGE recommends that for patients with clinical evidence of recurrent peptic ulcer hemorrhage, use of a cap-mounted clip should be considered. In the case of failure of this second attempt at endoscopic hemostasis, transcatheter angiographic embolization (TAE) should be considered. Surgery is indicated when TAE is not locally available or after failed TAE. Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence. 9: ESGE recommends high dose proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy for patients who receive endoscopic hemostasis and for patients with FIIb ulcer stigmata (adherent clot) not treated endoscopically. (A): PPI therapy should be administered as an intravenous bolus followed by continuous infusion (e.&#x200a;g., 80&#x200a;mg then 8&#x200a;mg/hour) for 72 hours post endoscopy. (B): High dose PPI therapies given as intravenous bolus dosing (twice-daily) or in oral formulation (twice-daily) can be considered as alternative regimens.Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 10: ESGE recommends that in patients who require ongoing anticoagulation therapy following acute NVUGIH (e.&#x200a;g., peptic ulcer hemorrhage), anticoagulation should be resumed as soon as the bleeding has been controlled, preferably within or soon after 7 days of the bleeding event, based on thromboembolic risk. The rapid onset of action of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACS), as compared to vitamin K antagonists (VKAs), must be considered in this context.Strong recommendation, low quality evidence.

### PMID 33061164 (2020) — Indian journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Sutureless hemostasis of a coronary sinus rupture with Hydrofit.
DOI: 10.1007/s12055-020-00953-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Coronary sinus rupture (CSR) is a rare operative complication, and a standard procedure for its treatment has not been established. We report successful repair of a CSR in a 68-year-old man who underwent total arch replacement for type A acute aortic dissection. CSR was caused by the coronary sinus cannulation for retrograde cardioplegia and was detected during cardiopulmonary bypass weaning. We applied an elastomeric sealant with a bovine pericardium patch on the beating heart. After manual compression for 2&#xa0;min, complete hemostasis was achieved. A clampless and sutureless hemostasis for repairing coronary sinus rupture is a simple, fast, and effective technique.

### PMID 31893336 (2020) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: In vitro evaluation of the hemostatic effect of method involving the combined use of Hydrofit&#xae; and Spongel&#xae;.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-019-01282-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We developed an effective hemostatic method using Hydrofit&#xae; and a hemostatic gelatin sponge (Spongel&#xae;). We evaluated the hemostatic effect in comparison to the conventional silicone sheet method.
METHODS: A simulated circuit was created using the pump of a Nipro ventricular assist system and a prosthetic graft. A hole was made in the graft by a needle and three hemostatic methods were applied: the silicone sheet method (SS) using Hydrofit&#xae; and a silicone sheet, the bread and butter method (BB) using Hydrofit&#xae; and a gelatin sponge instead of a silicone sheet, and French toast method (FT) using Hydrofit&#xae; and a gelatin sponge over which water was poured before compression. The amount of leakage before and after the application each of the methods was measured according to the compression time.
RESULTS: In the 60&#xa0;s compression, the amount of leakage after SS, BB, and FT was 0.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.8, 0.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.6, and 0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.0&#xa0;ml, respectively, and FT showed no leakage. In the 30&#xa0;s compression, the amount of leakage after SS, BB, and FT was 14.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;27.9, 1.0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.2, and 7.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;22.6&#xa0;ml, respectively, and did not differ to a statistically significant extent.
CONCLUSIONS: The method of combining Hydrofit&#xae; and Spongel&#xae; could obtain reliable hemostasis in 60&#xa0;s.

### PMID 33251313 (2020) — Gynecologic oncology reports
TITLE: Inflammatory reaction to BioGlue&#x2122; masquerading as recurrence in patients with endometrial cancer: A report of two cases.
DOI: 10.1016/j.gore.2020.100665 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: &#x2022;BioGlue&#x2122;, a glutaraldehyde-based vessel sealant, can cause a foreign body reaction.&#x2022;Vessel sealants may be used for IVC repair during endometrial cancer staging.&#x2022;Foreign body reaction to BioGlue&#x2122; may look like a cancer recurrence on imaging.&#x2022;It is important to note prior use of vessel sealants in assessing paraaortic recurrence.

### PMID 32301439 (2020) — Journal of investigational allergology &amp; clinical immunology
TITLE: Anaphylaxis to Bovine Serum Albumin Tissue Adhesive in a Non-Meat-Allergic Patient.
DOI: 10.18176/jiaci.0522 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 32159755 (2020) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Evaluation of a biocompatible sealant for on-demand repair of vascular defects-a chronic study in a large animal model.
DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivaa012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Existing surgical sealants fail to combine design requirements, such as sealing performance, on-demand activation and biocompatibility. The aim of this study was to compare the effectiveness and safety of the SETALIUM&#x2122; Vascular Sealant (SVS), a novel, on-demand activatable sealant, with the commercial sealant, BioGlue&#xae;, for the repair of vascular defects.
METHODS: In an in vivo porcine model, the use of SVS was compared with BioGlue, for sealing 2-mm defects of the carotid artery and jugular vein. Animals were followed for 7&#x2009;days and 5&#x2009;weeks (each time point and per experimental group, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4), respectively. The degree of stenosis and flow velocity was determined, and the local tissue response was evaluated.
RESULTS: In vivo incision closure succeeded in all cases, and SVS was superior in clinical usability, enabled by its on-demand activation. Unlike BioGlue, SVS use did not induce stenosis and was associated with physiological blood flow in all cases. Moreover, closure with SVS was associated with a low inflammatory reaction and no thrombus formation or intima proliferation, in contrast to BioGlue.
CONCLUSIONS: SVS demonstrated effective and rapid sealing of 2-mm vascular defects, with favourable biocompatibility compared to BioGlue. Thus, SVS seems to be an effective and safe vascular sealant.

### PMID 31959032 (2020) — Journal of biomaterials applications
TITLE: Tissue reactions to polyethylene glycol and glutaraldehyde-based surgical sealants in a rabbit aorta model.
DOI: 10.1177/0885328219900078 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Surgical sealants help achieve rapid haemostasis when applied as an adjunct to sutures in vascular surgery, but their use can lead to various side effects. This study compared the local inflammatory reaction to commercially available BioGlue and Coseal sealants in a rabbit aorta suture hole model. Twenty male New Zealand white rabbits were randomised to testing with either BioGlue or Coseal. Two weeks after sealant application to suture holes, sections of the aorta at the puncture site, and surrounding tissue, were processed for histopathological analysis. Inflammation was graded from 0 to 3 according to tissue alteration and presence of inflammatory cells. Material stiffness was measured in vitro using compression testing. From examination of the inflammatory response to the sealants, a less severe histopathological assessment score was assigned to the Coseal compared to the BioGlue group (mean&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;SD: 1.56&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.53 vs 2.67&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.50; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.002). While both materials triggered a typical foreign body reaction characterised by granulomatous inflammation, BioGlue additionally provoked eosinophilic cell infiltration. Lymphocytes, plasma cells and B cells were also more prevalent in the BioGlue compared to the Coseal specimens. Coseal residue was either absent or visible in only small quantities, while significant BioGlue deposits remained in the tissue 2&#x2009;weeks after application. Coseal was much more elastic than BioGlue, with a compressive modulus an order of magnitude lower (mean&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;SD: 91&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;41 vs 1833&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;297&#x2009;kPa). Compared to BioGlue, Coseal elicited a less pronounced inflammatory response in the aortic and peri-aortic tissue in this model, and demonstrated greater elasticity.

### PMID 31731262 (2020) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Bioadhesives in neurosurgery: a review.
DOI: 10.3171/2019.8.JNS191592 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Neurosurgery presents unique surgical challenges arising from delicate neural structures, limited accessibility, and the risk of CSF leakage that can lead to CNS infections. Sutures and staples may have limited applicability in the complex anatomical constraints of cranial and spinal surgeries, especially in trauma settings when time is of the essence. Surgical bioadhesives are emerging as attractive alternatives because they avoid traumatic application methods, provide a stress-distributed fixation, and provide good cosmesis and outcomes. This article presents the history of the development of surgical bioadhesives, and is also a review of current applications of commercial surgical bioadhesives within neurosurgical procedures and the unmet clinical needs that should be addressed in bioadhesives technologies.
METHODS: A PubMed literature search was performed using the terms "(glue OR bioadhesive OR fibrin OR tisseel OR evicel OR tachosil OR cyanoacrylate OR duraseal OR bioglue) AND (neurosurgery OR spine OR spinal OR dural OR microvascular decompression OR transsphenoidal OR endovascular)." Of 2433 records screened, 168 studies were identified that described the use of bioadhesives in neurosurgical procedures.
RESULTS: The greatest number of studies describing the use of bioadhesives in neurosurgery were identified for endovascular embolization, followed by dural closure and transsphenoidal surgeries. Other common areas of application were for microvascular decompression, skin closure, peripheral nerve repair, and other novel uses. Numerous case reports were also identified describing complications associated with bioadhesive use.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the paucity of approved indications, surgical bioadhesive use in neurosurgical procedures is prevalent. However, current bioadhesives still each have their own limitations and research is intense in the development of novel solutions.

### PMID 32395458 (2020) — Korean journal of neurotrauma
TITLE: Postoperative Thecal Sac Compression Induced by Hydrogel Dural Sealant after Spinal Schwannoma Removal.
DOI: 10.13004/kjnt.2020.16.e10 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak is a common complication of spinal and cranial surgery, and patients undergoing spinal tumor surgery are probably particularly predisposed due to the presence of an intradural tumor and many other factors. Furthermore, a meticulous dural closure technique does not always result in watertight closure. A number of adjunctive methods have been used to assist with dural closure. Synthetic, absorbable polyethylene glycol hydrogel dural sealants are widely used and have been approved for use as adjuncts for cranial applications requiring sutured dural closure. We report a case of thecal sac compression by DuraSeal&#xae; Dural Sealant used to repair the CSF leak after intentional durotomy during lumbar schwannoma extirpation.

### PMID 36237726 (2020) — Taehan Yongsang Uihakhoe chi
TITLE: [Interventional Treatment of Chemical Pleuritis and Hemothorax Caused by Iatrogenic Internal Jugular Vein Perforation after Central Venous Port System Implantation: A Case Report].
DOI: 10.3348/jksr.2020.0032 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The perforation of the intrathoracic internal jugular vein during the placement of an implantable central venous chemoport is a rare complication that is manifested by hemothorax or hemorrhagic shock. Furthermore, inappropriate instillation of a chemotherapeutic agent in the chemoport can cause chemical pleuritis, and the diagnosis of these complications prior to the instillation of chemotherapeutic agents and open thoracic surgery is mandatory. We report a patient with chemical pleuritis and hemothorax following an inappropriate instillation of a chemotherapeutic agent, through the perforated right internal jugular vein after placement of an implantable central venous chemoport. Treatment by embolization using coils and N-butyl cyanoacrylate, after percutaneous drainage, was successful. &#xd56d;&#xc554;&#xce58;&#xb8cc;&#xb97c; &#xc704;&#xd574; &#xd749;&#xac15; &#xb0b4; &#xc18d;&#xbaa9;&#xc815;&#xb9e5;&#xc758; &#xcc9c;&#xc790;&#xb97c; &#xd1b5;&#xd55c; &#xd53c;&#xd558;&#xb9e4;&#xbab0; &#xc911;&#xc2ec;&#xc815;&#xb9e5; &#xcf00;&#xbaa8;&#xd3ec;&#xd2b8;(implantable central venous chemoport) &#xb3c4;&#xad00;&#xc758; &#xc124;&#xce58; &#xc911; &#xbc1c;&#xc0dd;&#xd560; &#xc218; &#xc788;&#xb294; &#xc758;&#xc778;&#xc131; &#xc18d;&#xbaa9;&#xc815;&#xb9e5; &#xcc9c;&#xacf5;&#xc740; &#xb9e4;&#xc6b4; &#xb4dc;&#xbb38; &#xd569;&#xbcd1;&#xc99d; &#xc911;&#xc758; &#xd558;&#xb098;&#xb85c; &#xd608;&#xd749;&#xc774;&#xb098; &#xcd9c;&#xd608;&#xc131; &#xc1fc;&#xd06c;&#xb97c; &#xc77c;&#xc73c;&#xd0ac; &#xc218; &#xc788;&#xc73c;&#xba70;, &#xbd80;&#xc801;&#xc808;&#xd55c; &#xd56d;&#xc554;&#xc81c; &#xc8fc;&#xc785;&#xc73c;&#xb85c; &#xc778;&#xd55c; &#xb291;&#xb9c9;&#xc0bc;&#xcd9c;&#xc774; &#xbc1c;&#xc0dd;&#xd560; &#xc218; &#xc788;&#xb2e4;. &#xb530;&#xb77c;&#xc11c; &#xd56d;&#xc554;&#xc81c; &#xc8fc;&#xc785; &#xc804; &#xc870;&#xae30;&#xc5d0; &#xc9c4;&#xb2e8;&#xd558;&#xc5ec; &#xc751;&#xae09; &#xac1c;&#xd749;&#xc220;&#xc744; &#xd1b5;&#xd574; &#xcc9c;&#xacf5;&#xb41c; &#xc18d;&#xbaa9;&#xc815;&#xb9e5;&#xc744; &#xbd09;&#xd569;&#xd558;&#xb294; &#xac83;&#xc774; &#xce58;&#xb8cc; &#xc6d0;&#xce59;&#xc774;&#xb2e4;. &#xc800;&#xc790;&#xb4e4;&#xc740; &#xc6b0;&#xce21; &#xc18d;&#xbaa9;&#xc815;&#xb9e5;&#xc744; &#xd1b5;&#xd55c; &#xd53c;&#xd558;&#xb9e4;&#xbab0; &#xc911;&#xc2ec;&#xc815;&#xb9e5; &#xcf00;&#xbaa8;&#xd3ec;&#xd2b8;&#xc758; &#xc124;&#xce58; &#xd6c4; &#xbc1c;&#xc0dd;&#xd55c; &#xc18d;&#xbaa9;&#xc815;&#xb9e5; &#xcc9c;&#xacf5; &#xd658;&#xc790;&#xc5d0;&#xc11c; &#xbd80;&#xc801;&#xc808;&#xd55c; &#xd56d;&#xc554;&#xc81c; &#xc8fc;&#xc785;&#xc73c;&#xb85c; &#xc778;&#xd574; &#xbc1c;&#xc0dd;&#xd55c; &#xb291;&#xb9c9;&#xc0bc;&#xcd9c;&#xacfc; &#xd608;&#xd749;&#xc744; &#xac1c;&#xd749;&#xc220;&#xc744; &#xc2dc;&#xd589;&#xd558;&#xc9c0; &#xc54a;&#xace0; &#xacbd;&#xd53c;&#xc801; &#xbc30;&#xc561;&#xc220; &#xd6c4; &#xcf54;&#xc77c;&#xacfc; N-butyl cyanoacrylate&#xb97c; &#xc774;&#xc6a9;&#xd55c; &#xc0c9;&#xc804;&#xc220;&#xc744; &#xd1b5;&#xd574; &#xc131;&#xacf5;&#xc801;&#xc73c;&#xb85c; &#xce58;&#xb8cc;&#xd55c; 1&#xc608;&#xb97c; &#xacbd;&#xd5d8;&#xd558;&#xc600;&#xae30;&#xc5d0; &#xc774;&#xb97c; &#xbcf4;&#xace0;&#xd558;&#xace0;&#xc790; &#xd55c;&#xb2e4;.

### PMID 33071230 (2020) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [A Rebleeding Case of Carotid Blowout Syndrome after Endovascular Treatment with Covered Stent].
DOI: 10.11477/mf.1436204299 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a case of a patient who survived carotid blowout syndrome(CBS)due to covered stent placement, but bled again 34 days later. A 67-year-old man with laryngeal cancer experienced cardiac arrest due to carotid blowout a day after he underwent the balloon occlusion test and abnormal feeder embolization of the tumor. After quick resuscitation, he was treated with endovascular therapy using a covered stent, since he had insufficient cerebral ischemic tolerance. We succeeded in stent placement and the bleeding stopped without any procedural complications. The patient survived after the procedure. However, bleeding recurred when a nasal endoscope was inserted 34 days later. The rupture point was immediately distal of the stent. We performed carotid artery occlusion with coils and n-butyl-cyanoacrylate. The patient survived, but his condition gradually weakened and died 97 days after stenting. Emergency hemostasis for carotid blowout using a covered stent is the only available treatment for patients who do not have sufficient cerebral ischemic tolerance. However, this procedure has a higher rate of re-bleeding than carotid artery occlusion. Moreover, it is an off-label treatment in Japan. Therefore, possible treatments for CBS including use of covered stent or treatments for non-ruptured CBS should be analyzed in the future.

### PMID 32994914 (2020) — Journal of surgical case reports
TITLE: Preoperative embolization of high-flow peripheral AVMs using plug and push technique with low-density NBCA/Lipiodol.
DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjaa316 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) embolization is considered as a promising option either its single treatment or in combination with surgery, and the use of low-density N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA)/Lipiodol is acceptable mixture agents but its application should be performed by experienced endovascular teams. We describe a successful case preoperative embolization of high-flow AVMs with low-density NBCA/Lipiodol. A 26-year-old male patient was hospitalized with a big pulsatile mass at the right thigh. Doppler ultrasound showed a mass with high systolic, and diastolic velocities coming from the right superficial femoral artery. Angiogram showed a large and high-flow AVM type IV, according to Yakes classification. Low-density NBCA/Lipiodol 12.5% were performed to obstruct all the nidus and feeding arteries. Extirpation surgery was implemented 4 days after the complete embolization procedure.

### PMID 32952751 (2020) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Successful lymphatic embolization using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate for postoperative lymphorrhea in a patient with renal pelvic cancer.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2020.08.051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a successful case of percutaneous lymphatic embolization using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) for postoperative lymphorrhea in a patient with urothelial carcinoma of renal pelvis. A 75-year-old man with urothelial carcinoma of left renal pelvis with para-aortic lymph nodes metastases. The patient presented severe lymphorrhea after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy followed by laparoscopic total left nephroureterectomy and lymph nodes dissection. Since conservative treatments were ineffective, percutaneous lymphatic embolization using NBCA resulted in healing of the lymphorrhea without recurrence. Percutaneous lymphatic embolization using NBCA followed by intranodal lymphography is a powerful treatment option for intractable postoperative lymphorrhea after lymph nodes dissection.

### PMID 32858493 (2020) — European journal of radiology
TITLE: Effectiveness of bronchial arterial embolization using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate for local control of pulmonary hilar or mediastinal tumors that are refractory to chemotherapy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejrad.2020.109160 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To investigate local control and survival after bronchial artery embolization (BAE) using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) for pulmonary hilar or mediastinal tumors that are refractory to chemotherapy or chemoradiotherapy.
METHOD: This is a single center retrospective study involving 42 patients treated between 2015 and 2018 for pulmonary hilar or mediastinal tumors (primary tumors in 5 and metastatic ones in 37). Tumor histology was sarcoma in 22 and carcinoma in 20 patients. All patients had shown tumor progression regardless of previous chemotherapy (n = 37) or chemoradiotherapy (n = 5). Thirty-seven patients (88 %) had respiratory symptoms, such as cough, dyspnea, and hemoptysis. BAE was performed using NBCA to shrink tumors for extending life expectancy. Target tumors were followed with computed tomography at 1,3, and 6 months after BAE. Endpoints included the best tumor response within 6 months as well as overall survivals in patients with and without tumor responses.
RESULTS: Best local responses within 6 months were complete response (CR) in 1 patient, partial response (PR) in 16, stable disease (SD) in 24, and progressive disease (PD) in 1; the CR/PR rate was 40 % (17/42). Median follow-up period was 13 months (range:1-43). Overall survival in patients with CR/PR was significantly better than in those with SD/PD (p = 0.006); with 3-year survival rates of 45 % (8/17) and 0% (0/25), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: BAE using NBCA has potential promise for shrinking hilar and/or mediastinal tumors that are refractory to chemotherapy or chemoradiotherapy, and may also improve overall survival in patients who respond.

### PMID 32648243 (2020) — Clinical journal of gastroenterology
TITLE: Racemose hemangioma of the bronchial artery mimicking esophageal submucosal tumor: a case report.
DOI: 10.1007/s12328-020-01172-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Primary racemose hemangioma of the bronchial artery is a rare congenital disease that is occasionally complicated by aneurysms. An asymptomatic 78-year-old man was referred to our hospital with an esophageal submucosal tumor that was endoscopically found in the upper thoracic esophagus in a health check-up. Physical examination findings were unremarkable. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography with three-dimensional image reconstruction and selective bronchial arteriography resulted in a definitive diagnosis of primary racemose hemangiomas of the bronchial arteries accompanied by left bronchial artery aneurysm. Because rupture of a bronchial artery aneurysm can cause critical life-threatening hemorrhage, bronchial arterial embolization using coils and a mixture of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and iodized oil was thus performed for bronchial artery aneurysm. Postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the third postoperative day. Computed tomography performed after 6&#xa0;months revealed no enhancement of the aneurysms. In conclusion, we report a case of an asymptomatic primary racemose hemangioma of the bronchial artery accompanied by an aneurysm that mimicked a submucosal esophageal tumor. We also reviewed other Japanese case of primary racemose hemangioma of the bronchial artery accompanied by aneurysm based on the literature.

### PMID 32630568 (2020) — Diagnostics (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Ultrasound-Guided Percutaneous Antegrade Varicocele Embolization with Cyanoacrylate Glue as an Alternative to the Standard Retrograde Approach.
DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics10060432 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case of a 29-year-old male referred to our hospital for endovascular treatment of a left-sided painful varicocele. Standard retrograde embolization via the left renal vein was not possible because of the presence of a left circum-aortic renal vein making the catheterization of the testicular vein not feasible. The patient was successfully treated via ultrasound-guided percutaneous antegrade access of the testicular vein at the inguinal level with subsequent cyanoacrylate glue embolization as a minimally invasive alternative to surgical therapy. This is a new approach to varicocele embolization when the left renal vein does not feed the varicocele.

### PMID 32479884 (2020) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Embolization Techniques for Arteriovenous Malformations in Parkes-Weber Syndrome.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2020.05.039 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Multiple high-flow arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are the hallmark of Parkes-Weber syndrome (PWS). Surgical resection has historically shown poor outcomes with PWS. The aim of this study was to assess the management of PWS in the current era.
METHODS: A retrospective review was performed from 2004 to 2017 on all patients presenting to a single institution for the management of PWS. Presentation, techniques, complications, and outcomes were reviewed.
RESULTS: Fourteen patients (50% male) with PWS were seen at our institution, and mean age was 19.9&#xa0;years (range, 4.7-68.8). The lower extremity was affected in 12 (86%) and the upper extremity in 2 (14%) patients. All patients presented with pain and swelling in the affected limb. Seven (50%) patients presented with ulcers, of which 3 (43%) had extensive wounds. Five (36%) patients had echocardiographic evidence of high-output cardiac failure. All patients underwent angiography with the intention to treat. Three (21%) patients were found to have diffuse arteriovenous communication with no discrete AVM nidus and thus did not undergo intervention. The remaining 11 (79%) patients underwent transcatheter embolization of the AVM's arterial inflow. Six (55%) patients required multiple or staged inflow embolization procedures, with a mean of 3.3 (range, 1-10) interventions. Thirty-two arterial embolization procedures were performed in total. n-Butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (nBCA) adhesive was used in 22 (69%), microspheres in 8 (25%), and a combination of coils and nBCA adhesive in 2 (6%) cases. Technical angiographic success was seen in all patients. Six (55%) patients also had interventions to treat the venous component of the malformation, either concomitantly or during a separate procedure. This included radiofrequency ablation in 1 (17%), coil embolization in 1 (17%), sodium tetradecyl sulfate (STS) sclerotherapy in 2 (33%), and a combination of STS, coil embolization, and vein stripping in 2 (33%) patients. Ten (91%) patients experienced a partial response and 1 (9%) patient experienced no response to treatment. No patients had a complete response, as expected with the diffuse nature of this disease. There were no periprocedural complications. Two of 3 patients with complex wounds required major amputations for gangrene, including one above-knee and one below-knee amputation at 128&#xa0;months and 66&#xa0;months after the index procedure, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: AVMs in PWS can be successfully treated by a transcatheter approach. Multiple interventions are usually required. Patients with extensive wounds remain at risk for loss of limb.

### PMID 32436809 (2020) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: Feasibility and Safety of Sac Embolization Using N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate in Emergency Endovascular Aneurysm Repair for Ruptured Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms or Isolated Iliac Artery Aneurysms.
DOI: 10.1177/1526602820923954 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the feasibility and safety of sac embolization with N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) in emergency endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) for ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and iliac artery aneurysm (IAA) in comparison to EVAR without sac embolization.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Between February 2012 and December 2019, among 44 consecutive patients with ruptured AAA or IAA, 29 underwent EVAR. Of these, 22 patients (median age 77.5 years; 18 men) had concomitant sac embolization using NBCA; the remaining 7 patients (median age 88 years; 6 men) underwent EVAR without sac embolization and form the control group. The technical success, clinical success (hemodynamic stabilization), procedure-related complications, and mortality were compared between the groups.
RESULTS: All EVAR procedures and embolizations were successful. The clinical success rates in the NBCA and control groups were 95% (21/22) and 71% (5/7), respectively (p=0.14). There was no complication related to the procedure. Type II endoleak occurred in 4 of 21 patients (19%) in the NBCA group vs none of the control patients. One patient (5%) died in the NBCA group vs 3 (43%) in the controls (p=0.034).
CONCLUSION: Sac embolization using NBCA in emergency EVAR appears to be feasible and safe for ruptured AAA and IAA.

### PMID 32435571 (2020) — Global spine journal
TITLE: Cyanoacrylate Dermal Closure in Spine Surgery: Systematic Review and Pooled Analysis.
DOI: 10.1177/2192568219861619 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Systematic review.
OBJECTIVES: Cyanoacrylate glue closure has been utilized for dermal closure in surgical incisions. Its safety and efficacy in spine surgery are not established. The authors perform a systematic review to determine the rate of surgical site infection (SSI), wound dehiscence, and wound erythema with cyanoacrylate dermal closure in spine surgery.
METHODS: A systematic review adhering to PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines was performed utilizing the PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane databases on patients undergoing spine surgery with cyanoacrylate dermal closure. Pooled analysis was performed with stratification of patients according to spinal level and the presence/absence of instrumentation. Risk-of-bias and methodological quality was appraised using 17 prespecified criteria.
RESULTS: Five articles (1 retrospective cohort study, 4 cases series) with a total of 1282 patients were included. A total of 967 patients, all diagnosed with degenerative spine disease, were suitable for pooled analysis. In 290 patients who underwent anterior cervical discectomy and fusion, and in 23 patients with posterior cervical decompression (without instrumentation), there was 0% rate of SSI, wound dehiscence, and erythema. In 489 patients who underwent lumbar microdiscectomy, there was 0.41% rate of SSI, 0.20% rate of wound dehiscence, and 0.20% rate of wound erythema. In 165 lumbar laminectomy patients, there was a 1.82% rate of SSI, 0.61% rate of wound dehiscence, and 0% rate of wound erythema.
CONCLUSION: Cyanoacrylate dermal closure for the aforementioned procedures is associated with low rates of wound complications (SSI, dehiscence, and erythema). Further studies should be performed, especially in nondegenerative surgery, instrumented thoracic and lumbar spine surgery.

### PMID 32426082 (2020) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Successful treatment of spontaneous middle mediastinum hematoma due to rupture of bilateral bronchial artery with transcatheter arterial embolization using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2020.04.028 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Mediastinum hematoma is often caused by chest trauma, aortic dissection, and tumor. Spontaneous nontraumatic middle mediastinum hematoma is a rare and potentially life-threatening condition. Here, we report the case of a patient who was a 46-year-old experienced sudden chest pain with spontaneous middle mediastinum hematoma caused by rupture of the bilateral bronchial artery. We successfully treated the patient with transcatheter arterial embolization via the bilateral bronchial artery using N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate.

### PMID 32055262 (2020) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Balloon-occluded retrograde glue embolization for intractable lymphorrhea from bilateral iliac lymphatics following surgery for rectal cancer.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2020.01.017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Lymphorrhea is a rare complication of rectal surgery. Although percutaneous embolization of thoracic or lymphatic ducts is now increasingly being reported for various types of lymphatic leakage, there are only sparse data on lymphatic interventions for lymphorrhea following rectal surgery. A novel balloon-occluded retrograde lymphatic embolization (BRLE) technique can be a simple and effective option for intractable lymphorrhea. We report a case of a man with infected lymphorrhea after rectal resection. Transperineal drainage was performed; however, lymphatic leakage persisted after 1 month of conservative treatment. Lymphangiography revealed multifocal leaks from bilateral iliac lymphatics. The proposed BRLE technique was performed via a balloon catheter inserted through the transperineal drainage. The balloon allowed occlusion of lymphatic outflow and forceful retrograde injection to achieve denser accumulation of n-butyl cyanoacrylate. Tight embolization of bilateral iliac lymphatics and drastic improvement of the leakage was achieved. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of percutaneous embolization for lymphorrhea after rectal surgery. This case supports the efficacy of the BRLE as a simple and effective therapeutic option for such persistent multifocal lymphatic leaks.

### PMID 31882316 (2020) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Multicenter experience in translumbar type II endoleak treatment in the hybrid room with needle trajectory planning and fusion guidance.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2019.10.076 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of treating type II endoleaks (T2Ls) after aortic endovascular repair with image guidance translumbar puncture using intraoperative cone beam computed tomography with preprocedure computed tomography angiography fusion in hybrid operating rooms.
METHODS: Twenty-six consecutive T2L patients in three different institutions were treated between March 2015 and September 2017 by direct translumbar puncture of the abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) sac after previous endovascular aortic repair. All patients were treated at a single setting in a cardiovascular hybrid operating room with a workstation featuring needle trajectory planning and guidance software. Aneurysm sac size change from the index treatment, freedom from recurrent endoleak after treatment, demographics, risk factors, and procedure factors were analyzed with univariate analysis.
RESULTS: All patients (N&#xa0;= 26; 19 male, 7 female; age range, 59-95&#xa0;years; mean body mass index, 27.44&#xa0;&#xb1; 3.06&#xa0;kg/m2) underwent treatment for AAA sac expansion or symptoms. Four patients had failed to respond to previous catheter-directed T2L treatment. The most common risk factors included hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, coronary artery disease, tobacco use, and diabetes. Time to initial endoleak diagnosis ranged from 2 to 1914&#xa0;days (average, 404&#xa0;days). Aneurysm size after initial repair was 60.3&#xa0;&#xb1; 7.5&#xa0;mm; sac size had increased 10.1&#xa0;&#xb1; 6.5&#xa0;mm at the time of treatment. Onyx (Medtronic, Irvine, Calif) or glue (n-butyl cyanoacrylate) and coil embolization was used in 20 cases, and 6 patients were treated with coiling alone. There was no difference between the patients treated with coils alone and those treated with coils or glue (P &gt; .05) in terms of freedom from failure. Total procedure time was 75.9&#xa0;&#xb1; 40.7&#xa0;minutes; contrast material volume, 19.9&#xa0;&#xb1; 29&#xa0;mL; fluoroscopy time, 13.74&#xa0;&#xb1; 12.2&#xa0;minutes; and radiation dose, 121.16&#xa0;&#xb1; 167.7&#xa0;mGy. After embolization, the mean sac diameter decreased by 2.2&#xa0;mm to 67.5&#xa0;&#xb1; 9.8&#xa0;mm. Average follow-up period was 214&#xa0;days. In 19 patients, the sac reduced in size between 0.2 and 19.1&#xa0;mm per 100&#xa0;days; in 2 patients, there was continued AAA expansion (3.4-4.3&#xa0;mm per 100&#xa0;days); there was no change in the sac size in 5 patients after the procedure. There were no AAA ruptures during the study period. Once T2L was treated, the recurrence rate was low at 11.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: This initial multicenter evaluation of the effectiveness of fusion image-guided translumbar obliteration of T2L demonstrated that the technique was effective at all three study centers and showed excellent efficacy to reduce AAA sac size. This may become a more effective and efficient method of treating T2L compared with transarterial or transcaval embolization because of its high success rate and technical ease.

### PMID 31749319 (2020) — Pediatric blood &amp; cancer
TITLE: Single-stage embolization with n-butyl cyanoacrylate and surgical resection of venous malformations.
DOI: 10.1002/pbc.28029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Sclerotherapy or surgical resection is options for symptomatic venous malformations (VM). Sclerotherapy may require repetitive intervention and resection is often avoided due to operative morbidity. The purpose of this study was to report use of single-stage n-butyl cyanoacrylate glue embolization and surgical resection of focal VM.
METHODS: A review of patients with focal VM who underwent glue embolization followed by resection at a single tertiary care vascular malformations center was performed. All embolizations were performed with ultrasound and fluoroscopy under the same anesthetic as resection. Patient characteristics and outcomes were evaluated.
RESULTS: Fifteen procedures were performed in 12 patients with a total of 20 VM addressed, as several patients had multiple VM. Mean age was 16 &#xb1; 9 years. Malformation locations included scalp, hip, gluteal, labial, toe, finger, face, lip, chest, and foot and size ranged from 1.0 to 10.5&#xa0;cm. Median (range) of prior sclerotherapy treatments was 3 (0-5) and three patients previously underwent surgical resection. Median blood loss was zero (0-10) mL. Surgical complications occurred after five procedures (33%) including superficial wound dehiscence and cellulitis. No complications required readmission or reoperation. At a median follow up of 195 (103-266) days, no patients have required additional treatment.
CONCLUSION: Glue embolization and resection of focal VM of variable size and location appears to have durable results and low surgical morbidity. This single-stage procedure, often performed as an outpatient, may be utilized as upfront treatment for symptomatic malformations or for VM refractory to other treatments.

### PMID 36284832 (2020) — Interventional radiology (Higashimatsuyama-shi (Japan)
TITLE: Safety and Efficacy of Embolization Using N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate via a Percutaneous Direct Approach for Endoleaks after Abdominal/Thoracic Endovascular Aortic Repair.
DOI: 10.22575/interventionalradiology.2018-0018 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To elucidate the safety and efficacy of embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) for endoleaks after abdominal/thoracic endovascular aortic repair (EVAR/TEVAR) via a direct percutaneous approach versus a transarterial approach.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The retrospective design of the study was approved by the institutional ethics committee, and the requirement for informed written consent was waived. Sixteen patients underwent embolization for endoleaks after EVAR/TEVAR, which was diagnosed as type II, from March 2010 to December 2013 at our institution. The number of embolization sessions was 21. A direct percutaneous approach was used in 10 sessions, and a transarterial approach was used in 11 sessions. There were 11 and 15 embolic sites for the two approaches, respectively. The procedure time, amount of contrast media used, therapeutic effect, and complications were evaluated.
RESULTS: The mean procedure time (per embolic site) was 100 min (53-170) in the direct percutaneous approach, which was significantly shorter than the 191 min (76-275) in the transarterial approach. The mean amount of contrast media used during the procedure (per embolic site) was 12.8 ml (3-25) by the direct percutaneous approach, which was significantly lesser than the 71.8 ml (30-180) in the transarterial approach. Local control of the embolic site and interval increase in the size of aneurysm after embolization were not significantly different between the two approaches. In one case each, mesenteric hematoma and migration of the embolic agent occurred with a direct percutaneous approach, and a small arterial injury occurred with the transarterial approach; aneurysmal rupture/perianeurysmal hematoma and neurological dysfunction were not observed.
CONCLUSION: A direct percutaneous approach is a feasible procedure for embolization of endoleaks after EVAR/TEVAR.

### PMID 32359521 (2020) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Giant Pulmonary Aneurysms in Beh&#xe7;et's Disease Presenting with Hemoptysis-Embolization with Cyanoacrylate Glue and Coils.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2020.02.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Video-Audio Media, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 31971877 (2020) — Journal of laparoendoscopic &amp; advanced surgical techniques. Part A
TITLE: Blue Dye Embolization of Renal Tumor: A New Technique to Improve Tumor Localization During Laparoscopic Partial Nephrectomy.
DOI: 10.1089/lap.2019.0686 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Purpose: To improve the tumor localization during laparoscopic surgery, we describe an innovative technique involving superselective intra-arterial injection of blue dye in tumoral vessels to color the tumor before surgical enucleation. Materials and Methods: The dye injection was performed at the same time as superselective embolization, immediately before laparoscopic surgery in a hybrid operating room. We used this new treatment sequence on 50 consecutive patients. Results: The selective intra-arterial injection of an emulsion of blue dye and lipiodol was feasible in 46 (92%) cases and well tolerated, followed by superselective embolization of the tumor vessels with glue or coils. The tumor was easily localized during surgery due to the blue coloration. Tumor coloration was not associated with postoperative complication, especially allergic reaction or renal failure. Pathologic analysis of the tumor was not modified by the coloration and all tumors had negative surgical margins. Conclusions: The preoperative dye localization is a feasible, safe, and accurate procedure. This combined approach reduces the difficulty of surgery and increases patient safety.

### PMID 32599185 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: L1/2 Intradural Disc Herniation with Compression of the Proximal Cauda Equina Nerves: A Surgical Challenge.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.06.163 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intradural disc herniation (IDH) in the upper lumbar spine is rare. Preoperative radiologic diagnosis can be difficult, making operative planning challenging. We report on a 74-year-old female patient who was diagnosed with an L1-L2 IDH intraoperatively. This case report aims to highlight and discuss the radiological features of IDH and operative challenges when approaching IDH.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 74-year-old female patient presented to outpatient clinic with a 3-month history of significant intermittent neurological claudication and severe lumbar back pain. Her examination was unremarkable apart from a positive left-sided femoral stretch test. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large central L1/L2 disc herniation causing significant compression of the thecal sac and proximal cauda equina nerve roots. She underwent an elective posterior L1/L2 lumbar exploration. Intraoperatively, identification of the disc was difficult, which led to inadvertent cerebrospinal fluid leak after incision of what was thought to be a disc bulge. Further exploration revealed an intradural disc that was removed via durotomy. The thecal sac was repaired with sutures and TISSEEL (Baxter, Deerfield, Illinois, USA). Postoperatively, the patient complained of weak left lower limb; MRI revealed residual disc remnants causing compression of the cauda equina. She successfully underwent an urgent revision decompression procedure. She was discharged to rehabilitation on postoperative day 14 with weakness in left knee flexion and extension (MRC grade 4/5) and left ankle plantar- and dorsiflexion (MRC grade 2/5).
CONCLUSIONS: Upper lumbar IDH represent a surgical challenge. Intraoperative considerations include identification of the disc, intentional or incidental durotomy, intradural discectomy, and anatomical restrictions of operating at the level proximal to the cauda equina.

### PMID 32581467 (2020) — Journal of current glaucoma practice
TITLE: Intrapalpebral Extending Dysesthetic Bleb Revision with Fibrin Glue.
DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10078-1270 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: This pilot study evaluates the safety and efficacy of a novel surgical technique using fibrin glue to treat bleb dysesthesia post-trabeculectomy due to intrapalpebral extension.
BACKGROUND: Trabeculectomy remains the gold standard for control of intraocular pressure (IOP) in refractory glaucoma. Bleb dysesthesia following antifibrotic-enhanced trabeculectomy is common, resulting in a significant decrease in quality of life. Symptoms include pain, foreign body sensation, and excessive tearing. Treatments include lubrication, topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), bandage contact lens, bleb needling, compression sutures, Nd:YAG laser treatments, autologous blood injection, and cryopexy. These procedures can be time-consuming, risk bleb function, and may be ineffective at symptom control; thus, a novel technique is required.
TECHNIQUE: This is a retrospective case series of eyes undergoing bleb dissection with scleral cutdown and conjunctival closure with ARTISS fibrin tissue glue. Reported cases have been followed up for 6 months. Outcomes assessed include complications, IOP, medication usage, subjective pain score, visual field, and cup-to-disk (C:D) ratio.
CONCLUSION: This small pilot series demonstrated that patients suffering from bleb dysesthesia due to intrapalpebral bleb extension can be successfully treated with a novel surgical approach combining conjunctival dissection to sclera with fibrin tissue glue closure. There was no significant effect on bleb function and no contribution to glaucoma progression over a 6-month period. A significant reduction in patient discomfort with no new surgical complications was noted.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: This demonstrates a safe and effective novel surgical approach to treat patients with this condition. The technique is easily learnt and can be employed in an outpatient setting. The technique is readily accepted by patients in group who are often reticent to undergo further intervention. Most importantly, it does not compromise bleb function or destabilize glaucoma control.
HOW TO CITE THIS ARTICLE: Holmes DP, Manning DK. Intrapalpebral Extending Dysesthetic Bleb Revision with Fibrin Glue. J Curr Glaucoma Pract 2020;14(1):37-42.

### PMID 32830078 (2020) — The journal of sexual medicine
TITLE: Multicenter Prospective Study of Grafting With Collagen Fleece TachoSil in Patients With Peyronie's Disease.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jsxm.2020.07.079 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A xenograft consisting of equine collagen coated with human fibrinogen and thrombin (TachoSil; Baxter, CA) has recently been introduced in grafting procedures for Peyronie's disease (PD).
AIM: To describe the results of a multicenter prospective registry on patients with PD undergoing plaque incision or and grafting (PIG) or plaque excision and grafting (PEG) with collagen fleece TachoSil, to evaluate the efficacy and safety of this procedure.
METHODS: A prospective non-controlled multicenter study of patients with PD was performed between May 2016 and March 2018. Patients from 10 centers with stable PD for at least 3 months, difficulties in sexual intercourse, normal erectile function with or without pharmacological treatment, curvature &gt;45&#xb0;, and/or penile shortening and/or complex deformities were included. All patients underwent PIG/PEG with collagen fleece TachoSil.
OUTCOMES: The main outcome measure of this study were penile curvature correction (intraoperative), penile shortening (intraoperative), erectile function with the 5-item version of the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF-5) and the Erection Hardness Score, subjective patient outcomes with non-validated questionnaires, and complications.
RESULTS: A total of 52 patients were enrolled in the study. The mean (SD) preoperative penile curvature was 72.8&#xb0; (17.0). PIG was the preferred technique (80.8%). Intraoperatively, complete curvature correction was achieved in 92.3%, and no significant penile shortening was recorded in 80.8% of subjects. Subjective penile shortening was reported in 83.3% of patients at 6 months. No objective measurement of penile curvature and length was recorded during follow-up. No statistically significant difference from the baseline was found in IIEF-5 and Erection Hardness Score at 3 or at 6 months, although 16.7% of men experienced a worsening of IIEF-5 scores and 14.3% required de novo phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor use. 6 months after surgery, 78.5% of men were satisfied with intervention. Swelling and ecchymosis/hematoma were the most common perioperative complications (40.4%). 2 cases (3.8%) of wound infection were recorded. At 6 months, 35.7% of patients reported mild penile hypesthesia.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Our results confirm the high success rate of grafting with TachoSil, and the surgeon perceived low percentage of penile shortening.
STRENGTH &amp; LIMITATIONS: This is the first multicentre study on patients with PD undergoing grafting with TachoSil without concomitant placement of penile prosthesis. The main limitations are the short follow-up and the relatively small sample size.
CONCLUSION: Grafting with TachoSil after PIG/PEG in patients with PD is an effective and safe procedure. Among the main advantages of this technique, there are ease of use of the graft and reduced operative time. Fern&#xe1;ndez-Pascual E, Manfredi C, Torremad&#xe9; J, et&#xa0;al. Multicenter Prospective Study of Grafting With Collagen Fleece TachoSil in Patients With Peyronie's Disease. J Sex Med 2020;17:2279-2286.

### PMID 32094313 (2020) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Hemifacial Spasm Caused by Vertebral Artery Fusiform Aneurysm and the Anterior Inferior Cerebellar Artery].
DOI: 10.11477/mf.1436204151 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case of hemifacial spasm in which the root exit zone(REZ)of the facial nerve was compressed by both the vertebral artery(VA)aneurysm and the anterior interior cerebellar artery(AICA). A 60-year-old female had suffered left hemifacial spasm for 2 years. Three-dimensional rotational angiography with selective arterial infusion of contrast medium(3DRA-IA)revealed that a distal part of the left AICA looping at the cisternal region was contacting the dome of the left VA aneurysm, although other imaging modalities did not show the exact course of the ipsilateral AICA. Constructive interference steady state magnetic resonance imaging revealed that both the left VA aneurysm and the left AICA had compressed the REZ of the left facial nerve. She underwent aneurysm clipping and decompression of the REZ by transposition of both the clipped aneurysm and the AICA using TachoSil&#xae;. Her hemifacial spasm disappeared immediately after surgery without complication. Some fine arteries might compress the REZ in patients with hemifacial spasm associated with VA aneurysms. 3DRA-IA was more effective for accurate evaluation than other imaging modalities. Transposition of vascular structures using TachoSil&#xae; is safe and effective for microvascular decompression surgery in such complicated cases.

### PMID 31629637 (2020) — Asian journal of surgery
TITLE: The efficacy of the TachoSil binding suturing technique in laparoscopic partial nephrectomy to prevent the development of pseudoaneurysm.
DOI: 10.1016/j.asjsur.2019.09.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Our specific aim was to introduce the TachoSil binding suturing technique for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients when closing the parenchymal defect after tumor excision during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (LPN), which is a novel technique for reducing the risk of developing subsequent pseudoaneurysm (PA).
METHODS: We identified 113 pT1aN0M0 RCC patients who underwent LPN at our institution. Eighty-one (72%) patients underwent the suturing procedure without binding TachoSil, whereas 32 (28%) patients underwent renorraphy with the renal defect closed together with TachoSil. The vascular complications were evaluated by computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging with enhanced contrast material at the first visit after LPN. We conducted Fischer's exact test to determine risk factors for transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE).
RESULTS: The median age was 55 (36-86) years old and the median follow-up time was 65 (12-147) months. In the overall population, there were 11 (11%) patients who underwent TAE because they developed PA. All 11 patients exhibited the imaging findings of PA, and were all from the conventional suturing group. In contrast, no patients for whom the TachoSil binding method was used had any significant findings on imaging (14% vs. 0%). Based on the analysis to determine risk factors for TAE due to PA development, the TachoSil binding suturing technique was one of the significant indicators for reducing the risk of developing PA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that the TachoSil binding suturing technique might reduce the development of PA after LPN. Prospective randomized study and comparison to the standard 2 or 3-layer renorrhaphy is needed to prove its actual value.

### PMID 32429114 (2020) — Nanomaterials (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Influence of the Introduced Chitin Nanofibrils on Biomedical Properties of Chitosan-Based Materials.
DOI: 10.3390/nano10050945 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage occurring during and after surgery still remains one of the biggest problems in medicine. Although a large number of hemostatic products have been created, there is no universal preparation; thus, the development of new materials is an urgent task. The aim of this research is to increase hemostatic properties of chitosan by introducing chitin nanofibrils (ChNF). The blood absorbance by ChNF-containing chitosan sponges and time-until-arrest of bleeding were studied. Non-woven materials containing 0.5% of ChNF and materials without chitin were obtained. The studies of &#x3b6;-potential showed that the material containing 0.5% ChNF had relatively a high positive charge, but efficiencies of both materials for hemorrhage arrest were comparable to those of commercial hemostatic products (Surgicel and TachoComb). To investigate the interaction between the materials and living organism, histological studies and optical microscopy studies were conducted after implantation of fibers. Despite bioinertness of fibers, implantation of non-woven materials led to formation of significant granulomas.

### PMID 32695815 (2020) — BioMed research international
TITLE: Effectiveness of Gelatin-Thrombin Matrix Sealants (Floseal&#xae;) on Postoperative Spinal Epidural Hematoma during Single-Level Lumbar Decompression Using Biportal Endoscopic Spine Surgery: Clinical and Magnetic Resonance Image Study.
DOI: 10.1155/2020/4801641 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Symptomatic postoperative spinal epidural hematoma (PSEH) is a devastating complication that could develop after lumbar decompression surgery. PSEH can also develop after biportal endoscopic spine surgery (BESS), one of the recently introduced minimally invasive spine surgery techniques. Gelatin-thrombin matrix sealant (GTMS) is commonly used to prevent PSEH. This study aimed at analyzing the clinical and radiological effects of GTMS use during BESS.
METHODS: A total of 206 patients with spinal stenosis who underwent decompression by BESS through a posterior interlaminar approach from October 2015 to September 2018 were enrolled in this study. Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed in all patients for evaluation of PSEH. Patients in whom GTMS was not used during surgery were assigned to Group A, and those in whom GTMS was used were classified as Group B. In the clinical evaluation, the visual analog scale (VAS) of the leg and back, Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), and modified MacNab criteria were used. The incidence rate and degree of dural compression of PSEH on postoperative MRI were measured.
RESULTS: The average age of the patients was 68.1 &#xb1; 11.2 (42-89) years. The overall incidence rate of PSEH was 20.9% (43/206). The incidence rates in Groups A and B were 26.4% and 13.6%, respectively, showing a significant difference (p = 0.023). The VAS-leg and ODI improvement was significantly different depending on the intraoperative use of GTMS. However, there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups in terms of the VAS-back improvement. Groups A and B showed "good" and "excellent" rates according to the modified MacNab criteria in 79.4% and 87.6% of patients, respectively, showing statistically significant difference (p = 0.049). In Group A, two patients underwent revision surgery due to PSEH, while none in Group B had such event.
CONCLUSION: Intraoperative use of GTMS during BESS may be related to reduction in the occurrence rate of PSEH. Specifically, patients with GTMS appliance showed marked decrease in the occurrence of PSEH and had better clinical outcomes.

### PMID 32734638 (2020) — Clinical otolaryngology : official journal of ENT-UK ; official journal of Netherlands Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology &amp; Cervico-Facial Surgery
TITLE: Surgiflo&#xae; may have a potential impact on the healing process in cricotracheal resection anastomosis.
DOI: 10.1111/coa.13614 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the role of thrombin-based haemostatic agent Surgiflo&#xae; (Ethicon) in improving the outcome of cricotracheal resection anastomosis.
DESIGN: Randomised controlled clinical trial.
SETTING: Otorhinolaryngology Department, Mansoura University Hospitals, Egypt.
PARTICIPANTS: This study included 55 patients with grade III and IV subglottic and/or cervical tracheal stenosis, who underwent cricotracheal resection anastomosis. Patients were randomly assigned into two groups: Surgiflo group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;20) and control group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;35). In Surgiflo patients, Surgiflo&#xae; was applied at the end of surgery over the whole operative field including the line of airway anastomosis with the purpose of adequate haemostasis and enhancing healing of the anastomosis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The success rate and the incidence of complications in both groups were compared.
RESULTS: At the end of treatment, decannulation rate was 95% (19/20) in the Surgiflo groups and 82.8% (29/35) in the control group. The overall incidence of complications was significantly lower in the Surgiflo group (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.021). Need for further surgical airway interventions in the form of repeated dilatation, granulation tissue removal or performing a tracheotomy was reported in 22.9% (8/35) of control group patients, in comparison with 5% (1/20) in Surgiflo group.
CONCLUSION: Direct Surgiflo&#xae; application in the operative field enhances the anastomotic healing, decreases the incidence of anastomotic complications and subsequently improves the outcome. It can be recommended as an adjuvant to surgery in patients undergoing cricotracheal resection anastomosis.

### PMID 33447702 (2020) — European heart journal. Case reports
TITLE: Surgicel mimicking early onset prosthetic valve endocarditis: case report.
DOI: 10.1093/ehjcr/ytaa334 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Surgicel is one of the commercial forms of oxidized regenerated cellulose used as a bioabsorbable topical haemostatic agent during surgical procedures. However, its presence can mimic an abscess, tumour, lymph node or retained foreign body on imaging studies. The challenge in cardiac surgery is to differentiate the haemostatic material from an abscess that might be mistaken for an early onset prosthetic valve endocarditis.
CASE SUMMARY: A 56-year-old woman was admitted to our department for a suspicion of early onset prosthetic valve endocarditis after an aortic valve replacement. An early clinical and biological improvement, features on a chest computed tomography scan, as well as a surgical correlation were able to rectify the diagnosis. The acute fever was linked to urinary tract infection, whereas the periaortic echogenic mass shown at the transoesophageal echocardiography corresponded to Surgicel.
DISCUSSION: Oxidized regenerated cellulose can mimic an abscess on cardiac imaging, especially when used in excess during cardiac surgery. Fortunately, some radiographic features can help differentiate the haemostatic material from an abscess. Hence, sharing the use and location of Surgicel between the surgeon, radiologist, and cardiologist is very important and necessary to make the correct diagnosis.

### PMID 32577613 (2020) — Materials today. Bio
TITLE: Porcine mesothelium matrix as a biomaterial for wound healing applications.
DOI: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2020.100057 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The increasing economic burden of wound healing in healthcare systems requires the development of functional therapies. Xenografts with preserved extracellular matrix (ECM) structure and biofunctional components overcome major limitations of autografts and allografts (e.g. availability) and artificial biomaterials (e.g. foreign body response). Although porcine mesothelium is extensively used in clinical practice, it is under-investigated for wound healing applications. Herein, we compared the biochemical and biological properties of the only two commercially available porcine mesothelium grafts (Meso Biomatrix&#xae; and Puracol&#xae; Ultra ECM) to traditionally used wound healing grafts (Endoform&#x2122;, ovine forestomach and MatriStem&#xae;, porcine urinary bladder) and biomaterials (Promogran&#x2122;, collagen/oxidized regenerated cellulose). The Endoform&#x2122; and the Puracol&#xae; Ultra ECM showed the highest (p&lt;0.05) soluble collagen and elastin content. The MatriStem&#xae; had the highest (p&lt;0.05) basic fibroblast growth factor (FGFb) content, whereas the Meso Biomatrix&#xae; had the highest (p&lt;0.05) transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-&#x3b2;1) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) content. All materials showed tissue-specific structure and composition. The Endoform&#x2122; and the Meso Biomatrix&#xae; had some nuclei residual matter. All tissue grafts showed similar (p&gt;0.05) response to enzymatic degradation, whereas the Promogran&#x2122; was not completely degraded by matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-8 and was completely degraded by elastase. The Promogran&#x2122; showed the highest (p&lt;0.05) permeability to bacterial infiltration. The Promogran&#x2122; showed by far the lowest dermal fibroblast and THP-1 attachment and growth. All tested materials showed significantly lower (p&lt;0.05) tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-&#x3b1;) expression than the lipopolysaccharides group. The MatriStem&#xae; and the Puracol&#xae; Ultra ECM promoted the highest (p&lt;0.05) number of micro-vessel formation, whereas the Promogran&#x2122; the lowest (p&lt;0.05). Collectively, these data confer that porcine mesothelium has the potential to be used as a wound healing material, considering its composition, resistance to enzymatic degradation, cytocompatibility, and angiogenic potential.

### PMID 32055465 (2020) — Translational andrology and urology
TITLE: An update on oxidized regenerated cellulose (fibrillar&#x2122;) in reducing postoperative corporal bleeding following inflatable penile prosthesis surgery.
DOI: 10.21037/tau.2019.08.05 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Scrotal hematoma formation is a dreaded complication of penile prosthesis surgery that increases patient pain and healthcare costs, as well the risk for eventual device infection and failure. The efficacy of hemostatic agents in reducing the incidence of scrotal hematoma development has not been extensively studied in urologic prosthetic surgery. In this paper we further evaluate our experience with oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC; Surgicel Fibrillar&#x2122;) as an adjunct to standard hemostatic practices in inflatable penile prosthesis (IPP) implantation.
METHODS: From April 2016 onward, intracorporal ORC pledgets were placed during corporotomy closure in all patients undergoing IPP implantation or revision by a single surgeon using an identical surgical technique. Perioperative parameters and outcomes-primarily postoperative cumulative drain output, secondarily patient phone calls in the postoperative period-were compared among successive cases with ORC (April 2016 to February 2019) and without ORC (April 2013 to March 2016).
RESULTS: A total of 274 men underwent IPP implantation during the study period; 175 (64%) had ORC included in their corporotomy closures. Median drain output was significantly reduced in the ORC patients relative to the non-ORC group (50 vs. 65 mL; P=0.0001). A significant reduction in patient-initiated phone calls regarding scrotal pain, swelling, or discomfort in the first 4 weeks following surgery was also observed in the ORC group (average 0.69 vs. 1.1 calls per patient; P=0.03). A total of 9 patients underwent IPP explantation during the study period, all due to device infection; 5 of these were in the ORC group, while 4 were in the non-ORC group (P=0.73). ORC use did not constitute any additional infection risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Bilateral incorporation of ORC pledgets during corporotomy closure in IPP surgery significantly decreases postoperative scrotal drain output, a well-documented risk factor for scrotal hematoma formation.

### PMID 33070884 (2020) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue as a dural sealant in cranial and spinal surgery. A technical note with a review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2020.07.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: A major complication in cranial and spinal surgery is the post-operative occurrence of a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak. Here we reported a technical note firstly describing the use of Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue as a dural sealant in cranial and spinal neurosurgical procedures. Moreover we carried out a review of the literature. Further to the best of our knowledge this was the first series including patients submitted to different spinal surgeries in whom Hemopatch&#xae; was used as dural sealant. We prospectively collected the data of 22 patients. In all procedures, fibrin glue was applied after Hemopatch&#xae;. The mean age was 59.68&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;10.79&#xa0;years and the mean follow-up (FU) was 3.63&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;1.46&#xa0;months, respectively. Overall, Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue was used in 8 cranial procedures (36.36%; all were retrosigmoid craniotomies) and 14 spinal procedures (63.64%). 9/14 spinal cases (64.28%) were incidental durotomies during a spinal decompression procedure. No CSF leak, no postoperative infection, no adverse reaction were observed during the FU in all cases. The literature search revealed only two retrospective series, reporting only patients submitted to cranial surgery for a total of 56 patients and a CSF leak occurring in 3 patients (5.35%). In conclusion, we firstly reported the feasibility and the safety of using Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue as dural sealant in cranial surgery and different spinal procedures. Further larger comparative studies are needed to confirm our initial encouraging results.

### PMID 32664170 (2020) — Medicine
TITLE: Fatal vascular complications during transradial percutaneous coronary intervention: A case report.
DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000021205 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: RATIONALE: Vascular complications of transradial percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) are rare and usually occur at the access site below the elbow. However, vessels along the tract of the wire or catheter can be injured at any point, causing various types of bleeding complications.
PATIENT CONCERNS: A 57-year-old man visited due to chest discomfort. Coronary angiography showed significant stenosis at the distal right coronary artery (RCA). Immediately after the coronary guidewire was passed through the distal RCA, he started a vigorous cough. The voice changed, dyspnea occurred within minutes, and lip cyanosis and stridor were observed. After endotracheal intubation, successful stenting of the distal RCA was achieved. He was extubated at 30&#x200a;minutes after coronary stenting, but 1-hour post-extubation, his blood pressure suddenly decreased to 70/50 mmHg.
DIAGNOSIS: Mediastinal widening was newly noted on chest X-ray, and blood hemoglobin was decreased. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography showed mediastinal hematoma, tracheal compression, and hemothorax. Contrast extravasation was noted in the terminal branches of the inferior thyroid artery on brachiocephalic angiography.
INTERVENTIONS: Successful hemostasis was achieved with endovascular embolization therapy using a Tornado embolization microcoil, Gelfoam gelatin sponge, and Histoacryl glue. The next day, the mediastinal hemorrhage was drained by mediastinoscopy. The endotracheal intubation and ventilator care were maintained for 2 days, and 6 units of packed red blood cells were transfused. Antithrombotics were used to prevent stent thrombosis, and antibiotics to control infection, respectively.
OUTCOMES: After successful hemostasis, thrombocytosis and high on-treatment platelet reactivity that disappeared at 2 weeks post-discharge were noted. Follow-up chest imaging showed the normalized mediastinal widening. At 14 months post-discharge, the patient remains healthy.
LESSONS: As life-threating vascular complications, such as brachiocephalic, subclavian vessel dissection, and vessel perforation in the internal mammary, costocervical, and thyrocervical arteries, can occur anytime during transradial PCI, the intervention cardiologist should be well aware of it and have the appropriate countermeasures implemented in the routine procedure.

### PMID 32634637 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Gelfoam Migration: A Potential Cause of Recurrent Hydrocephalus.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.06.214 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Gelfoam is a simple and effective hemostatic agent that is used to seal brain corticotomies or skull burr holes. Owing to its low cost, it is one of the most widely used tools in neurosurgical daily practice. However, migration of Gelfoam fragments can cause occlusion of endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) or shunt, leading to hydrocephalus recurrence.
CASE DESCRIPTION: Two cases of Gelfoam migration causing recurrent hydrocephalus are presented: a 12-year-old girl who underwent surgery for posterior fossa tumor removal and ETV for associated hydrocephalus, where a portion of Gelfoam (used to seal the burr hole) migrated up to close the ETV, and a preterm 8-month-old boy who was treated by neuroendoscopic brain lavage and afterward by ventriculoperitoneal shunt for posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus, where all the Gelfoam used to close the corticotomy migrated into the lateral ventricle, thus reopening the corticotomy and releasing small fragments that ultimately obstructed the shunt. A new endoscopic procedure was required in both patients (the second patient also required a shunt revision).
CONCLUSIONS: Review of the pertinent literature discloses other complications of Gelfoam migration (e.g., mass effect, granulomatous reaction) as well as other causes of uncommon ETV/shunt obstruction. Nonetheless, Gelfoam will remain an indispensable tool for neurosurgeons. The present report emphasizes the importance of its correct use to avoid complications.

### PMID 32201390 (2020) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Two Cases of Late-onset Brain Edema after Craniotomy for Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms Suspected to be due to an Allergic Reaction to Arachnoid Plasty Material].
DOI: 10.11477/mf.1436204165 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report two rare cases of late-onset brain edema after craniotomy for clipping or coating of unruptured intracranial aneurysms, possibly due to an allergic reaction to topically applied fibrin glue or gelatin sponge used for arachnoid plasty to cover the opened sylvian cistern. Both patients were women in their 60s with an allergic predisposition and both followed a similar clinical course. A slight fever and headache persisted during the postoperative period. Five to six weeks after surgery without complications, MR images showed an extensive T2 prolongated region in the white matter around the operative field, indicative of vasogenic edema, with mass effect and meningeal enhancement around the sylvian fissure that had been covered with gelatin sponge and sprayed fibrin glue. Swelling of the cerebral cortex around the sylvian fissure subjected to arachnoid plasty was also observed. Blood tests showed the absence of an inflammatory reaction and cerebrospinal fluid examination showed lymphocytosis that was considered to be due to an aseptic meningeal reaction or meningitis. Clinical symptoms and imaging findings steadily improved with the administration of steroids and antiallergic agents. Delayed brain edema may occur around the arachnoid plasty area despite an uneventful chronic postoperative period, which could be due to an allergic reaction to locally administered fibrin glue or gelatin sponge. Thus, the application of arachnoid plasty using fibrin glue and gelatin sponge in patients with a predisposition to allergies needs to be carefully considered.

### PMID 32101860 (2020) — Stereotactic and functional neurosurgery
TITLE: Microvascular Decompression Alone without Rhizotomy Is an Effective Way of Treating Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia: Clinical Analysis of 46 Cases.
DOI: 10.1159/000505712 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Microvascular decompression (MVD) has been the right choice for glossopharyngeal neuralgia (GPN) patients. However, whether glossopharyngeal/vagal nerve root rhizotomy should be combined with MVD is still controversial.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate whether glossopharyngeal/vagal nerve root rhizotomy during MVD is necessary for the treatment of GPN.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective study of 46 GPN patients who underwent MVD surgery alone in our hospital, and their patient demographics, clinical presentations, and intraoperative findings are shown. The immediate and long-term follow-up outcomes were investigated to show the treatment's efficiency and safety; the outcome was also compared with our previous study. The relevant literature was reviewed to show complications for GPN patients undergoing glossopharyngeal/vagal nerve root rhizotomy with MVD.
RESULTS: The most common offending vessel was the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (60.9%). 100% of the patients were pain-free (score of I on the Barrow Neurological Institute pain intensity [BNI-P] scale) immediately after MVD surgery, while 1 patient relapsed with occasional pain 12 months after the operation (score of III on the BNI-P scale). Poor wound healing and hearing loss were found in 1 case each. No complications related to the glossopharyngeal nerve/vagal nerve were reported. Some surgical techniques, such as thorough exploration of the CN IX-X rootlets, full freeing from arachnoid adhesions, and usage of a moist gelatin sponge, can improve the success rate of the operation.
CONCLUSIONS: MVD alone without rhizotomy is an effective and safe method for patients with GPN.

### PMID 32035204 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: A Rare Case of Fatal Pulmonary Embolism in a Pediatric Spine Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.01.225 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An 11-year-old girl had undergone posterior spinal fusion surgery for scoliosis. The surgery was complicated by intraoperative bleeding, and hemostasis was achieved by topically applying gelatin sponges.
CASE DESCRIPTION: She developed acute pulmonary embolism and cardiac arrest during the surgery, which was confirmed by transesophageal echocardiography.
CONCLUSIONS: Autopsy shortly after revealed that her death was associated with unintended intravascular entry of gelatin sponge fragments, resulting in an embolic event and secondary cardiopulmonary collapse.

### PMID 31689570 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Treatment of Typical Enneking Stage 3 Thoracic Aggressive Vertebral Hemangiomas with Pain and Neurologic Deficits: Results After at Least 36 Months of Follow-Up.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2019.10.158 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficiency of a comprehensive treatment strategy for patients with Enneking stage 3 thoracic aggressive vertebral hemangioma (AVH).
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of radiographic and clinical outcomes was performed for 17 patients who received treatment for Enneking stage 3 thoracic AVH accompanied by pain and neurologic deficits between January 2010 and February 2015. A visual analog scale (VAS) was used to clinically evaluate the level of pain. Neurologic examinations were performed to assess the patients' sensory symptoms, motor deficits, and Frankel grade.
RESULTS: The average operative time was 181.8 &#xb1; 37.1 minutes, and the average intraoperative blood loss was 1226.5 &#xb1; 151.2 mL (range, 900-1450 mL). All patients underwent preoperative embolization to minimize intraoperative blood loss. All patients experienced immediate pain relief and resolution of their neurologic symptoms. All 17 patients achieved Frankel grade D at the final follow-up; moreover, they reported that their pain was relieved (mean VAS score, 2.82 &#xb1; 0.81; P &lt; 0.05) and their neurologic deficits had resolved. No surgery-related complications were noted. No patients exhibited signs of recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: We recommend a comprehensive treatment strategy for patients with Enneking stage 3 thoracic AVH that includes preoperative embolization, vertebroplasty, posterior decompression, and internal fixation. We recommend that absorbable gelatin sponge particles be used for intraoperative embolization prior to the injection of bone cement, which may significantly reduce intraoperative bleeding, operative time, and occurrence of surgery-related complications.

### PMID 32449469 (2020) — Therapeutic advances in cardiovascular disease
TITLE: Antithrombotic and hemostatic stewardship: evaluation of clinical outcomes and adverse events of recombinant factor VIIa (Novoseven&#xae;) utilization at a large academic medical center.
DOI: 10.1177/1753944720924255 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) (Novoseven&#xae;) is utilized for the reversal of anticoagulation-associated bleeding and refractory bleeding in cardiac surgery. In August 2015, rFVIIa was transferred from the blood bank to the pharmacy at New York University (NYU) Langone Health. Concordantly, an off-label dosing guideline was developed. The objective of this study was to describe utilization and cost of rFVIIa and assess compliance to our dosing guideline.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective, observational review of rFVIIa administrations post-implementation of an off-label dosing guideline. All patients who received rFVIIa between September 2015 and June 2017 were evaluated. For each rFVIIa administration, anticoagulation and laboratory values, indications for use, dosing, ordering and administration times, concomitant blood products, and adverse events were collected. Adverse events included venous thromboembolism, stroke, myocardial infarction, and death due to systemic embolism and mortality. The primary endpoint was the utilization of rFVIIa in accordance with the off-label dosing guideline. Secondary endpoints included hemostatic efficacy of rFVIIa, adverse events, blood products administered, and cost-effectiveness of rFVIIa transition to pharmacy.
RESULTS: A total of 63 patients [pediatric (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6), adult (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;57)] received rFVIIa, with the majority of use for refractory bleeding after cardiac surgery. The utilization of rVIIa decreased after development of the off-label dosing guideline and transition from blood bank to pharmacy. The total incidence of thromboembolic events within 30 days was 19.6%; 17.6% arterial and 2% venous; 70% of patients with an adverse event were over 70 years of age. Use of rFVIIa reduced the median number of units of blood products administered.
CONCLUSION: Administration of rFVIIa for cardiac surgery appears to be effective for hemostasis. Transitioning rFVIIa from the blood bank to pharmacy and implementation of a dosing guideline appears to have reduced utilization. Patients receiving rFVIIa should be monitored for thromboembolic events. Elderly patients may be at higher risk for thromboembolic events.

### PMID 35118305 (2020) — Mediastinum (Hong Kong, China)
TITLE: Management of vascular injury during VATS lobectomy with hemostatic matrix sealant agent: a case report.
DOI: 10.21037/med-20-45 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Vascular injury is the most dreadful complication during a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) lobectomy and often lead to conversion to thoracotomy. While the rate of this event considerably drops with the progression on surgical team's learning curve, however, it is always useful to have an emergency plan to deal with it. The repairing approaches described in literature are mostly based on suction-compression angiorrhaphy technique (SCAT), involving a suture on the damaged vessels. In our case-report we display a good alternative to SCAT when we are dealing with small size lesions, without resorting to conversion. A 63-year-old with lung adenocarcinoma underwent a right upper VATS lobectomy: during the procedure, an iatrogenic lesion to intrascissural upper lobe artery occurred. We made use of suction and compression but, instead of performing a suture on the vessel, we applied hemostatic matrix sealant agent. The bleeding was effectively stopped and the wound sealed, allowing us to safely carry out the lobectomy without conversion to thoracotomy. No post-operative complications were highlighted and the patient was still alive after 6 months since the procedure. Our approach could be a useful addition to techniques already described and could be easily executed by surgeons still in learning curve. This is the first case of vascular injury managed specifically with only hemostatic matrix sealant agent described in literature and it has proven effective as well as the angiorrhaphy technique when it comes to small size artery lesions. Thanks to the easiness of sealant application, execution time of our method is shorter than a more complex repair in VATS, allowing inexperienced surgeons to fix the injury with little effort.

### PMID 32352902 (2020) — Innovations (Philadelphia, Pa.)
TITLE: A Novel Technique for the Management of Massive Hemoptysis: The Customized Endobronchial Silicone Blocker.
DOI: 10.1177/1556984520904351 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Massive hemoptysis (MH) has a high mortality rate. Therapeutic options include bronchoscopy for endobronchial lesions, bronchial artery embolization (BAE), and emergency surgery. Scant options exist for patients who are not candidates for these modalities. Culprit bronchial segment occlusion is an option to prevent "spillover flooding &#x2192; hypoxia." Applying this concept, we describe a case series of MH control using a novel bronchoscopically inserted customized endobronchial silicone blocker (CESB). We analyzed the safety and efficacy of CESBs in a select subset of patients with MH.
METHODS: Inclusion criteria were patients with MH who were unstable for surgery/BAE, failed BAE, or relatively contraindicated/refused BAE. CESBs were manufactured on-site by modifying silicone stents, inserted using rigid bronchoscopy and reinforced with glue. The CESB was removed after 6 weeks when possible. A successful outcome was defined as immediate bleeding control with no recurrence after removal.
RESULTS: Over 4.5 years, 13 episodes of MH in 12 patients meeting the criteria specified earlier were treated with CESBs. Seven of 12 patients had tuberculosis, 4 active and 3 inactive. One patient had mucormycosis, 1 post-lobectomy, 1 endobronchial renal cell carcinoma, 1 fibrosing mediastinitis, and 1 patient had metastatic laryngeal Ca. Eight of 12 patients were taken for primary-CESB placement. Four of 12 patients were sent for BAE, which was unsuccessful, and rescue-CESB was done for definitive management. The success rate, as defined earlier, was 92.3%, with no deaths from MH.
CONCLUSIONS: Innovative bronchoscopically inserted CESBs are an effective strategy in MH when patients are unstable or fail conventional management.

### PMID 31401042 (2020) — Clinics and research in hepatology and gastroenterology
TITLE: Acute pericarditis: A rare complication of gastric variceal obturation with cyanoacrylate glue.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clinre.2019.06.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Endoscopic obturation by cyanoacrylate glue is currently the treatment of reference of gastric varices bleeding in patients with portal hypertension with a good efficacy for bleeding control and secondary prophylaxis. However, several adverse events related to this treatment have been described including immediate rebleeding and glue embolism. Here we present a case of gastric variceal obturation by cyanoacrylate inducing an acute pericarditis due to glue embolism in mediastinal, pericardial and phrenic veins that was managed conservatively. We also discussed pathophysiological explanations and surveillance modality.

### PMID 32983675 (2020) — Cureus
TITLE: Successful Management of Life-threatening Pelvic Hemorrhage From Acquired Factor V Deficiency With immunosuppressive Therapy.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.9972 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Acquired Factor V deficiency is a rare and challenging condition to treat. It has been associated with major surgeries, antibiotics, blood transfusions, infections, autoimmune disorders, malignancy and exposure to bovine thrombin. The clinical presentation can be heterogeneous and can manifest as asymptomatic laboratory abnormalities to fatal hemorrhage with mortality rates around 15-20% . We report a case of acquired factor V deficiency in which the patient developed a life-threatening bleeding coagulopathy with elevated prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time and factor V inhibitor titers following multiple surgical procedures that were performed after a motor vehicle accident. The patient was successfully treated with immunosuppressive therapy including steroids and cyclophosphamide resulting in the complete elimination of inhibitor levels.

### PMID 32963920 (2020) — Cureus
TITLE: Intraoperative Anaphylaxis in Response to Hemostatic Agents With Protein Derivatives.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.9881 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic agents are commonly used in a wide variety of surgical procedures to assist in hemostasis. However, the use of these agents is not without risk as many contain biologically active agents derived from human and animal products that have the potential to cause adverse reactions. This case report covers a 44-year-old man with a history of alpha-gal syndrome who was scheduled for an open reduction and internal fixation of a left distal radius fracture. Alpha-gal syndrome is characterized by an IgE-mediated type 1 hypersensitivity reaction to a mammalian oligosaccharide epitope. Patients with this condition have a history of a past tick bite and subsequent development of an allergic reaction to mammalian protein products, most notably red meat. The patient had concerns about products used during surgery and potential reactions based on his allergy. The intent of this case report is to promote physician awareness of the widespread use of mammalian products in surgical hemostatic agents and potential immunogenic reactions. By increasing awareness of the alpha-gal syndrome, the goal is that medical device companies will actively disclose product components that could potentiate these adverse reactions and continue to develop alternative agents.

### PMID 32874809 (2020) — Cureus
TITLE: Acquired Factor V Inhibitor After Antibiotic Therapy: A Clinical Case Report and Review of the Literature.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.9481 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Acquired factor V inhibitor (aFVi) is an exceptionally rare hematologic condition that can range from incidental laboratory abnormalities to life-threatening hemorrhage. Bovine thrombin was formerly the most common cause of this condition; however, the decreased use of bovine thrombin in surgical procedures has led to a shift in the cause of aFVi toward antibiotic use and malignancies. Here we present a case of an 80-year-old Caucasian female on long-term warfarin therapy who presented with epistaxis and an elevated international normalized ratio, and a history of cephalosporin antibiotic use. We review the published literature beginning in 2016 to identify the evolving causes of aFVi. Additionally, we propose that stress-mediated immune regulation may contribute to antibody formation, preventing the interaction between factor V and the damaged phospholipid membranes. This case highlights the evolving causes of aFVi and should prompt physicians to consider this diagnosis in coagulopathies that do not correct with traditional therapies.

### PMID 32818017 (2020) — Molecular vision
TITLE: Thrombin alters the synthesis and processing of CYR61/CCN1 in human corneal stromal fibroblasts and myofibroblasts through multiple distinct mechanisms.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Previous research in our laboratory indicated that prothrombin and other coagulation enzymes required to activate prothrombin to thrombin are synthesized by the cornea and that apoptotic human corneal stromal cells can provide a surface for prothrombin activation through the intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways. The purpose of the work reported here is to study the role of thrombin activity in the regulation of matricellular protein Cyr61 (CCN1) produced by wounded phenotype human corneal stromal fibroblasts and myofibroblasts.
METHODS: Stromal cells from human donor corneas were converted to defined wounded phenotype fibroblasts and myofibroblasts with fetal bovine serum, followed by basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF&#x3b2;-1), respectively, and stimulated with varying concentrations (0-10.0 units (U)/ml) of thrombin from 1-7 h. Cyr61 transcript levels were determined using reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) and quantitative PCR (qPCR) while protein forms were analyzed using western blot data. Protease activities were characterized via protease class-specific inhibitors and western blot analysis. Thrombin activity was quantified using the fluorogenic peptide Phe-Pro-Arg-AFC. Protease-activated receptor (PAR) agonist peptides-1 and -4 were used to determine whether cells increased Cyr61 through PAR signaling pathways. The PAR-1 antagonist SCH 79797 was used to block the thrombin cleavage of the receptor. PCR data were analyzed using MxPro software and western blot data were analyzed using Image Lab&#x2122; and Image J software. Student t test and one- and two-way ANOVA (with or without ranking, depending on sample distribution), together with Dunnett's test or Tukey comparison tests for post-hoc analysis, were used to determine statistical significance.
UNLABELLED: Results: Full-length Cyr61 is expressed by human corneal stromal fibroblasts and myofibroblasts and is significantly upregulated by active thrombin stimulation at the message (p&lt;0.03) and protein (p&lt;0.03) levels for fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. Inhibition by the allosteric thrombin-specific inhibitor hirudin prevented the thrombin-associated increase in the Cyr61 protein expression, indicating that the proteolytic activity of thrombin is required for the increase of the Cyr61 protein level. PAR-1 agonist stimulation of fibroblasts and myofibroblasts significantly increased cell-associated Cyr61 protein levels (p&lt;0.04), and PAR-1 antagonist SCH 79797 significantly inhibited the thrombin stimulated increase of Cyr61 in fibroblasts but not in myofibroblasts. In the fibroblast and myofibroblast conditioned media, Cyr61 was detected as the full-length 40&#xa0;kDa protein in the absence of thrombin, and mainly at 24&#xa0;kDa in the presence of thrombin at &#x2265;0.5 U/ml, using an antibody directed toward the internal linker region between the von Willebrand factor type C and thrombospondin type-1 domains. Although known to undergo alternative splicing, Cyr61 that is synthesized by corneal fibroblasts and myofibroblasts is not alternatively spliced in response to thrombin stimulation nor is Cyr61 directly cleaved by thrombin to generate its 24&#xa0;kDa form; instead, Cyr61 is proteolytically processed into 24&#xa0;kDa N- and 16&#xa0;kDa C-terminal fragments by a thrombin activated leupeptin-sensitive protease present in conditioned media with activity distinct from the proteolytic activity of thrombin.
CONCLUSIONS: In cultured human corneal stromal fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, thrombin regulates Cyr61 through two mechanisms: 1) thrombin increases the Cyr61 expression at the message and protein levels, and 2) thrombin increases the activation of a leupeptin-sensitive protease that stimulates the cleavage of Cyr61 into N- and C-terminal domain populations in or near the thrombospondin type-1 domain. Generation of Cyr61 peptides during corneal injury stimulation may reveal additional functions of the protein, which modulate corneal wound healing activities or decrease activities of the full-length Cyr61 form.

### PMID 32016928 (2020) — Thrombosis and haemostasis
TITLE: Effect of Tranexamic Acid on Coagulation and Fibrin Clot Properties in Children Undergoing Craniofacial Surgery.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-3402762 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: &#x2003;Craniosynostosis surgery in small children is very often associated with a high blood loss. Tranexamic acid (TXA) reduces blood loss during this procedure, although the potential underlying coagulopathy in these children is not known in detail. Objective was to determine the nature of any coagulopathy found during and after craniosynostosis surgery and to characterize the effect of TXA on fibrin clot formation, clot strength, and fibrinolysis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: &#x2003;Thirty children received either TXA (bolus dose of 10&#x2009;mg/kg followed by 8&#x2009;hours continuous infusion of 3&#x2009;mg/kg/h) or placebo. Dynamic whole blood clot formation assessed by thromboelastometry, platelet count, dynamic thrombin generation/thrombin-antithrombin, clot lysis assay, and fibrinogen/factor XIII (FXIII) levels were measured. Additionally, clot structure was investigated by real-time live confocal microscopy and topical data analysis.
RESULTS: &#x2003;Increased ability of thrombin generation was observed together with a tendency toward shortened activated partial thromboplastin time and clotting time. Postoperative maximum clot firmness was higher among children receiving TXA. FXIII decreased significantly during surgery in both groups.Resistance toward tissue plasminogen activator-induced fibrinolysis was higher in children that received TXA, as evidenced by topical data analysis and by a significant longer lysis time. Fibrinogen levels were higher in the TXA group at 24&#x2009;hours.
CONCLUSION: &#x2003;A significant coagulopathy mainly characterized by changes in clot stability and not parameters of thrombin generation was reported. Tranexamic acid improved clot strength and reduced fibrinolysis, thereby avoiding reduction in fibrinogen levels.

### PMID 32758653 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Gas Embolism After Hydrogen Peroxide Use During Spine Surgery: Case Report and Literature Review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.07.210 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: As an irrigant, an antiseptic, and a hemostatic agent, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is widely used in surgical treatment, but it has been surrounded by persistent controversy. Fatal or near-fatal embolic events caused by H2O2 have been reported sporadically in spine surgery.
CASE DESCRIPTION: In this report, we present an 87-year-old man who underwent lumbar instrumentation removal and debridement consequent to surgical site infection in a prone position. H2O2 was used to irrigate the infected screw tracks and surrounding tissues during the procedures. Soon after irrigation, the patient suddenly developed tachycardia, hypotension, and rapid oxygen desaturation, followed by bradycardia. Transesophageal echocardiography indicated gas embolism. After prompt first aid treatment, the patient's condition improved and the gas embolus disappeared within a few minutes without any evidence of organ embolism.
CONCLUSIONS: Spine surgeons should reconsider the pending results of using H2O2 during surgery. Prolonged prone positioning and semiclosed cavities may increase the risk of gas embolism. An early diagnosis and timely intervention may be the key measures to prevent the occurrence of fatal consequences caused by gas embolism.

### PMID 31626024 (2020) — The journal of trauma and acute care surgery
TITLE: A comprehensive review of topical hemostatic agents: The good, the bad, and the novel.
DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000002508 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Uncontrolled exsanguination remains the leading cause of death for trauma patients, many of whom die in the pre-hospital setting. Without expedient intervention, trauma-associated hemorrhage induces a host of systemic responses and acute coagulopathy of trauma. For this reason, health care providers and prehospital personal face the challenge of swift and effective hemorrhage control. The utilization of adjuncts to facilitate hemostasis was first recorded in 1886. Commercially available products haves since expanded to include topical hemostats, surgical sealants, and adhesives. The ideal product balances efficacy, with safety practicality and cost-effectiveness. This review of hemostasis provides a guide for successful implementation and simultaneously highlights future opportunities.

### PMID 31139494 (2019) — American journal of stem cells
TITLE: Histopathological evaluation of mesenchymal stem cells in the healing of anastomosed carotid arteries.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The objective of this study was to evaluate the influence of mesenchymal stem cells on the healing of experimental carotid artery anastomoses histopathologically. Twenty-four female Sprague-Dawley rats were used in this study. After random separation of the subjects into two groups, in both groups carotid arteries were transected and anastomosed in end-to-end fashion. Anastomoses were locally treated with 1 ml 0.09% NaCl, and 1 ml mesenchymal stem cell suspension (1&#xd7;106 cells) in control and trial groups, respectively. Anastomoses were wrapped with an 8 mm sheet of surgicel and soaked with BioGlue in order to sequestrate the stem cells. After patencies were confirmed via Doppler USG, surgical site was closed with 2/0 silk sutures. Histopathological evaluation was carried out after 4 weeks. In respect to endothelial continuity, vessel patency (along with presence or absence of restenosis), integrities of internal and external elastic laminae, muscularis and adventitia; no statistically significant differences were present between the trial and control groups. In Trial and Control Groups, luminal thrombus was present in 8 (66.6%) and 3 (25%) of the 12 subjects, respectively. The difference was statistically significant (P &lt; 0.05). Recanalization was present in 6 subjects in trial group; 1 subjects in Control Group, respectively. Our results suggest that local administration of mesenchyme stem cell does not have a positive influence on success of an anastomosis.

### PMID 30274840 (2019) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Cytocompatibility and mechanical properties of surgical sealants for cardiovascular applications.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2018.08.043 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The present study compared physical, mechanical, and biologic characteristics of 4 clinically available surgical sealants for cardiovascular repair.
METHODS: BioGlue (Cryolife Inc, Kennesaw, Ga), PreveLeak (Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals, St Louis, Mo), Tridyne VS (BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ), and Coseal (Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Westlake Village, Calif) were compared for the following properties: hydrated swelling, cytocompatibility, burst strength, biaxial stretching (elasticity), and in&#xa0;vitro degradation.
RESULTS: Sealants showed a wide range of swelling upon hydration. By gravimetric and volumetric measurement, swelling was greatest for Coseal followed by Tridyne VS, BioGlue, and PreveLeak. Tridyne VS was the most cytocompatible based on Alamar Blue assay results, supporting 85% cell survival compared with 36% to 39% survival with the other sealants. All sealants withstood pressure above mean arterial pressure (70-110&#xa0;mm Hg) and physiologic systolic blood pressure (90-140&#xa0;mm Hg) in an ex&#xa0;vivo arterial flow burst model; lowest peak pressure at failure was PreveLeak at 235&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;48&#xa0;mm Hg, and highest peak pressure at failure was BioGlue at 596&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;72&#xa0;mm Hg. Biaxial tensile testing showed no differences in elasticity between ex&#xa0;vivo porcine aorta and carotid arteries and Tridyne VS or Coseal, and BioGlue and PreveLeak were significantly stiffer. In&#xa0;vitro degradation time for Coseal was 6&#xa0;days and 21&#xa0;days for Tridyne VS. No degradation was observed in BioGlue or PreveLeak for 30&#xa0;days.
CONCLUSIONS: Although all sealants withstood supraphysiologic arterial pressure, there were differences in characteristics that may be important in clinical outcome. Coseal degradation time was short compared with other sealants, whereas BioGlue and PreveLeak showed a significant compliance mismatch with native porcine carotid artery. Tridyne VS was significantly more cytocompatible than the other 3 sealants.

### PMID 30058475 (2019) — Seminars in cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Combined Use of a Fiberscope and Fuji Uniblocker for Removal of Retained Bronchial Tissue Glue After Repair of a Disrupted Left Main Bronchus.
DOI: 10.1177/1089253218792056 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe the novel combined use of a fiberoptic bronchoscope and a Fuji Uniblocker placed outside the endotracheal tube (ETT) for removal of a retained BioGlue polymerized tissue fragment (2.8 &#xd7; 0.8 cm) from the right main bronchus (RMB). The patient was a trauma victim who presented with a diffuse axonal injury, cervical spine and maxillofacial injuries, and a flail chest, and the procedure we describe took place following the surgical repair of a disrupted left main bronchus. Endoscopic retrieval using different sizes of grasping forceps and a Dormia basket failed to remove the foreign body (FB). Under combined GlideScope videolaryngoscopic and bronchoscopic guidance, a 9.0 F Uniblocker was introduced outside the ETT, placed into the RMB beyond the FB, initially inflated, and then gradually increased in volume during withdrawal from the RMB into the trachea so as to trap the FB between the tip of the ETT and the blocker balloon. The ETT, bronchoscope, blocker catheter, and the FB were then removed from the glottis as a single unit. The FB was then removed using Magill forceps with the aid of a GlideScope. We conclude that the combined use of a GlideScope, bronchoscope, and an Uniblocker placed outside the ETT can be an effective method for removal of a retained FB.

### PMID 31327584 (2019) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Fibrin glue as an adjuvant dural sealant reduces the rate of perioperative complications in posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty: A single center experience in 165 adult Chiari I patients.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2019.07.036 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 31596530 (2019) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: Percutaneous embolization of lymphatic fistulae as treatment for protein-losing enteropathy and plastic bronchitis in patients with failing Fontan circulation.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.28501 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To determine the feasibility and clinical result of selective embolization of hepatoduodenal or paratracheal lymphatics in Fontan patients with protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) or plastic bronchitis (PB).
METHODS: Dilated lymph vessels in periportal (PLE) or paratracheal (PB) position were percutaneously punctured with a 22G Chiba needle. Intralymphatic position was confirmed by water soluble contrast injection with drainage to hepatoduodenal or tracheal fistulae. After flushing with 10% glucose solution, occlusion of hepatoduodenal or paratreacheal lymphatics was effected by injection of 1-4 cc mixture 4/1 of Lipiodol/n-butyl cyanoacrylate (n-BCA; Histoacryl).
RESULTS: Seven patients with proven PLE were treated with periportal lymphatic embolization 10.7 (range: 6.6-13.5) years after the Fontan operation. The Fontan operation was performed at a median age of 3.7 (range: 2.9-5.7) years and PLE started a median of 3.1 (range: 0.9-4.7) years later. Five patients required a second procedure 2-8 months later. Complications were limited (spillage of glue in portal branch, transient cholangitis, and caustic duodenal bleeding). Six of seven patients reported significant improvement in quality of life and normalization of albumin levels after limited follow-up (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.01). One patient (Fontan at 2.9&#x2009;years; age 16.4&#x2009;years) had PB for 2&#x2009;years. Selective transthoracic cone-beam-directed puncture of left and right paratracheal lymphatics with n-BCA embolization of distal lymphatic fistulae resulted in lasting absence of tracheal casts (11&#x2009;months).
CONCLUSIONS: Embolization of periportal/peritracheal lymphatics is a promising technique in Fontan patients with PLE/PB. Larger series are required to determine incidence and reasons of success/failure, with long-term results and effects on liver function.

### PMID 31525826 (2019) — Lymphology
TITLE: Percutaneous fluoroscopically-guided transcervical retrograde access facilitates successful thoracic duct embolization after failed antegrade transabdominal access.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The purpose of this study was to demonstrate the feasibility of percutaneous fluoroscopically-guided transcervical retrograde access into the thoracic duct following unsuccessful transabdominal cisterna chyli cannulation to perform thoracic duct embolization for the treatment of chylothorax. Five patients, including three (60%) women and two (40%) men, with median age of 62 years, underwent percutaneous transcervical thoracic duct access and embolization after failed transabdominal cisterna chyli cannulation for the treatment of chylothorax. In all patients, fluoroscopically-guided percutaneous transcervical retrograde access into the distal thoracic duct was achieved using a 21-gauge needle and an 0.018-inch wire. Following advancement of a microcatheter, retrograde lymphangiography was performed to identify the location of thoracic duct injury. A combination of 2:1 ethiodized oil to cyanoacrylate mixtures, platinum microcoils, or stent-grafts were used to treat the chylous leaks. Technical successes, procedure durations, fluoroscopy times, blood losses, immediate adverse events, clinical successes, and follow-up durations were recorded. Technical success was defined as cannulation of the distal thoracic duct using a transcervical approach followed by treatment of the thoracic duct injury. Adverse events were classified according to the Society of Interventional Radiology guidelines. Clinical success was defined as resolution of the presenting chylothorax. Percutaneous transcervical retrograde thoracic duct access and treatment was technically successful in all patients (n=5). Median procedure duration was 173 minutes (range: 136-347 minutes) with a median fluoroscopy time of 94.7 minutes (range: 47-125 minutes). Median blood loss was 10 mL (range: 5-20 mL). No minor or major adverse occurred. Clinical success was achieved in all patients (n=5). Median follow-up was 372 days (range: 67-661 days). Percutaneous fluoroscopically- guided transcervical retrograde thoracic duct access is an effective and safe method to perform thoracic duct embolization following unsuccessful transabdominal cisterna chyli cannulation for the treatment of chylothorax.

### PMID 31439182 (2019) — The Indian journal of tuberculosis
TITLE: Endo-bronchial application of glue in the management of hemoptysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijtb.2019.01.005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemoptysis from varied etiologies, often fails to respond to conservative therapy. The conventional managements of such a situation are Bronchial Artery Embolization (BAE) or thoracic surgery which is often not possible. Endoscopic application of glue may stand as a method of therapy in these circumstances.
METHODS: 202 patients of hemoptysis were treated by video-bronchoscopy assisted endobronchial application of glue (n-butyl cyanoacrylate) with the help of polyethylene catheter being placed through the working channel. The details of the procedure and their 6 month follow up are presented.
RESULTS: Immediate control of hemoptysis was achieved in 183 i.e. 90.59% of patients. 19 patients had a partial response, i.e., hemoptysis stopped and then recurred, endobronchial application of glue was repeated in them out of which 14 (6.9%) responded to the second procedure whereas 5 (2.47%) failed to show any response in spite of the repeated procedure. The complication rate was 0.49% in the form of glue migrating into the trachea. There was no mortality.
CONCLUSION: Endobronchial application of glue for hemoptysis can be an effective, economic and alternative therapy for mild to moderate hemoptysis.

### PMID 31363897 (2019) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: A Novel Technique for the Treatment of Type 2 Endoleak After Endovascular Aortic Repair: Sac Embolization with Balloon Occlusion of the Aorta (SEBOA).
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-019-02299-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We presented a new method of sac embolization using n-butyl-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) with balloon occlusion of the aorta (SEBOA) that can facilitate decreasing flow rate of the involved branches with the goal of type 2 endoleak resolution after endovascular aortic repair (EVAR).
TECHNIQUE: This technique is demonstrated in six patients who required type 2 endoleak&#xa0;treatment including previous technical failure. A transarterial approach was performed in four patients and transabdominal direct puncture in two. Technical success was defined as complete embolization of both involved branches and sac on postoperative CT. Sacography under balloon occlusion of the aorta demonstrated decreased flow rate of the all involved branches in all patients. SEBOA was performed using 25 or 33% of NBCA diluted with lipiodol. Technical success was obtained in 3 of 6 patients, and one major complication was observed with adhesion of NBCA to the microcatheter resulting in foreign body retention.
CONCLUSION: SEBOA may help solve the difficulty of type 2 endoleak treatment after EVAR as decreased flow rate of the involved branches under balloon occlusion of the aorta was achieved in all patients. However, protocols regarding concentration of NBCA or using other embolic materials are needed to improve the success rate.

### PMID 31360155 (2019) — Jornal vascular brasileiro
TITLE: Treatment of type 1A endoleak using coil embolization: a case report.
DOI: 10.1590/1677-5449.180130 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In a type 1A endoleak, the endograft is unable to fully seal the proximal aneurysm neck and blood flow leaks between the wall of the aortic neck and the graft material. This article reports a case in which coil embolization was used and presents a literature review (PubMed, LILACS, and SciELO). Searches were run for articles published in the past 5 years using the descriptors "endoleak 1A", "coil embolization," and "treatment". Type 1A endoleak occurs in 1.1% of patients within 30 days of graft placement. Treatment of an endoleak is obligatory and usually consists of sealing the proximal graft neck using stents and balloons to expand the landing zone or to increase the radial force of the graft. Some studies have suggested using embolization techniques with cyanoacrylate, fibrin glue, and Onyx, demonstrating success rates that exceed 97%. However, correction of type 1A endoleak using coil embolization has seldom been described. No endoleak tipo 1A, a endopr&#xf3;tese n&#xe3;o sela completamente o colo do aneurisma proximal, e o fluxo arterial est&#xe1; presente entre a parede do colo a&#xf3;rtico e o material do implante. Este &#xe9; um relato de um caso no qual foi utilizada emboliza&#xe7;&#xe3;o com molas, associado a uma revis&#xe3;o de literatura (PubMed, LILACS e SciELO). Foram pesquisados artigos publicados nos &#xfa;ltimos 5 anos com os descritores &#x201c;endoleak 1A&#x201d;, &#x201c;coil embolization&#x201d; e &#x201c;treatment&#x201d;, combinados de formas aleat&#xf3;rias, sendo encontrados 25 artigos. O tipo 1A ocorre em 1,1% dos pacientes ap&#xf3;s 30 dias do implante. O tratamento consiste em aumentar a veda&#xe7;&#xe3;o do implante proximal, principalmente com o uso de stents e bal&#xf5;es para alargar a zona de aterragem ou aumentar a for&#xe7;a radial do implante. Alguns trabalhos sugerem t&#xe9;cnicas de emboliza&#xe7;&#xe3;o com cianoacrilato, cola de fibrina e uso de Onyx, mostrando taxas de sucesso superiores a 97%. Contudo, a corre&#xe7;&#xe3;o de endoleaks tipo 1A mediante emboliza&#xe7;&#xe3;o com molas &#xe9; pouco descrita.

### PMID 31121368 (2019) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Diagnosis and Endovascular Embolization of a Sacral Spinal Arteriovenous Fistula with "Holo-Spinal" Venous Drainage.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2019.05.099 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Spinal dural arteriovenous fistulas are the most common spinal vascular pathology, accounting for up to 70% of spinal vascular malformations. They most commonly present with insidious and progressive myelopathy and bowel, bladder, and sexual dysfunction. Although noninvasive imaging (e.g., magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance angiography) may suggest the presence of a spinal arteriovenous fistula (AVF), the diagnosis requires confirmation with spinal angiography.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 65-year-old woman presented with progressive myelopathy. Traditional spinal angiography of the paired radicular arteries failed to demonstrate any vascular malformation. However, injection of the right internal iliac artery demonstrated an AVF arising from the artery of Desproges-Gotteron with retrograde venous drainage to the upper thoracic region.
CONCLUSIONS: Selective transarterial catheterization and embolization with n-butyl cyanoacrylate resulted in complete occlusion of the AVF. Clinical improvement was also noted on postprocedural day 1. This case highlights the importance of internal iliac injections as a critical component of spinal angiography during an evaluation for vascular malformation.

### PMID 31118268 (2019) — Journal of neurointerventional surgery
TITLE: Republished: Transradial approach in the treatment of a sacral dural arteriovenous fistula: a technical note.
DOI: 10.1136/neurintsurg-2019-014834.rep | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Sacral dural arteriovenous fistulas (SDAVFs) are rare, constituting no more than 10% of all spinal dural fistulas. They are most commonly fed by the lateral sacral artery (LSA), a branch of the internal iliac artery (IIA). Catheterization of this vessel requires either a crossover at the aortic bifurcation in cases of right femoral access or retrograde catheterization from the ipsilateral common femoral artery. We present the case of a 79-year-old man with tethered cord syndrome and a symptomatic SDAVF fed by two feeders from the left LSA. Spinal diagnostic angiography was made exceptionally challenging by an aorto-bi-iliac endograft, and selective catheterization of the left IIA was not possible. The patient could not undergo surgery due to multiple comorbidities, therefore embolization was considered the best approach. The procedure was carried out through a transradial access (TRA) with Onyx and n-butyl cyanoacrylate. The SDAVF was successfully treated and the patient made a full neurological recovery.

### PMID 30936323 (2019) — BMJ case reports
TITLE: Transradial approach in the treatment of a sacral dural arteriovenous fistula: a technical note.
DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2019-014834 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Sacral dural arteriovenous fistulas (SDAVFs) are rare, constituting no more than 10% of all spinal dural fistulas. They are most commonly fed by the lateral sacral artery (LSA), a branch of the internal iliac artery (IIA). Catheterization of this vessel requires either a crossover at the aortic bifurcation in cases of right femoral access or retrograde catheterization from the ipsilateral common femoral artery. We present the case of a 79-year-old man with tethered cord syndrome and a symptomatic SDAVF fed by two feeders from the left LSA. Spinal diagnostic angiography was made exceptionally challenging by an aorto-bi-iliac endograft, and selective catheterization of the left IIA was not possible. The patient could not undergo surgery due to multiple comorbidities, therefore embolization was considered the best approach. The procedure was carried out through a transradial access (TRA) with Onyx and n-butyl cyanoacrylate. The SDAVF was successfully treated and the patient made a full neurological recovery.

### PMID 30691971 (2019) — Diagnostic and interventional imaging
TITLE: Interventional treatment of bleeding complications due to percutaneous cannulation for peripheral extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.diii.2019.01.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This study aimed to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of interventional techniques as a treatment for bleeding complications secondary to percutaneous cannulation for peripheral extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (PECMO).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Out of 1264 patients who underwent PECMO at our hospital between January 2009 and September 2018, we reviewed the clinical characteristics and outcomes of eight patients (4 men, 4 women; mean age, 54.9 years [range, 31-77 years]) who underwent percutaneous interventional treatment for bleeding complications secondary to percutaneous cannulation for PECMO.
RESULTS: Both hemodynamic instability and coagulopathy were present in 7 patients who had direct injury during PECMO insertion and absent in one patient with pseudoaneurysm at the PECMO removal site. Percutaneous ultrasound-guided thrombin injection was performed in three patients with pseudoaneurysm of the common or superficial femoral artery, and adjunctive embolization was combined with microcoils or n-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate in two of them. Stent graft was inserted in four patients with contrast extravasation (n=3) from external iliac artery (n=1) or common femoral or iliac veins (n=2) ruptures or the fistula between the superficial femoral artery and vein (n=1). N-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate and coil embolization was performed for pseudoaneurysm from the internal pudendal artery branch in the remaining one patient. Technical success was achieved in all eight patients. There were no procedure-related complications. There was no rebleeding during the follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Interventional treatment is a safe, technically feasible and therapeutically effective modality for treating bleeding complications secondary to a percutaneous cannulation for PECMO.

### PMID 30630391 (2019) — Vascular and endovascular surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous Embolization of an Inferior Mesenteric Artery Aneurysm in a Patient With Type IV Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
DOI: 10.1177/1538574418824185 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) refers to a group of genetic disorders involving the connective tissues. Type IV EDS impairs type III collagen that is responsible for vessel integrity. Patients with type IV EDS are susceptible to vascular and visceral complications, including aortic aneurysms, pseudoaneurysms, dissections, and spontaneous rupture of internal organs. Treating aneurysms with open surgery versus endovascular techniques each carry a unique risk-to-benefit ratio that must be applied to each individual carefully. We present a patient with type IV EDS who presented with a rapidly growing inferior mesenteric artery aneurysm. The patient was treated with a percutaneous endovascular technique using coils and n-butyl-cyanoacrylate glue.

### PMID 30570064 (2019) — Arquivos brasileiros de cardiologia
TITLE: Rapamycin Combined with &#x3b1;-Cyanoacrylate Contributes to Inhibiting Intimal Hyperplasia in Rat Models.
DOI: 10.5935/abc.20180247 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Vein graft restenosis has an adverse impact on bridge vessel circulation and patient prognosis after coronary artery bypass grafting.
OBJECTIVES: We used the extravascular supporter &#x3b1;-cyanoacrylate (&#x3b1;-CA), the local application rapamycin/sirolimus (RPM), and a combination of the two (&#x3b1;-CA-RPM) in rat models of autogenous vein graft to stimulate vein graft change. The aim of our study was to observe the effect of &#x3b1;-CA, RPM, and &#x3b1;-CA-RPM on vein hyperplasia.
METHODS: Fifty healthy Sprague Dawley (SD) rats were randomized into the following 5 groups: sham, control, &#x3b1;-CA, RPM, and &#x3b1;-CA-RPM. Operating procedure as subsequently described was used to build models of grafted rat jugular vein on carotid artery on one side. The level of endothelin-1 (ET-1) was determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Grafted veins were observed via naked eye 4 weeks later; fresh veins were observed via microscope and image-processing software in hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining and immunohistochemistry after having been fixed and stored" (i.e. First they were fixed and stored, and second they were observed); &#x3b1;-Smooth Muscle Actin (&#x3b1;SMA) and von Willebrand factor (vWF) were measured with reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Comparisons were made with single-factor analysis of variance and Fisher's least significant difference test, with p &lt; 0.05 considered significant.
RESULTS: We found that intimal thickness of the &#x3b1;-CA, RPM, and &#x3b1;-CA-RPM groups was lower than that of the control group (p &lt; 0.01), and the thickness of the &#x3b1;-CA-RPM group was notably lower than that of the &#x3b1;-CA and RPM groups (p &lt; 0.05).
CONCLUSION: RPM combined with &#x3b1;-CA contributes to inhibiting intimal hyperplasia in rat models and is more effective for vascular patency than individual use of either &#x3b1;-CA or RPM.

### PMID 30539235 (2019) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Transgraft sac Embolization Combined with Graft Reinforcement for Refractory Mixed-Type Endoleak.
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-018-2144-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 80-year-old female underwent EVAR 4&#xa0;years ago. She presented type II endoleak with sac expansion from 68 to 80&#xa0;mm during 3-year follow-up after EVAR. Although she underwent translumbar percutaneous sac embolization, the AAA sac continued to enlarge, suggesting mixed-type endoleak including type I, II, and III. Transgraft direct sac angiography revealed endoleak cavity without demonstrable feeding vessel. Transgraft sac embolization using n-butyl cyanoacrylate and graft reinforcement was performed concurrently, without complications. The graft reinforcement consisted of graft extension for eliminating occult type I endoleak, and relining for eliminating occult type III endoleak. Six months after the procedure, CT showed no signs of sac expansion. Transgraft sac embolization combined with graft reinforcement is one of the available options for persistent and refractory mixed-type endoleak.

### PMID 30476678 (2019) — Clinical imaging
TITLE: Embolization of a congenital arteriovenous malformation arising off the internal mammary artery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clinimag.2018.11.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Congenital arteriovenous malformations (AVM) of the internal mammary artery (IMA) are exceptionally rare. Patients with AVMs arising off the left IMA may present with continuous precordial murmurs and/or a pulsatile chest mass. AVMs in this location pose a risk of enlargement, rupture, infection, or high-output cardiac failure. The potential risks associated with AVMs warrant early therapeutic intervention. We describe a case of a congenital AVM originating from the left IMA, which was successfully embolized with n&#x2011;butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) using a transcatheter arterial approach.

### PMID 30460862 (2019) — Minimally invasive therapy &amp; allied technologies : MITAT : official journal of the Society for Minimally Invasive Therapy
TITLE: Endovascular management of endotension by graft reinforcement followed by direct sac embolization.
DOI: 10.1080/13645706.2018.1518918 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Purpose: To assess the efficacy of graft reinforcement followed by percutaneous direct sac embolization (PDSE) for the treatment of endotension after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR). Materials and methods: A total of 290 patients underwent elective EVAR. All patients regularly underwent scheduled surveillance with contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT). Two hundred thirty-five patients were followed for &#x2265;24&#x2009;months after EVAR. Aneurysmal sac expansion of &#x2265;10&#x2009;mm was observed in 20 patients. The patients with sac expansion of &#x2265;10&#x2009;mm with no evidence of endoleak were treated with graft reinforcement. Graft reinforcement consisted of graft extension and graft relining. The patients with sac expansion at 6&#x2009;months after graft reinforcement received PDSE using metallic coils and n-butyl cyanoacrylate-Lipiodol mixture. The aneurysm diameter was measured by CT performed 6&#x2009;months and every year after the final intervention. Results: Seven patients (7 men, 0 women; mean age, 69.1&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4.2&#x2009;years, Zenith&#xae;:5/Excluder&#xae;:1/Powerlink&#xae;:1) underwent graft reinforcement. Two patients underwent graft reinforcement alone, and five patients underwent PDSE after graft reinforcement. Mean follow-up time after the final intervention was 21.1&#x2009;months. The sac diameter stabilized after the final intervention in all patients. Conclusion: Graft reinforcement followed by complementary PDSE could be a useful treatment strategy for endotension.

### PMID 30132302 (2019) — Clinical journal of gastroenterology
TITLE: Successful treatment of esophageal bleeding due to rupture of major aortopulmonary collateral arteries by transcatheter arterial embolization.
DOI: 10.1007/s12328-018-0895-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) are unique vessels associated with hypoxia induced by congenital heart disease (CHD). Although MAPCAs are essential to supply blood to the lungs, their development and proliferation can induce life-threatening complications, such as rupture into the lung. Here, we describe a rare case of esophageal bleeding from MAPCAs in a CHD patient, which was successfully treated by transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE). A 16-year-old male with CHD experienced a hematemesis and melena after the Bentall procedure to treat valvular heart disease. Emergent esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed spurting bleeding from the middle esophageal vessels; accordingly, endoscopic variceal ligation (EVL) was performed. However, he had a hematemesis again after 2&#xa0;weeks of EVL. The arterial phase of dynamic computed tomography indicated that a MAPCA associated with CHD was the origin of bleeding. Hence, TAE of this MAPCA with a mixture of n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and ethiodized oil was performed to prevent re-bleeding. Color Doppler mode in endoscopic ultrasonography via the esophagus revealed mosaic-like signals in MAPCAs located in the esophageal wall. This finding was consistent with tortuous MAPCAs accompanied by turbulent blood flow. When clinicians encounter CHD patients with unexpected massive esophageal bleeding, bleeding related to MAPCAs should be considered.

### PMID 30028396 (2019) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Prevention of Vascular Anastomotic Stenosis With 2-Octylcyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000004725 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Although conventional microvascular anastomoses are well-studied, postoperative anastomotic stenoses remain a common surgical complication. The use of 2-octylcyanoacrylate to stabilize vascular anastomoses using a rabbit anastomosis model was investigated. A carotid artery anastomosis model was established in 20 New Zealand rabbits (2.5-3.0&#x200a;kg): 10 underwent conventional anastomosis surgery with sutures only, while 10 underwent suture ligation, followed by the application of 2-octylcyanoacrylate. Vascular patency and pulse strength were observed after adhesive solidification. The artery diameter was measured preoperatively and at 5&#x200a;minutes, 2 weeks, and 4 weeks postoperatively. An angiography was performed at 4 weeks postoperatively. Hyperplasia and the induced nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) content of the intima and media layers from the anastomotic stoma were assessed using immunohistochemistry. The artery inner diameter of experimental group decreased at each time point postoperatively (1.686&#x200a;&#xb1;&#x200a;0.066&#x200a;cm; 1.656&#x200a;&#xb1;&#x200a;0.069&#x200a;cm; 1.646&#x200a;&#xb1;&#x200a;0.074&#x200a;cm) (P&#x200a;&#x2264;&#x200a;0.01). At 4 weeks postoperatively, the intima and the media around the anastomosis was both significantly thinner in the experimental group (13.21&#x200a;&#xb1;&#x200a;0.84&#x200a;&#x3bc;m; 234.86&#x200a;&#xb1;&#x200a;13.84&#x200a;&#x3bc;m) than in the control group (17.06&#x200a;&#xb1;&#x200a;0.96&#x200a;&#x3bc;m; 279.88&#x200a;&#xb1;&#x200a;34.22&#x200a;&#x3bc;m) (P&#x200a;&lt;&#x200a;0.05). At 4 weeks postsurgery, intravascular iNOS expression was increased in both groups but was higher in the experimental group (82.5% versus 47.5%). The above results indicated that 2-octylcyanoacrylate adhesive can inhibit stenosis of vascular anastomoses.

### PMID 31471191 (2019) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Percutaneous Ultrasound-Guided Direct Glue Embolization: A Practical Approach to Iatrogenic Inferior Epigastric Artery Pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2019.05.029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 31394248 (2019) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Paraplegia Due to Spinal Cord Ischemia after Endovascular Treatment of a Type II Endoleak.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2019.05.054 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Type II endoleaks are a common complication after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair, with transarterial embolization using synthetic surgical glue being an established treatment option. We report a case of paraplegia due to spinal cord ischemia after lumbar arteries embolization by Glubran-lipiodol glue for a type II endoleak. Special attention must be given by interventional specialists when applying surgical diluted glues for the treatment of type II endoleaks to avoid distal embolization and subsequent spinal cord ischemia.

### PMID 31331927 (2019) — BMJ case reports
TITLE: Closure of bronchopleural fistula by a septal occluder device: a case for close collaboration between heart and lung specialists.
DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2019-229575 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present the case of a 66-year-old woman who underwent right inferior lobectomy for pulmonary carcinoma and developed persistent bronchopleural fistula (BPF) that was not amenable to surgical intervention (two surgical failures). The patient presented with a persistent cough and dyspnoea, which was treated with a hybrid procedure using fluoroscopy and bronchoscopy. A 7&#x2009;mm Amplatzer septal occluder device (ASOD) was successfully inserted into the BPF. Two weeks after the procedure, a small fistula developed, which was treated by endoscopically guided biologic glue embolisation. At 2-month, 6-month and 12-month follow-up visits, clinical examinations and endoscopic imaging confirmed the complete occlusion of the BPF. Obvious migration of the ASOD was not apparent, and the patient has remained asymptomatic. The success of an endoscopic BPF closure with the use of hybrid techniques was achieved because of a collaborative effort by a multidisciplinary team.

### PMID 31325053 (2019) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Atraumatic laparoscopic intraperitoneal mesh fixation using a new laparoscopic device: an animal experimental study.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-019-02008-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Laparoscopic ventral and incisional hernia repair (LVIHR) has become a common procedure because of its feasibility and safety, but it is not free of complications. Acute and chronic post-operative pain and bleeding caused by traumatic fixation of the mesh are frequently prolonging the hospital stay. The aim of this study was to analyze the behavior of n-butyl-cyanoacrylate (GLUBRAN&#xae; 2) as only mesh fixation METHODS: Ten female pigs were involved in the study and were divided into two groups of five (A and B). Animals in each group underwent a laparoscopic procedure in which two meshes were placed intraperitoneally and fixed with the same synthetic glue only. Animals in group A were sacrificed after 3&#xa0;weeks, and those in group B were sacrificed after 12&#xa0;weeks. We studied the morphological, biomechanical, and histological characteristics of the intraperitoneal mesh-tissue interface RESULTS: No disruption, migration or folding was observed in any of the pigs. In group A, the mean tensile strength was 1.4&#xa0;N/cm (&#xb1;&#x2009;0.2) while in group B, the mean tensile strength was 2.5&#xa0;N/cm (&#xb1;&#x2009;0.8). Histological analyses, in areas where mesh was fixed using the glue, showed a chronic lymphocytic inflammatory reaction with a granulomatous component and a marked desmoplastic reaction made up of immature collagen and numerous fibroblasts acquiring myofibroblastic characteristics. In some areas corresponding to fixation, the desmoplastic reaction originated from mature lamellar bone tissue with osteocytes and osteoblasts.
CONCLUSION: Laparoscopic mesh fixation with only the synthetic comonomer glue GLUBRAN&#xae; 2 is feasible, effective, and safe in intraperitoneal incisional/ventral hernia repair in this animal model.

### PMID 31112760 (2019) — Journal of gynecology obstetrics and human reproduction
TITLE: In utero embolization for placental chorioangioma and neonatal multifocal hemangiomatosis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jogoh.2019.05.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Placental chorioangioma is a limited non trophoblastic vascular tumour that may causes fetal complications as well as post-natal ones. We reported in here the first case of an in utero embolization of chorioangioma diagnosed at 22&#x2009;W&#x2009;G with a post-natal diagnosis of neonatal multifocal hemangioma with a good outcome. The chorioangioma was embolized using GLUBRAN 2 &#xae; (cyanolacrylate) a biologic surgical glue at 26&#x2009;W&#x2009;G. Premature rupture of membrane occurred at 28&#x2009;W&#x2009;G. A cesarean section at 32&#x2009;W&#x2009;G was performed for retro placental hematoma. The neonate was 1400&#x2009;g healthy girl with an anemia (hemoglobin 9.7&#x2009;g/dl). After one month of life, the child met a neonatal multifocal hemangioma (skin and liver were involved) with superficial erosion of skin hemangiomas that required post-natal transfusions. We propose a literature review related to the various technics of in utero treatment of placental chorioangioma and the links with neonatal multifocal hemangiomatosis as well. The girl is now 7&#x2009;year old and has a normal neurodevelopmental outcome.

### PMID 31032188 (2019) — Quantitative imaging in medicine and surgery
TITLE: Partial splenic embolization with Glubran&#xae;2/Lipiodol&#xae; mixture for oncological patients with hypersplenism-related thrombocytopenia requiring systemic chemotherapy.
DOI: 10.21037/qims.2019.03.07 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Partial splenic embolization (PSE) has been used to improve thrombocytopenia related to hypersplenism. The optimal embolic agent is still debated. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the safety, hematologic response and outcomes of PSE with cyanoacrylate glue for oncological patients with hypersplenism-related thrombocytopenia requiring systemic chemotherapy (SC).
METHODS: Retrospective single-center observational report of cancer patients with thrombocytopenia related to hypersplenism and requiring SC who underwent PSE with N-butyl cyanoacrylate-methacryloxy sulfolane (NBCA-MS) Glubran&#xae;2 glue between February 2015 and September 2017. All patients were treated under local anesthesia with a Glubran&#xae;2/Lipiodol&#xae; mixture of 1:5 ratio. They all received empiric antibiotic coverage. Splenic volume and parenchyma infarction rate were evaluated by CT scan within 1 month of PSE. Primary and secondary endpoints of the current study included a platelet count increase &gt;150&#xd7;109/L and the initiation of SC, respectively. Periprocedural laboratory values and adverse events were recorded.
RESULTS: PSE was performed in eight patients (6 males, 2 females; median age, 59 years; range, 33-75 years) for a technical success of 100%. For procedures with adequate follow-up, primary and secondary endpoints were achieved in 100% (7 of 7 patients) and 100% (7 of 7 patients) of patients, respectively. One patient died before follow-up, unrelated to the procedure. Mean splenic infarction post-PSE was 55% (range, 21-70%) on CT scan. For 7 patients with laboratory follow-up, the mean platelet count significantly increased from 74&#xd7;109/L [range, (62-83) &#xd7;109/L] immediately before PSE to a peak level of 272&#xd7;109/L [range, (161-417) &#xd7;109/L] 10 days after PSE (P&lt;0.05). All patients could receive SC after PSE. No non-target glue embolization occurred. All patients experienced a transient and moderate postembolization syndrome. No severe postembolization syndrome occurred. No major complication was reported. The mean overall survival was 7.9 months (range, 0.6-10.4 months) among the 8 patients after PSE.
CONCLUSIONS: PSE with cyanoacrylate glue is safe and effective in the management of thrombocytopenia related to hypersplenism in cancer patients. It allows sufficient platelet count improvement for administration of SC.

### PMID 30803339 (2019) — Interventional neuroradiology : journal of peritherapeutic neuroradiology, surgical procedures and related neurosciences
TITLE: Lyophilizing thrombin powder-based treatment for hemostasis during coil embolization of ruptured cerebral aneurysm: Two case reports.
DOI: 10.1177/1591019918824866 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Rupture of cerebral aneurysm is an inevitable complication during embolization, followed by subsequent acute subarachnoid hemorrhage or intracranial hematoma, and results in the aggravation of a patient's condition. In particular, for patients who have had a ruptured aneurysm, urgent treatment strategies are required during operation. The most common hemostatic methods seen in clinical practices are as follows: after lowering the blood pressure, we continue to embolize the aneurysms with detachable coils as soon as possible or inject with Glubran/Onyx embolization liquids, as well as use a balloon catheter to temporarily block the blood supply. If the conditions are permissible, a balloon guiding catheter may even be used to restrict the proximal blood flow. At times, due to limitations of these methods, neurosurgeons are requested to perform craniotomy to treat the hemostasis. However, the delayed transition often leads to rapid deterioration of the patient's condition and even death due to cerebral hernia.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We herein presented two cases of ruptured cerebral aneurysms to provide an alternative method for hemostasis and to save the lives of patients as much as possible. In an extremely urgent situation (conventional treatment is ineffective), we successfully saved the patient's life by injecting lyophilizing thrombin powder (LTP) solution into the aneurysmal sac and the parent artery through a microcatheter.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report of successful hemostasis during coil embolization of ruptured cerebral aneurysm with LTP. Further prospective studies are needed to confirm the safety and efficacy of LTP in cerebrovascular interventional therapy.

### PMID 30802563 (2019) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Surgery for a Late Type IIIb Endoleak From a Fabric Tear of an Excluder Stent Graft.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2018.12.101 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 85-year-old male patient, who had undergone endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) using the Gore Excluder stent graft 10 years ago, was referred for intermittent abdominal pain. He also received coil embolization of the lumbar arteries for a persistent type II endoleak, resulting in continued aneurysmal dilation at 4, 6, and 8&#xa0;years after the EVAR. The maximum size of the aneurysm sac was dilated from the initial size of 49&#xa0;mm&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;55&#xa0;mm to 78&#xa0;mm&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;90&#xa0;mm, and the contrast medium was observed around the proximal portion of the stent graft, suggesting the presence of a type Ia or II endoleak. Because the definite cause of the dilation was unclear and adequate proximal landing zone was not available to deploy an aortic cuff, emergent laparotomy was indicated to treat this symptomatic aneurysm dilation. A type IIIb endoleak due to fabric disruption of the main body was diagnosed, and the bleeding was controlled using a fibrin sealant patch. To reinforce the hemostasis site from the inside of the stent graft, a 28&#xa0;mm&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;3-cm Excluder aortic cuff was deployed inside the main trunk next day. At 1-year follow-up, his condition was stable without evidence of reexpansion of the aneurysmal sac.

### PMID 30777688 (2019) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Long-term outcome of sac filling with fibrin sealant after endovascular aneurysm repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm with challenging aortic neck anatomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2018.10.113 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: A retrospective single-center study is reported here to assess the safety and long-term effectiveness of applying a fibrin sealant (FS) sac-filling strategy to eliminate type IA endoleak (TIAE) after endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) of abdominal aortic aneurysm.
METHODS: Characteristics of abdominal aortic aneurysm patients who had challenging proximal aortic neck anatomy (short or angulated) and underwent FS sac filling to resolve TIAE after traditional EVAR in Changhai Hospital between December 2006 and July 2010 were collected and reviewed. Intrasac pressure was measured with a preloaded catheter before and after FS filling to observe the immediate curative effect. The 7- to 10-year long-term effect was evaluated on the basis of the occurrence of endoleak, maximum aneurysm diameter, all-cause mortality, and other severe complications by annual aortic computed tomography angiography check.
RESULTS: There were 107 patients with short (&#x2264;15&#xa0;mm; 83/107 [77.6%]) or angulated (&gt;60 degrees; 27/107 [25.2%]) aneurysm neck who underwent FS sac filling. The mean age of the patients was 71.1&#xa0;&#xb1; 12.1&#xa0;years (68 male patients). Of the 107 endoleaks, 106 (106/107 [99.1%]) were resolved, and 3 (3/107 [2.8%]) patients died in the perioperative period. Intrasac systolic, diastolic, mean, and pulse pressures decreased significantly in the treated cases (systolic pressure, 114.1&#xa0;&#xb1; 16.7&#xa0;mm Hg vs 59.5&#xa0;&#xb1; 20.4&#xa0;mm Hg; diastolic pressure, 65.0&#xa0;&#xb1; 10.4&#xa0;mm Hg vs 51.4&#xa0;&#xb1; 18.2&#xa0;mm Hg; mean pressure, 81.3&#xa0;&#xb1; 11.4&#xa0;mm Hg vs 54.1&#xa0;&#xb1; 18.8&#xa0;mm Hg; pulse pressure, 49.1&#xa0;&#xb1; 12.8&#xa0;mm Hg vs 8.2&#xa0;&#xb1; 5.2&#xa0;mm Hg; P&#xa0;&lt; .01). During a median follow-up period of 89.1&#xa0;months, the mean maximum aneurysm diameter became significantly smaller than that observed before the operation (53.23&#xa0;&#xb1; 10.9&#xa0;mm vs 59.86&#xa0;&#xb1; 11.77&#xa0;mm). The postoperative maximum aneurysm diameter decreased in 76 patients and was stable in 22 patients. One patient with aneurysm enlargement was transferred to open surgery because of a type IV endoleak, and another patient with no blood flow into the aneurysm sac observed by computed tomography angiography was closely followed up. Four patients received repeated endovascular treatment after the occurrence of type IB endoleak and aneurysm enlargement. After a median follow-up of 89.1&#xa0;months, the cumulative survival rate was 90.7%, 80.4%, 72.0%, 58.9%, and 51.4% after 1&#xa0;year, 3&#xa0;years, 6&#xa0;years, 8&#xa0;years, and 10&#xa0;years after the operation, respectively. There was no recurrent type I endoleak, distal embolization, migration, kinking, or malfunction after FS injections during the perioperative period and follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: FS sac filling combined with intrasac pressure measurement is a simple and effective treatment method to eliminate TIAE after EVAR, especially for patients with challenging proximal neck anatomy. This method could expand the current indications of EVAR.

### PMID 31096916 (2019) — BMC cardiovascular disorders
TITLE: Contribution of fibrin glue in the surgery of cyanogenic and non-cyanogenic congenital cardiopathies: retrospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.1186/s12872-019-1102-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative bleeding in cardiovascular surgery is a frequent and complicated situation for the surgical team, and may also be responsible for significant hospital expenditures. Fibrin glue are indicated in surgery to improve hemostasis when conventional techniques such as compression, sutures or electrocoagulation are insufficient. Through this study, we tried to study the contribution of fibrin glue to the improvement of the clinical parameters (volume of postoperative bleeding, length of stay in intensive care, volume of blood transfusion ...) in two populations having undergone cardiac surgery, one in which we used the fibrin glue and one without fibrin glue.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study conducted in the cardiovascular surgery department of our Hospital in Rabat between June 2012 and June 2015. Fibrin glue (Tissucol&#xae; of BAXTER) was used in one group with an haemostatic aim. The pre and post-operative clinical data of the patients were analyzed and compared with data from patients who were operated without the use of fibrin glue because it was not yet available in the hospital. The clinical parameters were collected analyzed using the SPSS 13.0 software.
RESULTS: One hundred ten patients were included in this study. The fibrin glue was used intraoperatively in 55 patients and not used in 55 patients. 43 (39.1%) had cyanogenic diseases and 67 (60.9%) had non-cyanogenic pathologies. The volume of transfused red blood cells was lower in patients in whom we used biological glue (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.005), as well as the number of days spent in intensive care (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.02). However, the difference was not significant between the two groups for other parameters such as bleeding volume per kg, the number of units of fresh frozen plasma and the platelet units count transfused.
CONCLUSIONS: The results we found show that fibrin glue reduces the duration of hospitalization in resuscitation and reduces the number of units of transfused red blood cells to patients after surgery. However, it does not reduce significantly the total postoperative bleeding volume per weight, the number of fresh frozen plasma units or platelets units transfused. The fibrin glue could therefore be of moderate benefit in pediatric cardiac surgery.

### PMID 31658792 (2019) — Archives of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Wound healing effect of regenerated oxidized cellulose versus fibrin sealant patch: An in vivo study.
DOI: 10.7181/acfs.2019.00472 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical hemostatic agents are used when ligation, electrocauterization, or other conventional hemostatic methods are impractical. Because a hemostatic agent is a foreign body, it can cause foreign body reactions, inflammation, and infections that can interfere with the wound healing process. Therefore, we should select hemostatic agents after considering their effects on wound healing. Here, we compared the effects of hemostatic agents on wound healing in a rectus abdominis muscle defect in rats.
METHODS: Twelve Sprague Dawley rats were subjected to creation of a 6 &#xd7; 6 mm defect in the rectus abdominis muscle and divided into four groups: control group; group A, Tachosil fibrin sealant patch; group B, Surgicel Fibrillar oxidized regenerated cellulose; and group C, Surgicel Snow oxidized regenerated cellulose. For the histologic analysis, biopsies were performed on the 3rd, 7th, and 27th days.
RESULTS: The foreign body reaction was the weakest in group A and most significant in group C. The inflammatory cell infiltration was the weakest in group A and similar in groups B and C. Muscle regeneration differed among periods. The rats in group A were the most active initially, while those in group C showed prolonged activity.
CONCLUSION: Tachosil and Surgicel administration increased inflammation via foreign body reactions, but the overall wound healing process was not significantly affected. The increased inflammation in the Surgicel groups was due to a low pH. We recommend using Tachosil, because it results in less intense foreign body reactions than Surgicel and faster wound healing due to the fibrin action.

### PMID 30440066 (2019) — Journal of neurological surgery. Part A, Central European neurosurgery
TITLE: TachoSil Dural Reconstruction in Extracranial-Intracranial Bypass Surgeries.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1675565 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Superficial temporal artery to middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) bypass is a treatment option for hemodynamic insufficiency in the anterior cerebral circulation. Complications associated with extracranial-intracranial bypass surgeries are ischemic strokes caused by bypass failure, wound-healing disorders, and further issues from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. CSF leakage can provide pathways for infection. It is well known in general neurosurgery that watertight closure of the dura mater is necessary to prevent such complications.
OBJECTIVE: To provide a technical description of TachoSil dural reconstruction in standard STA-MCA bypasses and their follow-up analyses.
METHODS: In this technical report with observational follow-up, the dura mater was closed partially by adaptive sutures, and the perforation site of the donor vessel was sealed with TachoSil. TachoSil is a collagen sponge covered with clotting factors that provides hemostatic and sealing effects.
RESULTS: Our study included eight cases of standard STA-MCA bypasses that had been operated between July 2015 and September 2016. Follow-up examinations were completed for all patients at 1&#x2009;month and 6 months after surgery. Duplex and Doppler ultrasound demonstrated regular bypass patency in all patients without increased flow velocity at the perforation sites, which is a possible sign of stenosis. No wound-healing disorders or CSF leakage occurred. No cerebrovascular stroke events were observed.
CONCLUSION: Duraplasty with TachoSil enables the elastic reconstruction of the dura perforation gap in standard extracranial-intracranial bypass surgeries.

### PMID 31463099 (2019) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Evaluation of a novel collagen hemostatic matrix in a porcine heart and cardiac vessel injury model.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.06.59 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Flowable hemostatic agents may be more advantageous than nonflowable hemostats, as they have capability to cover irregular wound surfaces, fill deep lesions, and easily remove excess materials with irrigation. In this study, we evaluated the hemostatic efficacy of the collagen hemostatic matrix (CHM) compared to FloSeal&#xae; via incisions in the heart and cardiac vessels in a porcine model.
METHODS: In each of the two female pigs, a total of two incisions were made in seven locations: right atrium (RA), right ventricle (RV), and cardiac vessels, such as the innominate vein (IV), superior vena cava (SVC), pulmonary artery (PA), coronary artery (CA), and aorta. Hemostatic agents were applied directly to the bleeding wounds. In certain location, one incision was treated with the CHM and the other with FloSeal&#xae;, and the time to hemostasis and the degree of bleeding of the two agents were assessed and compared. One week after surgery, the animals were sacrificed, and specimens were collected for histologic evaluation.
RESULTS: Bleeding from the vessels with relatively low pressure (the IV, SVC, and RA) was controlled within 1-2 minutes using both a CHM and FloSeal&#xae;. Bleeding from the vessels with high blood pressure (the RV, PA, CA, and aorta) was controlled within 3-10 minutes with the CHM. However, hemostasis in the PA and CA was not achieved with FloSeal&#xae;. Histological analysis revealed that the use of both the CHM and FloSeal&#xae; resulted in foreign body reactions of similar severity.
CONCLUSIONS: The hemostatic effect and safety of the CHM may be similar to that of FloSeal&#xae;. Further clinical studies must be conducted to validate our results.

### PMID 31382076 (2019) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Evaluation of a Novel Collagen Hemostatic Matrix: Comparison of Two Hemostatic Matrices in a Rabbits Jejunal Artery Injury Model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2019.05.017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: We evaluated the hemostatic efficacy and immunogenicity of CollaStat compared with FloSeal in a rabbit jejunal artery injury model.
METHODS: A total of 27 experimental rabbits were used in the study. For each hemostatic agent, an injury was created in one of the right angles of the jejunal arteries originating from the vascular arcs. Time to hemostasis was determined after applying manual compression to the wound for 30&#xa0;s, which was repeated a maximum of three times in cases of persistent bleeding. On postoperative day 7, the concentration of serum antithrombin antibody was measured among agent-treated and nontreated control groups.
RESULTS: The mean time to hemostasis for CollaStat was significantly shorter than for FloSeal (64.0&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;5.0 versus 84.0&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;7.8&#xa0;s; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.040). There were no significant differences in rabbit serum mean anti-thrombin Ab concentration between CollaStat-treated, FloSeal -treated, and the control groups (8.43&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.44 versus 8.18&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;7.8 versus 9.58&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;1.11&#xa0;ng/mL; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.065).
CONCLUSIONS: According to our study, CollaStat was more efficient in achieving hemostasis in a rabbit jejunal artery injury and exhibited nonsignificant immunogenicity compared with FloSeal. These findings suggest that CollaStat has acceptable hemostatic potential for controlling significant arterial bleeding.

### PMID 31236410 (2019) — BioMed research international
TITLE: Effects of Combined Use of Ultrasonic Bone Scalpel and Hemostatic Matrix on Perioperative Blood Loss and Surgical Duration in Degenerative Thoracolumbar Spine Surgery.
DOI: 10.1155/2019/6286258 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: How to decrease intraoperative bleeding, shorten surgical time, and increase safety in spinal surgery is an important issue. Ultrasonic bone removers and FloSeal have been proven to increase safety, reduce the surgical duration, and decrease intraoperative bleeding in skull base surgery. Therefore, we aimed to compare the surgical duration, blood loss, and complications during spinal surgery with or without the use of FloSeal and an ultrasonic bone scalpel. Therefore, we retrospectively reviewed 293 patients who underwent thoracolumbar spinal surgery with decompression and instrumented fusion performed by a single surgeon. We divided these patients into three groups, including nonuse of FloSeal nor a bone scalpel (group A), use of FloSeal only (group B), and use of FloSeal and a bone scalpel (group C) intraoperatively after pairing in terms of age, sex, and surgical level. The surgical duration, blood loss, and occurrence of complications were all recorded. The mean surgical duration in group A was 160 mins, in group B it was 167 mins, and in group C it was 134 mins. The mean blood loss was 700 ml in group A, 682 ml in group B, and 383 ml in group C. Six patients sustained intraoperative dura injuries in total, 3 in group A, 2 in group B, and 1 in group C. No postoperative neurologic defects or occurrences of hematoma were recorded. According to our results, we concluded that combined use of FloSeal and bone scalpels is recommended during primary thoracolumbar spinal surgery to reduce the intraoperative blood loss and shorten the surgical duration.

### PMID 30266245 (2019) — Neurocirugia
TITLE: A novel surgical technique for aggressive vertebral hemangiomas.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neucir.2018.08.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Vertebral hemangiomas are relatively common, but those causing spinal cord compression are rare. A 19-year-old male presented with thoracic back pain. The neurologic examination was normal and radiological examinations demonstrated an aggressive vertebral hemangioma centered within the T11 vertebral body. Damaged vertebral bone and soft tissue components of the mass were observed in the epidural space. Surgery was performed using a new technique involving radiofrequency ablation, injection of a hemostatic agent (FLOSEAL, Baxter, USA), and bone autograft placement in the affected vertebral body. There were no complications intra- or postoperatively, and the patient's back pain resolved completely during the postsurgical period. Bleeding is a serious issue in cases of aggressive vertebral hemangioma. This new technique provides improved bleeding control and strengthens the affected vertebra through autograft placement.

### PMID 31695521 (2019) — Orthopedic research and reviews
TITLE: Spinal Aneurysmal Bone Cysts (ABCs): Optimal Management.
DOI: 10.2147/ORR.S211834 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: AIM: To review the published literature on the treatment of aneurysmal bone cysts (ABCs).
METHOD: A systematic review of the English literature to April 2019 for all articles, with a minimum of three patients and 2-year follow-up, reporting on the treatment of spinal ABCs. The various treatment options were compared for the rates of recurrence, complications and mortality.
RESULTS: Twenty-one articles and 272 patients (mean age 16.9 years, range 3-67) were included in this review. The overall recurrence rate for ABCs following all treatments is 12.8%. This is highest in those lesions described as being treated with isolated surgiflo injection into the lesion (100%), decompression/laminectomy (42.3%), partial excision/resection (35.7%) and curettage alone (25.0%). Radiotherapy alone or in conjunction with operative intervention offers excellent cure rates. Adjuncts to operative intervention, including cryotherapy or phenol reduce the recurrence rates, whereas embolization does not. The most common complications are persistent neurological deficits, spinal deformity, and continued pain. The overall mortality rates are low (1.5%). The reoperation rates are higher in surgical than non-surgical treatments and most are performed for progressive deformity.
DISCUSSION: ABCs are highly radiosensitive. However, with the unknown longer-term risk of radiotherapy, surgical treatments, ideally with complete resection, and the use of adjunctive therapies such as cryotherapy or phenol, offer the best chance of cure. SAE is a useful adjunct to reduce intraoperative bleeding, but this study suggests that it only modestly improves recurrence rates. Newer techniques including bisphosphonate and doxycycline administration offer potential benefits, but their efficacy requires further investigation.

### PMID 31354307 (2019) — Journal of asthma and allergy
TITLE: Intraoperative anaphylaxis to gelatin-based hemostatic agents: a case report.
DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S202784 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgiflo Haemostatic Matrix is an absorbable gelatin matrix hemostatic material that has been widely used in various surgical operations to assist hemostasis. Nonetheless, as biologically active agents (contains porcine gelatin), there is potential for allergic reactions to these products. Here, we report the case of a 71-year-old man who had intraoperative anaphylaxis with cardiovascular events to gelatin associated with the use of a topical hemostatic agent (Surgiflo). The patient reported a history of red meat allergy and tick bites during his allergological examination after anaphylaxis. He also had high levels of specific IgE antibodies towards alpha-gal. Special consideration should be given before administering bovine- or porcine-derived gelatin products during surgery to patients with animal-related allergies, such as alpha-gal or gelatin allergy and an atopic background.

### PMID 31047059 (2019) — Carbohydrate polymers
TITLE: Internal surgical use of biodegradable carbohydrate polymers. Warning for a conscious and proper use of oxidized regenerated cellulose.
DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.04.036 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Oxidized regenerated cellulose has become a major local surgical hemostatic biomaterial because of its ease of use, favorable biocompatibility, bactericidal activity and bioabsorption characteristics. Additional clinical indications of oxidized regenerated cellulose include wound repair and tissue reconstruction. Sometimes, some unusual adverse events are described. Studies report cases of minor postoperative complications as nidus of infection or allergic reaction mainly presenting as acute dermatitis, eczema and sieroma. Also, rare and serious cases of foreign body reaction or impingement on nerve, due to not optimal bioabsorption, are showed in various surgical sites. Thus, on the one hand, patients should be informed by their clinicians of the possibility of these low incidence postoperative complications when considering preparations made of cellulose derivatives; and the clinicians should clearly indicate use of this biomaterial in the surgical procedure report so that radiologists may appropriately interpret any unusual findings potentially associated with this biomaterial use and thus avoid misdiagnosis and undue alarm in the follow-up of patients. On the other hand, the biomedical carbohydrate scientist must consider effective experimental design that substantially addresses the clinical adverse events associated with carbohydrate polymer use. Optimal development of carbohydrates for clinical use depends on excellent clinician/biomedical scientist communication.

### PMID 29420097 (2019) — Journal of investigative surgery : the official journal of the Academy of Surgical Research
TITLE: Hemostatic Comparison of a Polysaccharide Powder and a Gelatin Powder.
DOI: 10.1080/08941939.2017.1423421 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Purpose/Aim: Powdered hemostats have been widely adopted for their ease-of-use; however, their efficacy has been limited resulting in applications restricted to low-level bleeds. This study investigates the use of bovine-derived gelatin particles (BGP) as a standalone hemostatic powder and compare BGP to commercially available microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPH). Materials and Methods: The powders were investigated for their hemostatic efficacy in a heparinized pre-clinical bleeding model limited to grade 1 and 2 bleeds on a validated intraoperative bleeding scale, which represents the accepted, clinical use of hemostatic powders. Results: At 10&#xa0;minutes, the hemostatic success of lesions treated with BGP were 78% while MPH were 22%. The odds ratio for hemostatic success of BGP relative to MPH was 15.18 (95% CI: 7.37, 31.27). The 95% lower limit of the odds ratio was greater than 1. This indicates that BGP are superior to MPH (p &lt; 0.001). The median time to hemostasis for BGP was 1.6&#xa0;minutes and MPH was 14.5&#xa0;minutes. The ratio for time to hemostasis of MPH relative to BGP was 9.23 (95% CI: 6.99, 12.19). This indicates that BGP achieve significantly faster time to hemostasis (p &lt; 0.001). Conclusions: Characterization of tissue explant ultrastructure, particle size, and swelling revealed differences in the materials. BGP, in addition to absorbing fluid and concentrating clotting factors and platelets, integrate into the clot and stabilize the fibrin matrix. BGP have advantages over MPH in terms of speed and efficacy. BGP are a favorable biomaterial for further research that greatly improve the limited efficacy of powdered hemostats.

### PMID 31214324 (2019) — Journal of surgical case reports
TITLE: Delayed thoracic wall bleeding after minimally invasive mitral valve repair.
DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjz187 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The first case of late thoracic wall bleeding after minimally invasive mitral valve repair treated by endovascular therapy is reported. A 55-year-old woman underwent mitral valve repair and tricuspid annuloplasty through a mini-thoracotomy approach. Her postoperative course was uneventful until she had anemia one week after the surgery. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed right hemothorax due to bleeding from a branch of the right lateral thoracic artery. Endovascular coil embolization and gelatin sponge injection were performed. The patient was discharged without any complications on postoperative day 20.

### PMID 31063141 (2019) — Diagnostic and interventional radiology (Ankara, Turkey)
TITLE: Transcatheter arterial embolization for postoperative arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery.
DOI: 10.5152/dir.2019.18212 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We aimed to study the technical and clinical outcome of urgent transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) for postoperative arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery, and to accumulate additional experience about the role of embolization for these injuries.
METHODS: Patients who received TAE procedure for arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery between September 1st, 2002 and December 1st, 2014 were screened on medical records and included in the analysis. Angiographic findings included active contrast agent extravasation, pseudoaneurysm formation, arteriovenous fistula, and other suspicious signs such as sighting of coarse margin or distortion of vessels. Embolic agents consisted of coils, gelatin sponge, and polyvinyl alcohol. Technical success was defined as complete occlusion of targeted artery through angiography, and clinical success as sustained resolution of symptoms.
RESULTS: A total of 22 patients (15 males, 19-76 years old) were enrolled. Prior to TAE, 12 patients developed hemorrhagic shock and the remaining 10 patients had hemorrhage-related pain, hematoma, or anemia. Contrast agent extravasation occurred in 12 cases, pseudoaneurysm formation in 5 cases, and other suspicious signs in 5 cases. Injury occurred in the internal iliac artery stem in 6 cases, inferior gluteal artery in 6 cases and superior gluteal artery in 6 cases. Multiple vascular lesions appeared in 5 cases. After TAE, technical success occurred in 22 patients and clinical success in 21 patients (95.5%). A 36-year-old woman died of irreversible multiple organ failure; no other severe procedure-related complications were recorded.
CONCLUSION: TAE is safe and effective for postoperative arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery.

### PMID 30962082 (2019) — Journal of stroke and cerebrovascular diseases : the official journal of National Stroke Association
TITLE: Cerebral Venous Sinus Incision for Surgical Thrombectomy Combined with Thrombolysis During Decompressive Craniectomy for Malignant Cerebral Venous Sinus Thrombosis Complicated with Cerebral Hernia.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2019.03.030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: For malignant cerebral venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) complicated with cerebral hernia, decompressive craniectomy may be life-saving, and thrombectomy combined with thrombolysis may obtain better outcomes. This report describes an approach performed on 2 patients diagnosed with CVST combined both thrombectomy and thrombolysis with decompressive craniectomy through incising the superior sagittal sinus. The general procedure of the operation is as follows. The anterior part of the superior sagittal sinus was exposed firstly. After cutting the dura matter for decompression, a superior sagittal sinus incision was taken to detect sinus thrombus. In order to facilitate hemostasis during detecting the sagittal sinus, 2 silk sutures were sutured along the incision. The incision was 5 millimeters long approximately along the middle line of the front third of the superior sagittal sinus. A silicone intubation was inserted in the sinus through the incision. Thrombus was seen in the suction tube. At a depth of about 10 cm, while it is difficult to penetrate the tube, we used the gelatin sponge to cover the sinus incision and fixed the suture lines after cross-knotting. The silicone intubation was drawn out through the forehead and connected to external micro pump for injecting anticoagulant drugs, then cut the dura mater into star-shaped and discard bone flap for decompression. Absorbable artificial dura mater was used to repair bilateral dura mater, respectively. At last, connect the catheter to the micro pump for pumping anticoagulant. After operation, the 2 patients received thrombolysis through the catheter placed in the sinus. Both of them recovered well. There was no incision-related bleeding occurred after surgery. Both the patients achieved incredibly good outcomes. For patients with malignant cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, acute cerebral hernia or cerebral hernia tendency, it may be an effective approach combined both thrombectomy and thrombolysis with decompressive craniectomy through incising the superior sagittal sinus.

### PMID 30921064 (2019) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: A Rare Potential Compression Can Be Avoided by Lateral Spread Response Recordings During Microvascular Decompression for Hemifacial Spasm.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000005400 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors report a 34-year-old female with hemifacial spasm who was identified as a candidate for microvascular decompression. Lateral spread response (LSR) was not recorded at first because of anatomical shift of neurovascular relationship after drainage of cerebrospinal fluid, but they reappeared only after a piece of shredded gelatin sponge was placed near the posteroinferior cerebellar artery to expand surgical field. As the authors removed the gelatin sponge, the LSRs disappeared instantly. Subsequently, the authors put some soft shredded Teflon between the offending vessel and brainstem. Since then the authors did not find LSRs anymore. Clinical follow-up had been carried out with a questionnaire from 1 week to 3 months postoperatively, and the patient was cured with no complications. This report presented that the gelatin sponge placed in an inappropriate position resulting in compression potentially leading to the opposite effect of treatment. Such kind of excessive operation could be avoided by electrophysiological monitoring.

### PMID 30506328 (2019) — Pediatric radiology
TITLE: Percutaneous liver biopsy in Fontan patients.
DOI: 10.1007/s00247-018-4311-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Patients who have undergone the Fontan operation for palliation of congenital heart disease with single-ventricle pathophysiology are at high risk for developing progressive liver fibrosis. Pathological assessment from percutaneous liver biopsy is central to the management of Fontan-associated liver disease, but liver biopsy in this vulnerable population poses unique challenges and potential risks.
OBJECTIVE: This retrospective study describes our experience with percutaneous liver biopsy performed to assess changes of Fontan-associated liver disease, with particular regard to procedural outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data from liver biopsy procedure reports, pathology reports, cardiac angiography pressure measurements and laboratory values of patients with single ventricle heart disease after the Fontan operation who underwent ultrasound-guided percutaneous liver biopsy performed in interventional radiology at a pediatric tertiary care center during a 3-year period were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: Sixty-eight liver biopsies were performed in 67 patients (mean age: 20.2&#xa0;years, range: 7.2-39&#xa0;years). The technical success rate was 100%, and tissue was adequate for assessing liver disease in 100% of the procedures, including biopsies performed with a single pass. Anticoagulation was routinely suspended before biopsy, and no cardiac complications were encountered due to this suspension. A coaxial biopsy system using an 18-gauge (G) full-core instrument through a 17-G introducer trocar was most commonly used, in 41/68 cases (60%). The most common trough length was 2.3&#xa0;cm, used in 37 cases (54%). One pass was made in 27 procedures (40%) and two passes in 30 (44%); tract embolization with gelatin sponge was performed in 52 (76%). The only complication was hemorrhage, which occurred in 5/68 (7.4%) of the biopsies, minor in four (5.9%) and major in one (1.5%) -- similar to rates reported for liver biopsy in non-Fontan patients. Hemorrhage had a delayed presentation in three of these five cases. Immediate post-biopsy hemoglobin decrease of &#x2265;2&#xa0;mg/dL showed a low sensitivity for hemorrhage. The mean Fontan pressure measured during cardiac angiography was 13.8&#xa0;mmHg, and shunt pressures were not associated with an increased risk of hemorrhage.
CONCLUSION: Percutaneous liver biopsy in Fontan patients can be performed safely with high technical success rates and without increased complication rates. Meticulous technique and close observation are recommended to reduce post-biopsy complications. The degree of right heart pressure elevation was not associated with hemorrhage.

### PMID 31463137 (2019) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: A new technology for reducing anastomotic fistula in the neck after esophageal cancer surgery.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2019.07.28 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To explore the risk factors and prevention methods of cervical mechanical anastomotic fistula and stenosis after the radical resection of esophageal cancer.
METHODS: From March 2018 to November 2018, 128 patients undergoing mechanical anastomosis of esophageal cancer were selected from the Department of Thoracic Surgery of The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University. All the enrolled patients were operated on using the Mckeown method, and a retrospective study was conducted. Data for preoperative and postoperative test indices, intraoperative embedding materials, postoperative complications, and preoperative and postoperative treatment were collected, and the relationship between various factors and the incidence of cervical anastomotic fistula and stenosis was analysed. Univariate analysis was conducted using t tests or Fisher's exact probability method, and multivariate analysis was conducted using logistic regression models.
RESULTS: All 128 patients successfully underwent surgery without dying. The enrolled patients were evaluated using the Stooler classification, with 28 patients having grade 0, 41 patients having grade 1, 34 patients having grade 2, 21 patients having grade 3, and 4 patients having grade 4 stenosis. Patients with stenosis of grade 3 or above had obvious choking sensation, which could only be relieved by balloon dilation. Symptoms in all patients with stenosis were relieved by balloon dilation. There were no significant differences between the two groups regarding embedding materials, preoperative choking history, history of alcohol consumption, history of hypertension, history of coronary heart disease, history of diabetes, postoperative calcium concentration, average albumin concentration, average platelet concentration, body mass index, anastomotic fistula, preoperative chemotherapy, postoperative chemotherapy, or postoperative cough (P&gt;0.05). There were significant differences in postoperative reflux (&#x3c7;2=11.338, P&lt;0.05) and scar constitution (&#x3c7;2=12.497, P&lt;0.05). The effects of embedding materials in patients with anastomotic fistula were significantly different (&#x3c7;2=4.372, P&lt;0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Postoperative reflux and scar constitution may be risk factors for postoperative anastomotic stenosis after resection of esophageal cancer. There was almost no difference in the effects on esophageal anastomotic stenosis between embedding materials and the omentum majus, but Neoveil&#xae; may have certain advantages in preventing cervical anastomotic fistula, and thus may have certain clinical application value.

### PMID 31694845 (2019) — BMJ open
TITLE: Cost-effectiveness of point-of-care viscoelastic haemostatic assays in the management of bleeding during cardiac surgery: protocol for a prospective multicentre pragmatic study with stepped-wedge cluster randomised controlled design and 1-year follow-up (the IMOTEC study).
DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-029751 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078325">Clinical Trial Protocol, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: During cardiac surgery-associated bleeding, the early detection of coagulopathy is crucial. However, owing to time constraints or lack of suitable laboratory tests, transfusion of haemostatic products is often inappropriately triggered, either too late (exposing to prolonged bleeding and thus to avoidable administration of blood products) or blindly to the coagulation status (exposing to unnecessary haemostatic products administration in patients with no coagulopathy). Undue exposition to transfusion risks and additional healthcare costs may arise. With the perspective of secondary care-related costs, the IMOTEC study (Int&#xe9;r&#xea;t M&#xe9;dicO-&#xe9;conomique de la Thrombo-Elastographie, dans le management transfusionnel des h&#xe9;morragies p&#xe9;ri-op&#xe9;ratoires de chirurgies Cardiaques sous circulation extracorporelle) aims at assessing the cost-effectiveness of a point-of-care viscoelastic haemostatic assay (VHA: RoTem or TEG)-guided management of bleeding. Among several outcome measures, particular emphasis will be put on quality of life with a 1-year follow-up.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This is a multicentre, prospective, pragmatic study with stepped-wedge cluster randomised controlled design. Over a 36-month period (24 months of enrolment and 12 months of follow-up), 1000 adult patients undergoing cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass will be included if a periprocedural significant bleeding occurs. The primary outcome is the cost-effectiveness of a VHA-guided algorithm over a 1-year follow-up, including patients' quality of life. Secondary outcomes are the cost-effectiveness of the VHA-guided algorithm with regard to the rate of surgical reexploration and 1-year mortality, its cost per-patient, its effectiveness with regard to haemorrhagic, infectious, renal, neurological, cardiac, circulatory, thrombotic, embolic complications, transfusion requirements, mechanical ventilation free-days, duration of intensive care unit and in-hospital stay and mortality.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study was registered at Clinicaltrials.gov and was approved by the Committee for the Protection of Persons of Nantes University Hospital, The French Advisory Board on Medical Research Data Processing and the French Personal Data Protection Authority. A publication of the results in a peer-reviewed journal is planned.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02972684; Pre-results.

### PMID 30496905 (2019) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Intentional Targeted False Lumen Occlusion after Aortic Dissection: A Systematic Review of the Literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2018.08.086 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Residual patent false lumen (FL) after chronic type B aortic dissection (cTBAD) or type A aortic dissection (TAAD) treatment is independently associated with poor long-term outcomes. The aim of our study was to present endovascular techniques and the existing experience with targeted FL thrombosis after cTBAD or TAAD treatment.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A systematic review was performed (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses) searching in MEDLINE, CENTRAL, and Cochrane databases for studies reporting on targeted FL occlusion after cTBAD or TAAD treatment.
RESULTS: One hundred one patients either after open repair of a TAAD (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;40; 3 case reports and 3 retrospective studies) or after cTBAD (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;61; 13 case reports and 6 retrospective studies) underwent an endovascular procedure for intentional FL occlusion (2 studies reported on both procedures). Among TAAD patients, 27 of 40 (68%) had previous open repair, whereas 48 of 61 (79%) with cTBAD had a previous endovascular repair. Thirty-one (78%) patients with TAAD and fifty-one (83%) with cTBAD were treated electively. Four main techniques were used: (1) the candy-plug (19/101), (2) the knickerbocker (3/91), (3) the "cork in the bottle neck" technique (2/101), and (4) FL embolization with combined use of coils, onyx, plugs, and glue (77/101). The technical success rate was 100%, with a 30-day mortality rate of 2.5% (1/40) in TAAD and 0% in cTBAD patients. During follow-up (ranging: 2 to 63&#xa0;months), the mortality rate was 0% (0/31) and 7.1% (4/61) in TAAD and cTBAD patients, respectively. The FL remained completely thrombosed in 78% (31/40) of TAAD and 62% (38/61) of cTBAD patients, whereas it was partially thrombosed in 3 and 2 patients, respectively (no report for 22 patients).
CONCLUSIONS: Intentional FL occlusion seems to be a feasible less invasive approach after cTBAD or TAAD treatment, which is not broadly used. Future larger studies with longer follow-up duration may demonstrate the apparent benefit in terms of aortic remodeling or stabilization of the disease progression.

### PMID 31689633 (2019) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Transcatheter embolization of the esophagomediastinal fistula with N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2019.10.054 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Acute mediastinitis with esophageal perforation is a very fatal condition and must be treated promptly. Esophagomediastinal fistula is a rare complication of acute mediastinitis with esophageal perforation. There are many treatment options such as surgery or endoscopic treatment, but it is most important to start treatment immediately.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 69-year-old female presented with chest pain and fever. Contrast enhanced chest computed tomography was compatible with acute mediastinitis and esophageal perforation. Esophagography revealed esophagomediastinal fistula in the upper esophagus. Endoscopic clipping with fibrin was failed and endoscopic vacuum therapy (EVT) was not effective for esophagomediastinal fistula. We performed the successful transcatheter embolization of the esophagomediastinal fistula with N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue.
DISCUSSION: There are many considerations in the treatment of acute mediastinitis with esophageal perforation, but surgery is the mainstay of treatment. Recently non operative management is appropriate in certain well-defined situations. Like our case patients, non-operative management may be considered if the diagnosis is delayed and the surgical treatment period is missed. Currently, endoscopic treatment such as covered stenting, clipping and application of fibrin glue are useful and a less invasive rather than surgical treatment. However, if endoscopic or surgical procedure are not possible, we considered transcatheter NBCA glue embolization.
CONCLUSION: Transcatheter embolization with NBCA glue was proven to its effectiveness as an alternative therapeutic option in the treatment of esophagomediastinal fistula which endoscopic or surgical treatment are impossible or fails.

### PMID 31589810 (2019) — Cancer cytopathology
TITLE: FNA cytology of postoperative pseudotumoral lesions induced by oxidized cellulose hemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.1002/cncy.22194 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The use of topically applied hemostatic substances during surgery has become a common practice. In some cases, the material is not absorbed or induces a granulomatous reaction resulting in a pseudotumoral lesion. With imaging studies, it is not possible to differentiate this from a tumor recurrence or abscess. This study describes the authors' cytologic experience with a large series of pseudotumoral lesions induced by oxidized cellulose, one of the most commonly used hemostatic agents. Almost no cytologic descriptions are available in the medical literature.
METHODS: Sixteen patients were evaluated, and the most common sites of fine-needle aspiration (FNA) were the mediastinum and thyroid surgical bed. Other locations were the axilla, neck, vulva, liver, and retroperitoneum. All these lesions appeared after surgical procedures in which oxidized cellulose was used as a topical hemostatic agent. The interval time between surgery and FNA varied from 4 to 46&#xa0;months with a mean of 15&#xa0;months.
RESULTS: Cytology samples showed very similar findings. In all cases, foreign-body material with a variable granulomatous reaction was present. Oxidized cellulose was seen as laminated inorganic fragments and most often showed an elongated, quadrangular appearance. Amorphous, ill-defined fragments as well as a dense proteinaceous background with phagocytic cells were also present.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study demonstrates that FNA cytology is a very useful method for the detection of pseudotumoral lesions induced by hemostatic agents. Pathologists must be familiarized with this finding because cytology permits easy differentiation from tumor recurrence.

### PMID 31194062 (2019) — Journal of orthopaedic translation
TITLE: Translation of bone wax and its substitutes: History, clinical status and future directions.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jot.2019.03.005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Bone wax, primarily composed of beeswax and softening agent, is a century-old material used to control bleeding of disrupted bone surfaces by acting as a mechanical barrier to seal the wound. The current bone wax products are commonly packed in easy-to-open foil in the form&#xa0;of sterile sticks or plates, with excellent malleability and smooth consistency, enabling cost-effective and easy handling approach for bleeding control. It has also been reported that the inert nature of bone wax causes complications including foreign body reaction, infection promotion&#xa0;and bone healing inhibition. With the advances in biomaterials and the market boost of bone haemostatic materials, the arena of bone wax substitute research has expanded to a wide spectrum of material formulations and forms. However, the development of substitutes of bone wax for translation is a pivotal yet challenging topic&#xa0;because currently a potential candidate is recommended to be just as simple to use, effective&#xa0;and inexpensive to produce as traditional bone wax but also be absorbable and osteogenic. This review provides an overview of bone wax including its history, clinical applications and associated complication. In addition, emerging substitutes of bone wax and outlooks of future directions including the standardised evaluation methods are also discussed&#xa0;as an effort to catalyse the innovation and translation of bone haemostatic agents in the near future. The translational potential of this article: Occurrence of osseous haemorrhage is common in surgically incised or traumatically fractured bone. It is essential to stop bone bleeding to avoid further pathologic consequences such as tissue necrosis and eventually mortalities due to blood loss. Medical sterile bone wax is a classical material for haemostasis of bone during orthopaedic surgeries, thoracic surgeries, neurological surgeries and so on. Along with its widespread use, complications such as foreign body reaction, bone healing inhibition and infection promotion associated with bone wax are observed. With the growing knowledge in biomaterials and the boost of market of bone haemostatic materials, bone wax substitute research is thriving. An overview of bone and its substitutes together with evolution of their design criteria is carried out in this work, providing information for the innovation and translation of bone haemostatic agents in the near future.

### PMID 31376435 (2019) — Journal of the American College of Surgeons
TITLE: Prospective, Randomized, Phase II, Non-Inferiority Study to Evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of Topical Thrombin (Human) Grifols as Adjunct to Hemostasis During Vascular, Hepatic, Soft Tissue, and Spinal Open Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2019.07.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017427">Clinical Trial, Phase II, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Thrombin-based formulations have been used for topical hemostasis in surgery for decades. However, the number of randomized clinical trials comparing bovine vs human thrombin is limited.
STUDY DESIGN: A randomized, double-blind, non-inferiority phase II study evaluated the hemostatic efficacy and safety of plasma-derived topical thrombin (human) Grifols (TTH-Grifols; Instituto Grifols SA) vs bovine THROMBIN JMI (BT-JMI; GenTrac Inc) (2:1 ratio) in vascular, hepatic, soft tissue, and spinal operations. The primary efficacy end point was the percentage of patients achieving hemostasis at target bleeding sites with mild to moderate bleeding (response) within 5 minutes (T5) of treatment application. Non-inferiority was met if the lower limit of the 95% CI of the response ratio of TTH-Grifols relative to BT-JMI by T5 exceeded 0.8. Secondary efficacy variables were the cumulative response by 3 and 4 minutes (T3 and T4), and the number of treatment failures. Safety parameters were assessed.
RESULTS: Randomized patients in TTH-Grifols and BT-JMI groups were n&#xa0;= 137 and n&#xa0;= 68, respectively. In modified intention-to-treat population, rates of hemostasis by T5 were 78.3% (94 of 120) in TTH-Grifols and 80.3% (49 of 61) in BT-JMI (response ratio: 0.973; 95% CI 0.833 to 1.135). Rates of hemostasis in vascular, hepatic, soft tissue, and spinal operations ranged from 75.0% to 82.5% for TTH-Grifols and from 54.5% to 91.7% for BT-JMI. No significant differences in adverse events were observed between treatment groups. Antibodies to bovine factor V antigen were detected in 2 patients exposed to BT-JMI and in none exposed to TTH-Grifols.
CONCLUSIONS: The TTH-Grifols was safe and well tolerated as a local hemostatic agent and was non-inferior to BT-JMI. No antibodies to thrombin developed in TTH-Grifols-treated patients.

### PMID 29185055 (2018) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: BioGlue&#xae; induced granuloma causing symptomatic spinal cord compression: a late complication.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-017-3411-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BioGlue&#xae; is an inert, bioadhesive surgical substance commonly used in spinal surgery to aid dural closure. The authors describe two cases in which the use of BioGlue&#xae; caused a local reaction culminating in the formation of a granuloma that caused cord compression several years after surgery in one case in which a second operation was required to relieve cord compression and remove the foreign material. In the other case spontaneous resolution occurred. To our knowledge these are the first reports of delayed spinal cord compression secondary to BioGlue&#xae;-induced granuloma. We recommend judicious use of this substance.

### PMID 30057825 (2018) — Case reports in anesthesiology
TITLE: Percutaneous Epidural Hydrogel Sealant for the Treatment of Spontaneous Intracranial Hypotension: A Case Report of Chronic Thoracic Neuralgia and Technical Lessons Learned.
DOI: 10.1155/2018/4189518 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case in which a 34-year-old female with refractory intracranial hypotension headaches due to a spontaneous dural tear was ultimately treated with CT-guided transforaminal epidural placement of a synthetic absorbable sealant (DuraSeal&#xae;). The procedure successfully resolved her headaches; however she subsequently developed thoracic neuralgia presumably due to mass effect of the sealant material on the lower thoracic spinal cord and nerve roots. This case report describes the potential for significant spinal cord and nerve root compression as well as the development of chronic neuralgia with the placement of epidural hydrogel and fibrin glue sealants. Careful consideration should be taken into the needle gauge, needle position, injectate volumes, and injection velocity when delivering the sealant to the epidural space. Use of an 18-gauge Tuohy needle with a slow but steady injection pressure, constant patient feedback, and a conservative injectate volume (less than 2&#x2009;ml per level) may best optimize sealant delivery to minimize the risk of spinal cord compression and neurologic injury.

### PMID 29281065 (2018) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Usefulness of Sealants for Dural Closure: Evaluation in an In Vitro Model.
DOI: 10.1093/ons/opx260 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage occurs in 4% to 32% of cranial surgeries and is associated with significant patient burden and expense. The use of sealant as an adjunct to primary dural closure is assumed to help prevent CSF leakage.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the utility of different sealants for dural closure using an in Vitro model.
METHODS: We evaluated 9 commonly used dural sealants, including Tachosil (Takeda Inc, Osaka, Japan), Adherus (Hyperbranch Inc, Durham, North Carolina), Duraform (Codman, Raynham, Massachusetts), Tissudura (Baxter, Deerfield, Illinois), Hemopatch (Baxter), TissuePatchDural (Tissuemed, Leeds, United Kingdom), Tisseel (Baxter), Duragen Secure (Integra, Plainsboro, New Jersey), and Duraseal, (Integra). Sealants were tested in 2 novel in Vitro setups using fresh porcine dura: the first tested the acute burst pressure of a sealed 3-mm gap, while the second examined resistance to a pressure wave mimicking intracranial pressure for 72 h.
RESULTS: Adherus showed the highest mean burst pressure (87 &#xb1; 47 mmHg) followed by Tachosil (71 &#xb1; 16 mmHg) and Duraseal (51 &#xb1; 42 mmHg); these were the only 3 sealants showing burst pressures above normal physiological intracranial pressure. In the 72-h setup, only Adherus and Duraseal maintained appropriate sealing for the duration of the experiment. Tachosil released from the dura after 1.4 h (95% confidence interval, -1.8-4.7).
CONCLUSION: Given the high cost of sealants and the results of this study, we advocate a critical attitude toward sealant application as an adjunct to classic dural closure.

### PMID 30505718 (2018) — Quantitative imaging in medicine and surgery
TITLE: Type II endoleak model creation and intraoperative aneurysmal sac embolization with n-butyl cyanoacrylate-lipiodol-ethanol mixture (NLE) in swine.
DOI: 10.21037/qims.2018.10.01 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of type II endoleak model creation and efficacy of intraoperative aneurysmal sac embolization using n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate-lipiodol-ethanol mixture (NLE) for type II endoleak in swine.
METHODS: In six swine (mean body weight 53.5 kg), abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) was created and then end-to-side anastomosis between the left renal artery and AAA sac was performed. And then, endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) was performed, leading to creation of a type II endoleak model. As control group, EVAR without sac embolization was performed in two swine. In four swine, AAA sac was embolized using NLE immediately after EVAR via the microcatheter placed in AAA sac (NLE embolization group). Follow-up aortography was performed immediately and three days after the procedure, and then the aneurysms were extracted.
RESULTS: The AAA sac and type II endoleak model were successfully created in all cases. In control group, type II endoleak persisted three days after the procedure. In NLE embolization group, endoleak disappeared immediately and three days after the procedure. In NLE embolization group, AAA sac was occupied with thrombus and embolic material. Inflammatory changes were recognized in aneurysmal sac wall in NLE embolization group.
CONCLUSIONS: This experimental study suggests that creation of a type II endoleak model in swine is feasible and that intraoperative AAA sac embolization with NLE during EVAR might reduce the occurrence of type II endoleak.

### PMID 30146214 (2018) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Embolization of Congenital Anastomosis between Bronchial and Pulmonary Arteries Using N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate Combined with Lipiodol and Ethanol under Temporary Balloon Occlusion.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2018.01.765 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 29941385 (2018) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Transabdominal Direct Sac Puncture Embolization of Type II Endoleaks after Endovascular Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm&#xa0;Repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2018.04.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To determine the efficacy and safety of transabdominal direct sac puncture embolization of type II endoleaks after endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This retrospective review included 30 patients (4 women, 26 men; mean age&#xa0;= 79.1 years) who underwent 33 transabdominal direct sac puncture embolization procedures for type II endoleaks after EVAR. Embolization agents included cyanoacrylate glue only (45.5%), glue/coils (36.4%), and Onyx with or without glue/coils (18.1%). Technical success was defined as complete endoleak embolization on intraprocedural fluoroscopy. The primary outcome was freedom of aneurysm growth, which was defined as &#x2264; 5% aneurysm sac volume change on follow-up computed tomography (CT) imaging or &#x2264; 5 mm aneurysm sac diameter change on ultrasound without definite endoflow. Aneurysm sac volumes before and after embolization were manually segmented from CT images. The procedural complication rate was calculated.
RESULTS: Technical success was achieved in 97% of patients (29/30). Follow-up imaging was available in 27 patients (25 CT; 2 ultrasound), and mean imaging follow-up duration was 15.5 months. Freedom of aneurysm growth was achieved in 85.2% of patients (23/27) after 1 or more embolization procedures. Median fluoroscopic and procedure times were 11.3 minutes and 90 minutes, respectively. The complication rate was 9.1% (3/33) and included 1 case of nontarget embolization with transient neuropraxia and 2 self-limiting rectus sheath hematomas relating to the percutaneous puncture site. No aneurysm-related mortality occurred during the follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: Percutaneous transabdominal embolization is a safe and efficacious treatment for type II endoleak, with a short procedure time.

### PMID 29705224 (2018) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Translumbar Infusion of N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate for the Treatment of Type II Endoleaks.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2018.01.788 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate long-term efficacy of translumbar embolization of type II endoleaks exclusively supplied by the lumbar arteries in patients with growing abdominal aortic aneurysm sacs using N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) instilled via percutaneous needle access.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study included 25 patients who developed type II endoleak after endovascular aneurysm repair. Inclusion criteria for intervention were defined as sac expansion &gt; 5 mm detected with CT angiography at 6-month follow-up or later. Translumbar infusion of NBCA directly into the patent portion of the aneurysm sac was performed in all cases. Duplex US was performed the day after the intervention, and CT angiography was performed within the first month. Subsequently, duplex US was performed at 3, 6, and 9 months, and CT angiography or CT was performed at 12 months and annually thereafter.
RESULTS: Translumbar embolization was achieved in all 25 patients. The endoleak resolved in 22 patients (88%) on duplex US performed 1 day after the embolization procedure. Three patients with persistent endoleak (12%) required repeat embolization. Two complications were detected and were managed conservatively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the safety and efficacy of NBCA injection for treatment of type II endoleaks. This technique provides another option for the management of type II endoleaks.

### PMID 29654570 (2018) — La Radiologia medica
TITLE: The role of ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer in association with other embolic agents for the percutaneous and endovascular treatment of type Ia endoleak.
DOI: 10.1007/s11547-018-0885-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: To evaluate safety, technical and clinical success of embolization of type Ia endoleak (T1a EL) using ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer as embolic agent alone or in combination with other materials.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five patients presented T1a EL after endovascular repair of aortic aneurysms (EVAR) with radiological evidence of expanding sac size; in particular, three had contained rupture. In one patient, proximal cuff insertion was previously performed, in three patients proximal cuff was urgently inserted but T1a EL persisted; one patient, previously treated with Ovation Abdominal Stent Graft System, was directly proposed for endovascular treatment. In all cases, endovascular embolization was successfully performed and the transfemoral approach was always chosen; in one case it failed and translumbar approach by direct puncture of the sac was required. Used embolization agents were glue, ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer (Onyx) and coils in three cases, n-butyl cyanoacrylate and Onyx in one case, Onyx and coils in the last case.
RESULTS: Technical success rate was 100% as well as clinical success. No major or minor complication, including non-target embolization, was registered. Clinical success was 100% until today and the sac diameter remained stable in four patients and decreased in one.
CONCLUSIONS: Onyx may be considered a suitable embolic agent in the treatment of patients with type Ia endoleaks after EVAR, after failure of conventional treatments such as prolonged balloon inflation of the aortic neck or deployment of large bare stent.

### PMID 29343674 (2018) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: A Spontaneous Abdominal Aortic Pseudoaneurysm Treated with N-butyl Cyanoacrylate and Coil Embolization: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.5761/atcs.cr.17-00040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Pseudoaneurysms are vascular spaces vulnerable to pressure, and expansion or rupture of these spaces may occur during embolization. Here, we describe the case of a transcatheter embolization of a spontaneous aortic pseudoaneurysm, which showed gradual expansion during n-butyl cyanoacrylate embolization. This pseudoaneurysm was successfully embolized with an adjuvant coil.

### PMID 34805845 (2018) — Journal of interventional medicine
TITLE: Embolizing intracranial arteriovenous malformations with Onyx: experience at a single center with 250 patients.
DOI: 10.19779/j.cnki.2096-3602.2018.03.06 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Objective The aim of this study is to evaluate the embolization techniques, as well as the effects and complications, using the non-adhesive liquid embolic material Onyx in intracranial arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). Methods The study comprises a retrospective analysis of 250 patients with intracranial AVMs treated with Onyx in Guangdong General Hospital from Jan 2010 to Dec 2017. The therapeutic strategies, as well as embolization effects and complications, of Onyx are summarized. Results Of 250 cases, 170 were male and 80 were female. Following the Spetzler-Martin (S-M) grading system, there were 35 cases of grade I, 77 of grade II, 72 of grade III, 39 of grade IV, and 27 of grade V. All cases were treated with Onyx. In addition, 69 cases were treated with Glubran glue. The injected volume of Onyx per patient ranged from 1 mL to 10 mL. The largest volume of Onyx injected in one procedure was 10 mL. The cure rate was 67.9% (76/112) of grade I-II patients, 15.0% (11/72) of grade III patients, 7.7% (3/39) of grade IV patients, and 0% (0/27) of grade V patients. The total cure rate was 36.0% (90/250). The average number of targeted vascular branches per patient was 2.28. The microcatheter broke off in two cases. There were two patients who suffered an intracranial hemorrhage during the embolic procedure; in one of these two patients, the microcatheter also broke off. There were two patients who suffered an intracranial hemorrhage after the embolic procedure; one of them died. Seven cases suffered new-onset neurological deficits or their original symptoms deteriorated. Six of them improved or recovered within 3-6 months. The total complication rate was 5.2% (13/250). Conclusion The application of Onyx in intracranial AVMs is flexible, effective and safe, and may also reduce the complications.

### PMID 30327287 (2018) — EuroIntervention : journal of EuroPCR in collaboration with the Working Group on Interventional Cardiology of the European Society of Cardiology
TITLE: A new Percutaneous technique for effective vascular Access Site closure in patients undergoing Transfemoral aortic valve implantation and thoraco-abdominal aortic aneurysm rEpair: the PASTE study.
DOI: 10.4244/EIJ-D-18-00245 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIMS: The success of transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) and thoraco-abdominal aneurysm repair (TAAR) depends on haemostatic control of the access site, which is usually obtained with suture-based closure devices (Prostar or two ProGlide). A single ProGlide/Glubran technique, involving a suture placement on the vessel wall followed by tissue glue injection around the vessel wall, has not been previously investigated in this clinical setting. Our aim was to study the feasibility and safety of a single ProGlide/Glubran technique for vascular access-site closure after transfemoral TAVI and TAAR.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This technique was used in 250 patients from 2012 to 2017. The primary endpoint was the success of the technique, defined as access-site haemostasis without complications and not requiring any additional intervention within 30 days of the index procedure. Patients had a mean age of 82.4&#xb1;1.93 years, with a logistic EuroSCORE of 20.2&#xb1;2.32. A total of 218 TAVI and 32 TAAR procedures were performed with a mean sheath size of 18.09&#xb1;1.55 Fr. The mean sheath to femoral artery ratio was 1.04&#xb1;0.16, with mean femoral artery minimal lumen diameter 6.65&#xb1;0.64 mm. The overall success rate of this technique was 98.4%. Four patients (1.6%) developed critical stenosis of the femoral artery requiring balloon dilatation. No major VARC-2 vascular complications were observed. Thirty-day mortality was 0.4% (non-cardiovascular).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest that the single ProGlide/Glubran technique is a safe and effective method of closing the arterial access site after transfemoral TAVI and TAAR. The results of our study need to be confirmed in a randomised controlled trial before being adopted in routine clinical practice.

### PMID 30306060 (2018) — Quantitative imaging in medicine and surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous ultrasound-guided balloon-assisted embolization of iatrogenic femoral artery pseudoaneurysms with Glubran&#xae;2 cyanoacrylate glue: safety, efficacy and outcomes.
DOI: 10.21037/qims.2018.09.12 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Femoral pseudoaneurysm (PA) is a frequent complication of arterial access for endovascular procedures. Surgery has traditionally been considered as the gold standard of therapy. We aimed to report our experience of percutaneous ultrasound (US)-guided balloon-assisted embolization with cyanoacrylate glue for the treatment of iatrogenic femoral PAs.
METHODS: Retrospective two-center study of patients with femoral iatrogenic PAs treated by N-butyl cyanoacrylate-methacryloxy sulfolane (NBCA-MS) Glubran&#xae;2 glue embolization between July 2013 and November 2017. All patients underwent contralateral arterial access with balloon placement of an appropriate size in front of the PA neck before glue/lipiodol embolization in a 1:1 ratio by percutaneous US-guided puncture of the aneurysmal sac under fluoroscopy control.
RESULTS: Twenty-three patients (12 females, 11 males; median age, 79 years; range, 18-93 years) were included. Median PA size was 34 mm (range, 17-60 mm). The median time to treatment was 5 days (range, 1-30 days). Twenty patients (86.9%) were successfully treated by glue injection alone. The three remaining patients (13.1%) with persistent PA or associated arterial-venous fistula were immediately treated during the same procedure by additional stent-graft. Then, overall immediate and 1-month clinical success rates were 100%. No surgical conversion was necessary. No recurrence was reported during the median follow-up of 11 months (range, 2-73 months). Two (8.7%) puncture-related complications occurred at the contralateral arterial access site, which spontaneously resolved. No non-target glue embolization occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: US-guided balloon-assisted glue embolization is safe and effective to treat iatrogenic femoral PAs in most cases, offering complete exclusion of the PA and avoiding the morbidity of open surgery.

### PMID 29928611 (2018) — Quantitative imaging in medicine and surgery
TITLE: Atypical use of ALN inferior vena cava filters as protection devices prior to embolization of a large portosystemic shunt with Amplatzer Vascular Plugs and Glubran 2 cyanoacrylate glue.
DOI: 10.21037/qims.2018.03.11 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 29729454 (2018) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Transarterial Balloon-Assisted Glue Embolization of Pial Arteriovenous Fistulas.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.04.171 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Endovascular disconnection of pial arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs) is challenging. The aim of this study was to evaluate safety and effectiveness of transarterial balloon-assisted glue embolization for treating pial AVFs.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed medical and imaging records of 8 patients with high-flow pial AVFs treated by transarterial balloon-assisted glue embolization from August 2011 to July&#xa0;2017.
RESULTS: There were 6 male patients and 2 female patients with age range of 1-48 years. Presentation was seizure in 4 patients, headache in 3 patients, and subarachnoid hemorrhage in 1 patient. Seven lesions were located in the supratentorial region. All lesions were single-channel fistulas associated with venous varix. Five lesions had a single feeder, and 3 had multiple feeders. All lesions were obliterated completely in single-session embolization with no procedure-related complications. Two patients experienced symptomatic thrombosis of drainage venous system after embolization. One patient fully recovered on discharge, and another patient fully recovered after 8 months. With a mean clinical follow-up of 12.1 months, all patients were free of pretreatment symptoms. Follow-up angiograms revealed durable occlusion of fistulas.
CONCLUSIONS: Transarterial balloon-assisted glue embolization is a feasible and effective option for treatment of high-flow pial AVFs.

### PMID 29462732 (2018) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Characteristics and Endovascular Management of the Posterior Cerebral Artery Anterior Temporal Branch Aneurysms.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2018.02.054 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To investigate characteristics of the posterior cerebral artery anterior temporal branch aneurysm and the safety and efficacy of endovascular management.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 6 patients with anterior temporal branch aneurysms were enrolled. All 6 patients had concurrent occlusion of the ipsilateral anterior circulating arteries. The aneurysms ranged from 2.5 to 5.0 mm. All patients were treated and followed up.
RESULTS: Four unruptured aneurysms were treated with coil embolization of the aneurysm sac only, with the parent artery maintained in 2 patients, slow flow in the parent artery in one and thrombosis at the aneurysm neck leading to parent artery occlusion in the last one. One patient with subarachnoid hemorrhage was treated with coil embolization of both the aneurysm and the parent artery, and the last patient with subarachnoid hemorrhage was treated with the Glubran 2 glue to embolize both the aneurysm and the parent artery. One patient with subarachnoid hemorrhage died of lung complication after embolization. Followed up for 3 months to 1 year, the 4 patients with unruptured aneurysms had no symptoms, including 1 patient with slow flow in the anterior temporal artery and 1 patient with thrombosis and parent artery occlusion. The remaining patient with parent artery occlusion had a good recovery.
CONCLUSIONS: The anterior temporal artery aneurysm is a special subtype of aneurysm and can be readily misdiagnosed as on the posterior cerebral artery trunk or the superior cerebellar artery. Endovascular management has a greater success rate, good effect, and fewer complications but with greater difficulties.

### PMID 29056401 (2018) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Outcomes of Transcatheter Arterial Embolization with a Modified N-Butyl Cyanoacrylate Glue for Spontaneous Iliopsoas and Rectus Sheath Hematomas in Anticoagulated Patients.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2017.08.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To assess the efficacy and safety of n-butyl cyanoacrylate methacryloxy sulfolane (NBCA-MS) transcatheter arterial embolization for anticoagulation-related soft-tissue bleeding and to evaluate predictive factors of clinical success and 30-day mortality.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective review of 50 anticoagulated patients (25 male; mean age, 71.7 y &#xb1; 14.2; range, 19-87 y) who underwent emergent Glubran 2 NBCA-MS embolization for iliopsoas hematomas (IPHs; n&#xa0;= 38), rectus sheath hematomas (n&#xa0;= 11), or both (n&#xa0;= 1) between 2011 and 2016 was performed. Inclusion criteria were active bleeding on computed tomography (CT) and anticoagulation. The mean number of red blood cell (RBC) units transfused was 4.8 &#xb1; 3.2 (range, 0-14), median hemoglobin level before embolization was 9.7 g/dL (range, 6.2-18 g/dL), and median "mean blood pressure" (MBP) was 62.5 mm Hg (range, 58.3-75 mm Hg). Mean International Normalized Ratio before intervention was 2.5 &#xb1; 1.5 (range, 1.0-6.9). Angiograms revealed extravasation in 44 of 50 patients (88%). Mean hematoma volume was 1,119.2 cm3 &#xb1; 863.5 (range, 134.0-3,589.0 cm3).
RESULTS: Technical success was achieved in 100% of patients, and 30-day clinical success was achieved in 66% of patients. Recurrent bleeding and mortality rates within 30 days of embolization were 34% and 44%, respectively. No complications related to the embolization procedure occurred. Lower MBP (P&#xa0;= .003), greater number of RBC units transfused (P&#xa0;= .003), greater volume of hematoma (P&#xa0;= .04), and IPH location (P&#xa0;= .02) were associated with decreased clinical success. Clinical failure (P&#xa0;= .00002), lower MBP (P&#xa0;= .004), greater number of RBC units transfused (P&#xa0;= .002), and IPH location (P&#xa0;= .01) were significantly associated with higher 30-day mortality rates.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcatheter arterial embolization with NBCA-MS is safe and effective in treating refractory soft-tissue bleeding in anticoagulated patients despite the high mortality rates associated with this patient population.

### PMID 28765976 (2018) — Abdominal radiology (New York)
TITLE: Safety and efficacy of transcatheter embolization with Glubran&#xae;2 cyanoacrylate glue for acute arterial bleeding: a single-center experience with 104 patients.
DOI: 10.1007/s00261-017-1267-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To assess the efficacy and the safety of Glubran&#xae;2 n-butyl cyanoacrylate metacryloxysulfolane (NBCA-MS) transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) for acute arterial bleeding from varied anatomic sites and to evaluate the predictive factors associated with clinical success and 30-day mortality.
METHODS: A retrospective review of consecutive patients who underwent emergent NBCA-MS Glubran&#xae;2 TAE between July 2014 and August 2016 was conducted. Variables including age, sex, underlying malignancy, cardiovascular comorbidities, coagulation data, systolic blood pressure, and number of red blood cells units (RBC) transfused before TAE were collected. Clinical success, 30-day mortality, and complication rates were evaluated. Prognostic factors were evaluated by uni- and multivariate logistic regression analyses for clinical success, and by uni- and bivariate analyses after adjustment by bleeding sites for 30-day mortality.
RESULTS: 104 patients underwent technically successful embolization with bleeding located in muscles (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;34, 32.7%), digestive tract (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;28, 26.9%), and viscera (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;42, 40.4%). Clinical success rate was 76% (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;79) and 30-day mortality rate was 21.2% (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;22). Clinical failure was significantly associated with mortality (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.0001). A number of RBC units transfused greater than or equal to 3 were associated with poorer clinical success (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.025) and higher mortality (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.03). Complications (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;4, 3.8%) requiring surgery occurred only at puncture site. No ischemic complications requiring further invasive treatment occurred. Mean TAE treatment time was 4.55&#xa0;min.
CONCLUSIONS: NBCA-MS Glubran&#xae;2 TAE is a fast, effective, and safe treatment for acute arterial bleeding whatever the bleeding site.

### PMID 30505112 (2018) — Oman journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Outcomes of pterygium surgery-glue versus autologous blood versus sutures for graft fixation-an analysis.
DOI: 10.4103/ojo.OJO_4_2017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: The aim of this study is to compare the surgical outcomes of pterygium excision with conjunctival autograft using sutures, fibrin glue (tisseel), and autologous blood for the management of primary pterygium.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective study done in 681 eyes with primary nasal pterygium. Excision of the pterygium was performed followed by closure of the bare sclera with conjunctival autograft using interrupted 10-0 monofilament nylon sutures in 173 eyes (Group 1), fibrin glue (tisseel-baxter healthcare corporation, westlake village, ca-91362 USA) in 351 eyes (Group 2), and autologous blood in 157 eyes (Group 3). Patients were followed up for a period of 5-52 months. During follow-up, graft-related complications such as recurrence, graft loss, graft retraction, granuloma if any were noted and compared among the three groups.
RESULTS: A total of 681 eyes who had primary nasal pterygium were included in this study. Pterygium excision with conjunctival autograft was performed using 10-0 monofilament nylon interrupted sutures in 173 eyes (25.4%), tisseel fibrin glue in 351 eyes (51.54%), and autologous blood in 157 (23.05%) eyes. The mean duration of follow-up was 5-52 months. The overall recurrence rate was 2.9% (20 eyes). In Group 1, recurrence was seen in 5 eyes (2.89%), in Group 2, it was seen in 7 eyes (1.99%) and in Group 3, 8 eyes (5.10%). However, the recurrence rate was not significant (P = 0.160). The rate of graft retraction in the 3 study groups were 12 eyes (6.94%), 10 eyes (2.85%), and 56 eyes (35.67%) with a significant P &lt; 0.001. Granuloma was seen in 2 eyes (1.16%), in Group 1, and in 1 eye (0.64%) in Group 3. Graft loss was seen in 3 eyes (1.73%), 4 eyes (1.14%), 6 eyes (3.82%) in Group 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The outcomes of the three most commonly performed surgical technique of conjunctival autograft fixation has shown us that all three techniques are equally comparable and can be offered to our patients with equally good results.

### PMID 30510888 (2018) — Journal of neurological surgery reports
TITLE: Tension Pneumocephalus after Cervical Spine Surgery: A Case Report with Review of the Literature.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1676298 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This is the case of a 66-year-old male with cervical myelopathy secondary to severe cervical stenosis manifesting as worsening dexterity and numbness in his right hand. The patient underwent C3-C6 laminoplasty with bilateral foraminotomies. During the procedure an incidental durotomy occurred which was patched intraoperatively with Duragen and Tisseel. At 1&#x2009;month follow-up, the patient reported that he was doing well and skin sutures were removed. Two days later, the patient presented to the emergency department with postoperative wound dehiscence, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage, altered mental status and lethargy. At that time, a computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed a tension pneumocephalus which was treated with a cranial burr hole and revision durotomy repair. The patient improved and was discharged to a rehabilitation facility with intact motor and cognitive function. At the 1-year follow-up appointment, he continued to do well without sequelae.

### PMID 28799873 (2018) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: "Birdlime" technique using TachoSil tissue sealing sheet soaked with fibrin glue for sutureless vessel transposition in microvascular decompression: operative technique and nuances.
DOI: 10.3171/2017.1.JNS161243 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE Microvascular decompression (MVD) is effective for the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (TN), hemifacial spasm (HFS), and glossopharyngeal neuralgia. The transposition technique is the standard procedure to avoid adhesions and granuloma around the decompression site but is more complex and difficult to perform than the interposition technique. The authors describe a simple and safe MVD transposition procedure they call the "birdlime" technique, which uses a tissue glue-coated collagen sponge soaked with fibrin glue, and the results of this technique. METHODS The authors retrospectively reviewed the medical charts and radiographic findings of 27 consecutive patients with TN (8 patients) and HFS (19 patients) who, between January 2012 and December 2015, had undergone an MVD transposition procedure utilizing a tissue glue-coated collagen sponge (TachoSil tissue sealing sheet) soaked with fibrin glue (Tisseel 2-component fibrin sealant, vapor heated). Offending arteries among the patients with TN were the superior cerebellar artery (SCA) in 5 patients, the SCA and anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) in 2, and the AICA in 1. Those among the patients with HFS were the vertebral artery (VA) in 3 patients, the VA and AICA in 4, the VA and posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) in 3, the PICA in 4, the AICA in 1, the AICA-PICA in 3, and the PICA and AICA in 1. Operations were performed according to the Jannetta procedure. The offending artery was transposed and fixed to the dura mater of the petrous bone using TachoSil pieces soaked with fibrin glue. Postoperative constructive interference in steady-state MRI was performed to evaluate the change in the position of the offending artery. RESULTS Transposition of the offending artery was easily and safely performed in all patients. All patients had total remission of symptoms directly after the procedure. No severe complications occurred. The postoperative course was uneventful. No recurrences, adhesions, or dysfunction of the cranial nerves was observed in any of the patients. Postoperative MRI showed that the offending vessels were displaced and fixed in the appropriate position. CONCLUSIONS The described transposition technique provides an easy and adjustable way to perform MVD safely and effectively. In addition, this transposition and fixation technique is simple and avoids the risk of needle injury close to the cranial nerves and vessels. This simple sutureless technique is recommended for MVD to reduce the risk of intraoperative neurovascular injury.

### PMID 29905060 (2018) — Swiss dental journal
TITLE: [Therapeutic options to manage bleeding in a dentist&#x2019;s office].
DOI: 10.61872/sdj-2018-06-02 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: This manuscript provides an overview of therapeutic options for the problem of bleeding in a dentist&#x2019;s office. Bleeding after tooth extraction is a very common finding in dental medicine and persistent blood in the mouth is obviously uncomfortable and sometimes terrifying for the patient. Most bleedings can be stopped simply with compression, in some cases a homeostatic therapy is necessary. For local compression, a swab with tranexamic acid is useful. If local compression is not sufficient, sutures are often an option. A very effective therapy would also be Tabotamp&#xae;, a local hemostypticum which is placed onto the bleeding and should increase the thrombocytic aggregation. In the worst case Floseal&#xae;, a human Thrombin, can be placed locally. It stops the bleeding very fast and sufficiently.

### PMID 28439721 (2018) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Incidence of thromboembolic events after use of gelatin-thrombin-based hemostatic matrix during intracranial tumor surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-017-0856-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: Association between the use of hemostatic agents made from collagen/gelatin mixed with thrombin and thromboembolic events in patients undergoing tumor resection has been suggested. This study evaluates the relationship between flowable hemostatic matrix and deep vein thrombosis in a large cohort of patients treated for brain tumor removal. The authors conducted a retrospective, multicenter, clinical review of all craniotomies for tumor removal performed between 2013 and 2014. Patients were classified in three groups: group I (flowable gelatin hemostatic matrix with thrombin), group II (gelatin hemostatic without thrombin), and group III (classical hemostatic). A total of 932 patients were selected: tumor pathology included 441 gliomas, 296 meningiomas, and 195 metastases. Thromboembolic events were identified in 4.7% of patients in which gelatin matrix with thrombin was applied, in 8.4% of patients with gelatin matrix without thrombin, and in 3.6% of cases with classical methods of hemostasis. Patients with venous thromboembolism had an increased proportion of high-grade gliomas (7.2%). Patients receiving a greater dose than 10&#xa0;ml gelatin hemostatic had a higher rate of thromboembolic events. Intracranial hematoma requiring reintervention occurred in 19 cases: 4.5% of cases of group III, while reoperation was performed in 1.3 and 1.6% of patients in which gelatin matrix with or without thrombin was applied. Gelatin matrix hemostat is an efficacious tool for neurosurgeons in cases of difficult intraoperative bleeding during cranial tumor surgery. This study may help to identify those patients at high risk for developing thromboembolism and to treat them accordingly.

### PMID 29068803 (2018) — A&amp;A practice
TITLE: Anaphylaxis to Surgiflo During Posterior Spinal Fusion in an Adolescent Status Post Truncus Arteriosus Repair: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1213/XAA.0000000000000646 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anaphylactic reaction to gelatin-containing hemostatic agents has been reported in the orthopedic literature, most commonly during scoliosis repair in adolescents. However, the risk, differential diagnosis, and management of anaphylaxis in patients with complex congenital heart disease undergoing noncardiac procedures have not been previously reported. We describe the case of an adolescent with a history of repaired truncus arteriosus undergoing posterior spinal fusion who developed sudden and profound hypotension that was ultimately confirmed to be an anaphylactic reaction to Surgiflo. Echocardiography was used to aid in diagnosis and management of the cardiovascular effects of anaphylaxis in this patient with residual cardiac pathophysiology.

### PMID 30202631 (2018) — Turkish journal of obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Use of a gelatin-thrombin hemostatic matrix in obstetrics and gynecological surgery.
DOI: 10.4274/tjod.90217 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Gelatin-thrombin matrix (GTM) is a hemostatic sealant consisting of bovine-derived gelatin matrix and human-derived thrombin, combining both mechanical and active mechanisms to achieve hemostasis. It was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 1999. GTM has been used by several surgical specialties; however, it is a possibly an under-used tool in obstetrics and gynecology. A limited number of studies have been performed on its use during laparoscopic endometrioma excision and myomectomy. It may prove useful in endometrioma excision in reproductive aged women because it is likely to harm ovarian reserve less than electrocautery; however, this conclusion needs to be validated. The only study on GTM use in myomectomy included 50 women randomized into GTM and control groups, and showed decreased blood loss and shorter hospital stays in the GTM group. In gynecologic oncology, it was successfully used to reduce lymphocele cases in a cohort study. GTM has been used successfully in obstetrics in a handful of cases of uncontrolled bleeding from caesarean scar, placental site, ectopic pregnancy, rectovaginal hematoma, and venous plexus over the vaginal vault after emergency postpartum hysterectomy. Risk of viral transmission is a major concern about GTM, yet there are no reports on disease transmission with GTM use to date. Rare but serious adverse effects and complications have been reported such as fatal or near-fatal thromboembolism and small bowel obstruction. Although GTM is mostly a safe product, it is still not free of complications and risks. In conclusion, although routine use of GTM cannot be recommended due to concerns about its safety, cost, and availability, it may prove useful when conventional hemostatic methods such as suturing and electrocauterization fail or are not appropriate.

### PMID 29465600 (2018) — Medicine
TITLE: A novel endobronchial approach to massive hemoptysis complicating silicone Y-stent placement for tracheobronchomalacia: A case report.
DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000009980 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: RATIONALE: Airway stabilization for severe, symptomatic tracheobronchomalacia (TBM) may be accomplished by silicone Y-stent placement. Common complications of the Y-stent include mucus plugging and granulation tissue formation.
PATIENT CONCERNS: We describe a rare case of massive hemoptysis originating from a silicone Y-stent placed for TBM.
DIAGNOSES: An emergent bronchoscopy showed an actively bleeding, pulsatile vessel at the distal end of the left bronchial limb of the Y-stent. It was felt that the bleeding was caused by, or at least impacted by, the distal left bronchial limb of the Y-stent eroding into the airway wall.
INTERVENTIONS: We hypothesized that placement of oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) would provide initial hemostasis, and the subsequent placement of a biocompatible surgical sealant would lead to definitive resolution.
OUTCOMES: ORC provided sufficient hemostasis and the subsequent synthetic polymer reinforced the tissue for complete cessation of the bleed.
LESSONS: The combined use of ORC and a biocompatible surgical sealant provided long-term management for life-threatening hemoptysis, and potentially morbid procedures such as embolization or surgery were avoided by advanced endobronchial therapy.

### PMID 29107157 (2018) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Efficacy, Reliability, and Safety of Completely Autologous Fibrin Glue in Neurosurgical Procedures: Single-Center Retrospective Large-Number Case Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2017.10.097 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Commercially available fibrin glue (Com-FG), which is used commonly worldwide, is produced with pooled human plasma from multiple donors. However, it has added bovine aprotinin, which involves the risk of infection, allogenic immunity, and allergic reactions. We evaluate the efficacy, reliability, and safety of completely autologous fibrin glue (CAFG).
METHODS: From August 2014 to February 2016, prospective data were collected and analyzed from 153 patients. CAFG was prepared with the CryoSeal System using autologous blood and was applied during neurosurgical procedures. Using CAFG-soaked oxidized regenerated cellulose and/or polyglycolic acid sheets, we performed a pinpoint hemostasis, transposed the offending vessels in a microvascular decompression, and covered the dural incision to prevent cerebrospinal fluid leakage.
RESULTS: The CryoSeal System had generated up to a mean of 4.51 mL (range, 3.0-8.4 mL) of CAFG from 400 mL autologous blood. Com-FG products were not used in our procedures. Only 6 patients required an additional allogeneic blood transfusion. The hemostatic effective rate was 96.1% (147 of 153 patients). Only 1 patient who received transsphenoidal surgery for a pituitary adenoma presented with the complication of delayed postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage (0.65%). No patient developed allergic reactions or systemic complications associated with the use of CAFG.
CONCLUSIONS: CAFG effectively provides hemostatic, adhesive, and safety performance. The timing and three-dimensional shape of CAFG-soaked oxidized regenerated cellulose and/or polyglycolic acid sheets solidification can be controlled with slow fibrin formation. The cost to prepare CAFG is similar compared with Com-FG products, and it can therefore be easily used at most institutions.

### PMID 29096598 (2018) — Journal of medical economics
TITLE: Cost-effectiveness analysis of a sealing hemostat patch (HEMOPATCH) vs standard of care in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2017.1400977 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A recent randomized controlled trial showed that patients undergoing ascending aorta surgery treated with HEMOPATCH to control bleeding had a significantly better hemostasis success rate than with dry or wet gauze compression or similar standard of care (SOC).
OBJECTIVE: To compare the cost-effectiveness using two different agents for hemostasis (HEMOPATCH vs dry or wet gauze compression or similar SOC) in cardiac surgery from the European hospital perspective.
METHODS: A literature-based cost-effectiveness model estimating average cost per successful hemostasis event was developed based on the hemostasis efficacy difference (HEMOPATCH&#x2009;=&#x2009;97.6%, SOC&#x2009;=&#x2009;65.8%, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.001). Additional clinically significant end-points studied in the trial (blood transfusions and surgical revisions) were also analyzed. It was assumed that each surgery utilized two units of HEMOPATCH (dimensions of 4.5&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;9&#x2009;cm) and two units of SOC. Product acquisition costs for HEMOPATCH and SOC were included along with outcome-related costs derived from the literature and inflation-adjusted to 2017 EUR and GBP. Results are presented for an average hospital with an annual case load of 574 cardiac surgeries. One-way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Considering only product acquisition cost, HEMOPATCH had an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of &#x20ac;1,659, &#x20ac;1,519, &#x20ac;1,623, and &#xa3;1,725 per hemostasis success when compared to SOC for Italy, Spain, France, and the UK, respectively. However, when considering the cost and potential difference in the frequency of transfusions and revisions compared to SOC, the use of HEMOPATCH was associated with an annual reduction of six revisions and 60 transfusions, improving the ICER to &#x20ac;1,440, &#x20ac;1,222, &#x20ac;1,461, and &#xa3;1,592, respectively. Sensitivity analysis demonstrated model robustness.
CONCLUSIONS: This analysis supports the use of HEMOPATCH over SOC in cardiac surgery in European hospitals to improve hemostasis success rates and potential cost offsets from reduced transfusions, complications, and surgical revisions.

### PMID 30187219 (2018) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Intracranial foreign material granulomas after cranial surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-018-3663-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Various synthetic materials are used in neurosurgery and left in place intentionally during surgery for several purposes such as hemostasis, dural closure, or cranioplasty. Although leaving such substances in surgical sites is considered safe, in general, foreign body granuloma may occur months or years after intracranial surgery. Thus, far relatively little is known about treatment and outcome of such lesions.
METHODS: A systematic review of 3466 histopathological examinations after cranial surgeries achieved over a 13-year period was performed. After excluding patients with Teflon granulomas or infection, a total of 12 patients with foreign body granulomas induced by synthetic material used in a prior surgery were identified. Patient records, imaging studies, and histopathological data were analyzed. Furthermore, postoperative outcome was assessed.
RESULTS: Mean age at the second surgery was 51&#xa0;years (range, 11-68&#xa0;years). The median time between the primary and the secondary surgery was 13&#xa0;months (range, 1-545&#xa0;months). Eight patients (75%) presented with signs and symptoms related to the foreign body granulomas. Total resection of the foreign body granulomas was performed in all patients. The granulomas were induced by oxidized cellulose polymer (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6), suture material (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3), Gelfoam (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1), methylmethacrylate (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1), and bone wax (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1). The mean postoperative follow-up time was 54&#xa0;months (range 1-137&#xa0;months). There was symptomatic improvement in all instances. Imaging studies did not demonstrate any recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Despite its rarity, foreign body granuloma should be taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis of intracranial mass lesions especially in cases of suspected tumor recurrence after prior surgery. The pathogenesis of foreign body granuloma still needs further clarification. Our study demonstrates that they have good prognosis after surgical removal.

### PMID 29608482 (2018) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Posterior Fossa Re-Exploration for Recurrent Trigeminal Neuralgia: Operative Findings and Surgical Techniques.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000004576 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Microvascular decompression (MVD) is considered the first choice for the surgical treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (TN). However, recurrence after MVD is still a problem and a challenge for neurosurgeons. In this study, we share our experience in the posterior fossa re-exploration of the recurrent cases.
METHODS: From January 2014 to January 2015, 15 recurrent TN patients who received fossa re-exploration were retrospectively studied. Surgeries were performed by retrosigmoid suboccipital approach. Brainstem auditory evoked potentials (BAEP) were monitored throughout the operation. Intraoperative findings and surgical techniques were recorded. Postoperative outcomes and complications were analyzed.
RESULTS: Among the 15 patients, Teflon adhesion was found in 14. Teflon felt displacement was found in 4 patients, and additional Teflon felt was used to interpose. New offending vessels were found in 5 patients. Three of them were small arteries and the other 2 were petrosal veins. After dissected, small pieces of wet gelatin sponge and Teflon felt were implanted respectively to ensure complete decompression. The remaining 6 patients had no vascular compression except severe adhesion, and nerve combing was performed. After surgery, 12 achieved complete pain relief, 2 gained partial pain relief, and 1 failed. Six patients experienced facial numbness postoperatively. There was no hearing impairment or other complications. During the mean 26-month follow-up, no recurrence occurred and all of 6 cases with facial numbness after surgery improved.
CONCLUSIONS: Teflon adhesion is a significant cause of recurrent TN. Wet gelatin-assisted method is good for Teflon interposition. If no vascular compression is found during re-exploration, trigeminal nerve combing can be used. Intraoperative BAEP monitoring is helpful to reduce the incidence of hearing loss.

### PMID 29687263 (2018) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: A Stepwise Embolization Strategy for a Bronchial Arterial Aneurysm: Proximal Coil and Distal Glue with the Optional Use of a Microballoon Occlusion System.
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-018-1969-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This study aimed to demonstrate a transcatheter embolization strategy for bronchial artery aneurysms (BAAs) using coils for the proximal lesion and glue (n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate [NBCA]) embolization for the distal lesion with or without the use of a microballoon occlusion catheter.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five patients with BAAs presenting with hemoptysis were enrolled in this study. A bronchial angiogram indicated a mediastinal BAA near the orifice, accompanied by dilated distal branches with or without intrapulmonary BAA. A stepwise procedure was performed. First, the intrapulmonary branches were embolized with glue, with or without the use of a microballoon catheter depending upon the anatomical and local flow hemodynamic conditions. Second, the mediastinal BAA was tightly packed with detachable coils.
RESULTS: Glue embolization of intrapulmonary abnormal branches successfully controlled hemoptysis in all patients; microballoon catheters were used in five of the 10 arteries. The volume embolization ratio of coils within the mediastinal BAA ranged from 28 to 59%, and neither coil compaction nor signs of recanalization were observed during follow-up.
CONCLUSION: The stepwise embolization procedure with the sequential use of glue (with or without a microballoon occlusion system) and detachable coils may represent a possible endovascular strategy for the treatment of complex BAAs.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE IV: Level 4: Case Series.

### PMID 29878119 (2018) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Oxidized resorbable cellulose (Gelita-cel) causing foreign body reaction in the mediastinum.
DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivy180 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: Different types of oxidized cellulose have been used for haemorrhage control in thoracic surgery, abdominal surgery and neurosurgery. Oxidized resorbable cellulose (Gelita-cel) is a new haemostatic agent. Once saturated with blood, it swells and makes a gelatinous mass that formats as a fibrin clot. We have performed a prospective observational cohort study of patients operated for lung cancer or suspected lung cancer using Gelita-cel as a haemostatic agent. Between October 2010 and April 2012, 477 patients were operated in our department for lung cancer. Gelita-cel was used in 200 patients due to minor intraoperative haemorrhage after lymph node resection from Stations 2 to 11. During follow-up for lung cancer, computed tomography, which was performed 4-60&#x2009;months after the primary operation, showed enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum in 16 patients. Endoscopic bronchial ultrasonographic biopsies of the lymph nodes showed foreign body material and granulomatous inflammation, and no sign of lung cancer recurrence. Gelita-cel has a high risk of causing granuloma and should not be used as a haemostatic agent in thoracic surgery.

### PMID 29891539 (2018) — Infection and immunity
TITLE: Identification, Cloning, and Characterization of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius Coagulase.
DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00027-18 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Coagulase activation of prothrombin by staphylococcus induces the formation of fibrin deposition that facilitates the establishment of infection by Staphylococcus species. Coagulase activity is a key characteristic of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius; however, no coagulase gene or associated protein has been studied to characterize this activity. We report a recombinant protein sharing 40% similarity to Staphylococcus aureus coagulase produced from a putative S. pseudintermedius coagulase gene. Prothrombin activation by the protein was measured with a chromogenic assay using thrombin tripeptide substrate. Stronger interaction with bovine prothrombin than with human prothrombin was observed. The S. pseudintermedius coagulase protein also bound complement C3 and immunoglobulin. Recombinant coagulase facilitated the escape of S. pseudintermedius from phagocytosis, presumably by forming a bridge between opsonizing antibody, complement, and fibrinogen. Evidence from this work suggests that S. pseudintermedius coagulase has multifunctional properties that contribute to immune evasion that likely plays an important role in virulence.

### PMID 29411561 (2018) — Allergy, asthma &amp; immunology research
TITLE: A Case of Intraoperative Anaphylaxis Caused by Bovine-Derived Thrombin.
DOI: 10.4168/aair.2018.10.2.184 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative bovine-derived topical thrombin is still widely used for hemostasis during surgery. A 38-year-old woman with chronic spontaneous urticaria was referred to the orthopedic surgery department for herniated disk and myelopathy. During the first stage of operation, bovine-derived thrombin powder soaked in Gelfoam was used as a hemostatic aid. After 30 minutes, the patient developed anaphylactic shock with systemic skin rash and angioedema. Repeated intravenous bolus and infusion of vasopressor were carried out, and her blood pressure normalized. Skin test and specific immunoglobulin E test showed positive results for bovine thrombin and beef, respectively. During the second stage of operation (After 10 days from first stage of operation), bovine-derived thrombin powder was excluded and the operation was successful without any unexpected events. Therefore, bovine thrombin should be used with caution because it might cause anaphylaxis.

### PMID 29573937 (2018) — Academic radiology
TITLE: Comparison of Local Injection of Fresh Frozen Plasma to Traditional Methods of Hemostasis in Minimally Invasive Procedures.
DOI: 10.1016/j.acra.2018.03.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: To evaluate different techniques for reducing hemorrhagic complications in coagulopathic patients with elevated international normalized ratio having an image-guided percutaneous invasive procedure; techniques included systemic transfusion of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), local injection of FFP, percutaneous injection of gelatin sponge, and percutaneous placements of angiographic coils.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retrospective review of 232 consecutive patients with known coagulopathy undergoing image-guided minimally invasive procedures were selected. Ninety-one patients had local FFP injected, 40 patients underwent local synthetic gelatin injection, 16 patients had percutaneous coil embolization, and 85 patients received systemic FFP. The number of bleeds, complications related to bleeds, and systemic complications were recorded. A 30&#x2009;cc threshold was used to delineate significant bleeding.
RESULTS: No patients experienced clinically significant or insignificant bleeding with local FFP injection (P value &lt;.05). Other local hemostatic methods (Gelfoam, systemic FFP, and coil embolization) were associated with higher levels of bleeding (12.5%, 17.1%, 37.5%, respectively) and complications (7.5%, 31.4%, 37.5%, respectively). Systemic FFP infusion was associated with respiratory, infectious, and mortal complications.
CONCLUSIONS: Local injection of blood products provides a safe and efficacious hemostatic agent to reduce the incidence of postprocedural bleeding. The technique is associated with lower rates of bleeding and systemic complications when compared to other local and systemic techniques. Further randomized prospective studies with a larger patient cohort need to be performed to corroborate these initial findings.

### PMID 29854573 (2018) — Cureus
TITLE: Efficacy of Hemocoagulase as a Topical Hemostatic Agent After Dental Extractions: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.2398 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Extraction is one of the more common oral surgical procedures carried out in routine dental practice, and postextraction bleeding is a recognized, frequently encountered complication. It causes distress, agony, and discomfort to the patient. The aim of this systematic review was to analyze the existing literature and determine the efficacy of topical hemocoagulase as a hemostatic agent and its ability to reduce postoperative complications in comparison to routine saline pressure pack after the extraction of teeth. Information was collected from an electronic database (PubMed), and a manual search was also done in Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology, Oral Radiology; International Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery; and the British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. Only those articles which met the inclusion criteria were selected. All studies and articles that compared topical hemocoagulase with saline pressure pack in patients requiring extraction of teeth were selected for review. Literature abstracts and full-text articles were analysed in this review. A total of four articles were included in this systematic review. All were randomized clinical trials that evaluated the clinical outcomes of topical hemocoagulase compared with saline pressure packs in extraction socket sites. A significant difference was present between the hemocoagulase group and control group (saline pressure pack) in relation to bleeding stoppage time, pain, swelling, wound healing, and other postoperative complications. Topical hemocoagulase is significantly effective in reducing bleeding, pain, and swelling after extraction of tooth when compared to saline pressure packs. It also acts as a promoter of wound healing.

### PMID 28294225 (2017) — Biomaterials science
TITLE: Enhanced sealing strength of a hydrophobically-modified Alaska pollock gelatin-based sealant.
DOI: 10.1039/c6bm00829a | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The aim of this study was the development of an innovative biocompatible sealant composed of Alaska pollock-derived gelatin partially modified with a dodecyl group (C12-ApGltn) and a poly(ethylene glycol)-based crosslinker, pentaerythritol poly(ethylene glycol) ether tetrasuccinimidyl glutarate. The burst strength of the developed sealants was measured using porcine aorta and rat lungs. The maximum burst strength of a C12-ApGltn-based sealant against the porcine aorta was 4-fold higher than that of an original ApGltn (Org-ApGltn)-based sealant. No significant increase in the burst strength was observed between C12-ApGltn-based sealants with 4.2 and 8.9 mol% modification ratios. From histological observation after burst strength measurement, tissue tearing was observed when a C12-ApGltn-based sealant was applied. In contrast, the Org-ApGltn-based sealant was peeled away from the aorta surface due to cohesion failure. Similar to the porcine aorta, the burst strength of C12-ApGltn-based sealants applied on a rat lung defect was 3-fold higher than that of an Org-ApGltn-based sealant. The curing time of the C12-ApGltn-based sealant measured by a simple mixing method was shorter (2.6 &#xb1; 0.1 s) than that of the Org-ApGltn-based sealant (4.1 &#xb1; 0.3 s). The swelling ratio of the C12-ApGltn-based sealant (23.7 &#xb1; 3.1) was significantly lower than that of the Org-ApGltn-based sealant (32.3 &#xb1; 1.1). The C12-ApGltn-based sealant was completely degraded within 28 days after implantation in the backs of rats without a severe inflammation reaction. However, the Org-ApGltn-based sealant disappeared within 14 days. These results indicated that hydrophobically-modified ApGltn has an effective sealing effect on moist tissues and biocompatibility in vivo.

### PMID 27636866 (2017) — Journal of neurosurgery. Spine
TITLE: Effects of early surgical decompression on functional and histological outcomes after severe experimental thoracic spinal cord injury.
DOI: 10.3171/2016.6.SPINE16343 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE In acute traumatic brain injury, decompressive craniectomy is a common treatment that involves the removal of bone from the cranium to relieve intracranial pressure. The present study investigated whether neurological function following a severe spinal cord injury improves after utilizing either a durotomy to decompress the intradural space and/or a duraplasty to maintain proper flow of cerebrospinal fluid. METHODS Sixty-four adult female rats (n = 64) were randomly assigned to receive either a 3- or 5-level decompressive laminectomy (Groups A and B), laminectomy + durotomy (Groups C and D), or laminectomy + duraplasty with graft (Group E and F) at 24 hours following a severe thoracic contusion injury (200 kilodynes). Duraplasty involved the use of DuraSeal, a hydrogel dural sealant. Uninjured and injured control groups were included (Groups G, H). Hindlimb locomotor function was assessed by open field locomotor testing (BBB) and CatWalk gait analysis at 35 days postinjury. Bladder function was analyzed and bladder wall thickness was assessed histologically. At 35 days postinjury, mechanical and thermal allodynia were assessed by the Von Frey hair filament and hotplate paw withdrawal tests, respectively. Thereafter, the spinal cords were dissected, examined for gross anomalies at the injury site, and harvested for histological analyses to assess lesion volumes and white matter sparing. ANOVA was used for statistical analyses. RESULTS There was no significant improvement in motor function recovery in any treatment groups compared with injured controls. CatWalk gait analysis indicated a significant decrease in interlimb coordination in Groups B, C, and D (p &lt; 0.05) and swing speed in Groups A, B, and D. Increased mechanical pain sensitivity was observed in Groups A, C, and F (p &lt; 0.05). Rats in Group C also developed thermal pain hypersensitivity. Examination of spinal cords demonstrated increased lesion volumes in Groups C and F and increased white matter sparing in Group E (p &lt; 0.05). The return of bladder automaticity was similar in all groups. Examination of the injury site during tissue harvest revealed that, in some instances, expansion of the hydrogel dural sealant caused compression of the spinal cord. CONCLUSIONS Surgical decompression provided no benefit in terms of neurological improvement in the setting of a severe thoracic spinal cord contusion injury in rats at 24 hours postinjury. Decompressive laminectomy and durotomy did not improve motor function recovery, and rats in both of these treatment modalities developed neuropathic pain. Performing a durotomy also led to increased lesion volumes. Placement of DuraSeal was shown to cause compression in some rats in the duraplasty treatment groups. Decompressive duraplasty of 3 levels does not affect functional outcomes after injury but did increase white matter sparing. Decompressive duraplasty of 5 levels led to neuropathic pain development and increased lesion volumes. Further comparison of dural repair techniques is necessary.

### PMID 29237485 (2017) — Journal of medical case reports
TITLE: Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta may increase the bleeding of minor thoracic injury in severe multiple trauma patients: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s13256-017-1511-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta, because of its efficacy and feasibility, has been widely used in treating patients with severe torso trauma. However, complications developing around the site proximal to the occlusion by resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta have almost never been studied.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 50-year-old Japanese woman fell from a height of approximately 10&#xa0;m. At initial arrival, her respiratory rate was 24 breaths/minute, her blood oxygen saturation was 95% under 10&#xa0;L/minute oxygenation, her pulse rate was 90 beats per minute, and her blood pressure was 180/120&#xa0;mmHg. Mild lung contusion, hemopneumothorax, unstable pelvic fracture, and retroperitoneal bleeding with extravasation of contrast media were observed in initial computed tomography. As her vital signs had deteriorated during computed tomography, a 7-French aortic occlusion catheter (RESCUE BALLOON&#xae;, Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was inserted and inflated for aortic occlusion at the first lumbar vertebra level and transcatheter arterial embolization was performed for the pelvic fracture. Her bilateral internal iliac arteries were embolized with a gelatin sponge; however, the embolized sites presented recanalization as coagulopathy appeared. Her bilateral internal iliac arteries were re-embolized by n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate. The balloon was deflated 18&#xa0;minutes later. After embolization, repeat computed tomography was performed and a massive hemothorax, which had not been captured on arrival, had appeared in her left pleural cavity. Thoracotomy hemostasis was performed and a hemothorax of approximately 2500&#xa0;ml was aspirated to search for the source of bleeding. However, clear active bleeding was not captured; resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta may have been the cause of the increased bleeding of the thoracic injury at the proximal site of the aorta occlusion.
CONCLUSIONS: It is necessary to note that the use of resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta may increase bleeding in sites proximal to occlusions, even in the case of minor injuries without active bleeding at the initial diagnosis.

### PMID 29196674 (2017) — Scientific reports
TITLE: Artificial controlled model of blood circulation system for adhesive evaluation.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-16814-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Since there are several casualties due to uncontrolled bleeding resulting from simple injury to surgery, effective styptic or vessel adhesives are important; however, their development is limited by the lack of standardized systems to evaluate potential compounds. The current study outlines the development of an aorta styptic evaluation system, comprising of decellularized swine aorta tissue and a heart pump-mimicking system. Although the cells in the swine aorta were removed, the structural stability of the aorta was sustained due to the maintenance of the extracellular matrix. Using a control adhesive, Cyanoacrylate, the developed model was found to have similar adhesive efficacy to intact aorta. The circulatory-mimicking system was designed to mimic the beat rate and strength of blood-flow from the heart, which was necessary to evaluate the adherent efficacy. The decellularized aorta improves instabilities of intact tissues, which occurs on account of storage and origin, thereby allowing for a more standardized system. The system was able to simulate several symptoms of circulation, according to patient age and health, by adjusting pumping frequency and intensity. Therefore, this system can be used as a standardized evaluation system for screening adhesives. Further, it would also evaluate other medical devices, such as stent or medications.

### PMID 28941519 (2017) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Iatrogenic Pulmonary Pseudoaneurysm Treated with Percutaneous Coil and Glue&#xa0;Embolization.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2017.06.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 28848195 (2017) — European neurology
TITLE: The Hemodynamic Changes in Patients with Cerebral Arteriovenous Malformations before and after Interventional Embolization Therapy with Glubran 2 Acrylic Glue.
DOI: 10.1159/000478727 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The study explored hemodynamic changes in patients with cerebral arteriovenous malformations (CAVM) before and -after interventional embolization therapy with Glubran 2 acrylic glue and analyzed the related factors. CAVM patients received endovascular embolization therapy with Glubran 2. Patients' systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), mean arterial pressure (MAP), blood flow velocity (BFV), and pulsatility index (PI) were measured. The location of malformed vessels, Spetzler-Martin (SM) grade, CAVM size, and type of feeding artery and venous drainage were analyzed. CAVM patients showed increased DBP, SBP, MAP, and PI and decreased average BFV compared to before therapy. CAVM patients with big CAVM size, SM grade IV/V, deep location malformed vessels, deep, and mixed venous drainage, and cortical branch and mixed artery blood-supply exhibited lower DBP, SBP, MAP, and PI but higher average BFV. Hypertensive CAVM patients showed lower DBP, SBP, MAP, average BFV, and PI before or after embolization. Hypertension, SM grade, CAVM size, malformed vessels location, venous drainage, and artery blood-supply were correlated to the hemodynamic changes of CAVM patients. Embolization with Glubran 2 acrylic glue could enhance hemodynamics in CAVM patients, and the hemodynamic changes were in correlation with the SM grade, CAVM size, and malformed vessels location.

### PMID 28131066 (2017) — Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials
TITLE: Polymerization kinetics of n-butyl cyanoacrylate glues used for vascular embolization.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2017.01.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Vascular embolization is a minimally invasive treatment used for the management of vascular malformations and tumors. It is carried out under X-ray by navigating a microcatheter into the targeted blood vessel, through which embolic agents are delivered to occlude the vessels. Cyanoacrylate liquid glues have been widely used for vascular embolization owing to their low viscosity, rapid polymerization/solidification rate, good penetration ability and low tissue toxicity. The objective of this study is to quantitatively investigate the physical properties of two n-butyl cyanoacrylate (nBCA) glues (Glubran 2 and Histoacryl) mixed with an iodized oil (Lipiodol) at various concentrations. We show that an homogeneous solution results from the mixing of the glue and Lipiodol, and that the viscosity, density and interfacial tension of the mixture increase with the proportion in Lipiodol. We have designed a new experimental setup to systemically characterize the polymerization kinetics of a glue mixture upon contact with an ionic solution. We observe that the whole polymerization process includes two phases: an interfacial polymerization that takes place at the interface as soon as the two liquids are in contact with a characteristic time scale of the order of the minute; a volumetric polymerization during which a reaction front propagates within the mixture bulk with a characteristic time scale of the order of tens of minutes. The polymerization rate, front propagation speed and volume reduction increase with the glue concentrations. It is the first time that such comprehensive results are obtained on liquid embolic agents.

### PMID 27935467 (2017) — Journal of neurosurgery. Pediatrics
TITLE: Possible toxicity following embolization of congenital giant vertex hemangioma: case report.
DOI: 10.3171/2016.5.PEDS13345 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors describe the case of a 3-year-old boy with a giant congenital vertex hemangioma who underwent presurgical embolization with Onyx (ethylene-vinyl alcohol copolymer dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide) and Glubran ( N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate). This vascular tumor had no intracranial vascular communication as assessed by pre-embolization MRI and catheter angiography. All embolizations were performed by direct percutaneous injection. One week following the last embolization procedure the child presented with a 24-hour history of ataxia and extrapyramidal tremor. He was diagnosed with a possible immune-mediated reaction to Onyx or Glubran, which was treated with an urgent surgical excision of the hemangioma followed by intravenous administration of immunoglobulin and steroids. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first case of possible immune-mediated toxicity secondary to either Onyx or Glubran administration. This case highlights the need for awareness of potential toxic reactions to these embolic agents in the treatment of hemangiomas in the pediatric patient.

### PMID 27864616 (2017) — World journal of surgery
TITLE: Randomized Clinical Trial Comparing Cyanoacrylate Glue Versus Suture Fixation in Lichtenstein Hernia Repair: 7-Year Outcome Analysis.
DOI: 10.1007/s00268-016-3801-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Lichtenstein hernioplasty has relatively low recurrence rate, but chronic inguinal pain may cause harm to the patient. The aim of our study was to compare long-term results of cyanoacrylate glue versus absorbable sutures for mesh fixation in Lichtenstein hernioplasty.
METHODS: Lichtenstein hernioplasty (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;302) was performed under local anesthesia in three hospitals. The patients were randomized to receive either 1&#xa0;ml of butyl-2-cyanoacrylate tissue glue (Glubran&#xae;; 151 hernias) or absorbable polyglycolic acid sutures (Dexon&#xae;; 151 hernias) for mesh fixation (Optilene&#xae; mesh). Short-term results were published previously. Chronic groin pain, foreign body sensation, use of analgesics, recurrence and re-operations were analyzed 7&#xa0;years after surgery.
RESULTS: We reached 236 patients (78%) to present study. In the glue group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;115), there were five (4.3%) and in the suture group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;121) three (2.5%) recurrent hernias (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.491). The prevalence of chronic pain (NRS&#xa0;&#x2265;&#xa0;3) in the patients without re-operations was similar in two groups: 15/118 (13%) and 13/111 (12%), respectively (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.843). There were no significant differences in the foreign body sensation (8/14, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.267) or in the need of analgesics (2/2, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.00) between the two study groups.
CONCLUSION: Both cyanoacrylate glue and mesh fixation with absorbable sutures were equal in terms of chronic pain and rate of recurrences in Lichtenstein hernioplasty after 7-year follow-up.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT00659542.

### PMID 27633564 (2017) — Microsurgery
TITLE: Effect of fibrin sealant in positioning and stabilizing microvascular pedicle: A comparative study.
DOI: 10.1002/micr.30094 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Fibrin sealants have had applications in hemostasis, cohesion, and promotion of healing in plastic surgery. In this article, we review cases where fibrin sealant was used to stabilize microvascular pedicles and compared with previous free flaps performed without fibrin sealant.
METHODS: Between 2008 and 2010, 62 consecutive patients underwent free tissue transfer for reconstruction; this involved 33 latissimus dorsi perforator flaps, 14 thoracodorsal artery perforator flaps, 9 latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flaps, 3 lateral thoracic artery perforator flaps, and 3 transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous flaps, used in head and neck reconstruction, lower limb reconstructions, breast reconstructions, and facial palsy reconstruction. Following microvascular anastomosis, the microvascular pedicles were placed in the optimal position, and fibrin sealant was used to fix and stabilize them. The complications, such as venous thrombosis, arterial thrombosis, hematoma, and vascular pedicle kinking, were compared with that of 672 previous free flaps without fibrin sealant for stabilizing microvascular pedicles.
RESULTS: Among the 62 free tissue transfers using fibrin sealant, there was only one complication involving flap failure (1.6%), in this case due to venous thrombosis. Analysis of 672 free flaps performed without application of fibrin sealant revealed 24 complications (3.6%), due to 3 venous thrombosis, 1 arterial thrombosis, 4 vascular pedicel compression due to hematoma, and 16 pedicle kinking. However, the comparison of complications between the free flap using fibrin sealant and the free flap without fibrin sealant were not statistically significant (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.65).
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant can be used to prevent vascular kinking and to position anastomosed vessels after successful micro-anastomosis and allow the reconstructive surgeon to overcome challenging situations of vascular pedicle related complications &#xa9; 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Microsurgery 37:406-409, 2017.

### PMID 29296285 (2017) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Tisseel's impact on hemostasis for 2-3 and 4-6-level lumbar laminectomies.
DOI: 10.4103/sni.sni_302_17 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tisseel (Baxter International Inc., Westlake Village, CA, USA), a fibrin sealant, was originally devised to strengthen repairs of spinal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistulas. Here, we evaluated how Tisseel correlated with hemostasis (e.g., defined as reduced postoperative drainage, time to drain removal, length of stay (LOS), and postoperative transfusion requirements) in 58 patients undergoing 2-3 vs. 79 patients having 4-6 level lumbar laminectomies.
METHODS: We assessed how Tisseel correlated with hemostasis in 58 patients undergoing 2-3 level laminectomies/stenosis (with 48 herniated discs and 20 synovial cysts, 1 degenerative spondylolisthesis) vs. 79 having 4-6 level laminectomies/stenosis (with 39 lumbar discs, 45 synovial cysts, and 26 degenerative spondylolisthesis).
RESULTS: Following 2-3 level laminectomies, the average drainage on postoperative day 1 was 87.26 cc, and on day 2 was 59.62 cc; most drains were removed and the majority of patients were discharged on postoperative day 2, requiring no transfusions. After 4-6 level decompressions, greater postoperative drainage was observed on postoperative days 1 (e.g., 156.63 cc), and 2 (115.8 cc), and many were continued for 3 (85.7 cc; 44 patients), and 4 postoperative days (93.6: 6 patients) respectively. Drains were typically removed and patients were discharged on postoperative days 3 and 4, with just 6 requiring transfusions. Notably, there were four CSF fistulas for patients undergoing 4-6 level laminectomies; one had a large disc hernation in conjunction with postoperative scare, while three had massive calcified synovial cysts extending to/through the dura.
CONCLUSIONS: Utilizing Tisseel as a hemostatic allowed us to quantitate hemostasis (the average postoperative drainage, time to drain removal, LOS, and postoperative transfusion requirements) for those undergoing 2-3 level laminectomies vs. 4-6 level procedures with large subsets also exhibiting herniated discs, synovial cysts, and degenerative spondylolisthesis.

### PMID 28863319 (2017) — Clinical biomechanics (Bristol, Avon)
TITLE: Comparison of mechanical compressive properties of commercial and autologous fibrin glues for tissue engineering applications.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2017.08.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin glues are widely used in orthopedic surgery as adhesives and hemostatic agents. We evaluated the compressive properties of selected fibrin glues in order to identify which are appropriate for tissue regeneration applications subject to compression.
METHODS: Uniaxial unconfined compression tests were performed on fibrin gels prepared from commercial and autologous products: (1) Evicel (Ethicon), (2) Tisseel (Baxter), (3) Angel (Arthrex), and (4) ProPlaz (Biorich). Cyclic loads were applied from 0 to 30% strain for 100cycles at 0.5Hz. Following cyclic testing, specimens were subjected to ramp displacement of 1% strain per second to 80% strain.
FINDINGS: Throughout cyclic loading, Evicel and Tisseel deformed (shortened) less than Angel at all but one time point, and deformed less than ProPlaz at cycles 10 and 20. The dynamic moduli, peak stress, and strain energy were significantly greater in Tisseel than all other groups. Evicel displayed significantly greater dynamic moduli, peak stress, and strain energy than Angel and ProPlaz. Following cyclic testing, Tisseel and Evicel were significantly less deformed than Angel. No specimens exhibited gross failure during ramp loading to 80% strain. Ramp loading trends mirrored those of cyclic loading.
INTERPRETATION: The tested commercial glues were significantly more resistant to compression than the autologous products. The compressive properties of Tisseel were approximately twice those of Evicel. All preparations displayed moduli multiple orders of magnitude less than that of native articular cartilage. We conclude that in knee surgeries requiring fibrin glue to undergo compression of daily activity, commercial products are preferable to autologous preparations from platelet-poor plasma, though both will deform significantly.

### PMID 28637109 (2017) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Closing the dura: dural hitching versus surgicel and tisseel overlay graft in craniocervicaldecompression for Chiari 1 malformation.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2017.1297363 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study compares dural hitching to surgicel and tisseel overlay graft following craniocervical decompression and C1 laminectomy with simple durotomy for Chiari I malformation. Outcome measures were syrinx decompression, headache resolution and complication rates.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of case notes was conducted. Patients who had undergone craniocervical decompression (CCD) were grouped by method of dural closure. Outcomes compared were rates of syrinx decompression, headache resolution, and post-operative complications. Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS v20.
RESULTS: We identified 32 adult patients for inclusion in this study. 53.1% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;17) had asyrinx, and 78.1% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;25) had a pre-operative headache. All were treated with suboccipital craniectomy, C1 laminectomy (with or without C2 laminectomy), and durotomy. The dura was either left open by dural hitching (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;23) or closed with surgicel and tisseel overlay graft (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;9). We found a statistically significant association between the method of dural closure and the rate of syrinx resolution. Resolution occurred in 91.7% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;11) of the hitching group, compared to 20.0% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1) of the overlay graft group: &#x3a7;2(1)&#x2009;=&#x2009;5.6, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.018. There were no statistically significant differences between the two groups in the rates of headache resolution or other complications.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with symptomatic Chiari I malformation and associated syringomyelia, syrinx resolution is more likely if the dura is hitched open rather than closed bysurgicel and tisseel overlay graft after durotomy.

### PMID 28385501 (2017) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous Embolization of Delayed External Carotid Artery Pseudoaneurysm Eight Years after Partial Parathyroidectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2016.12.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: External carotid artery pseudoaneurysm (ECAP) is very rare. The usual mechanism is trauma or iatrogenic. We report a case of a patient with an asymptomatic, chronic ECAP secondary to partial parathyroidectomy. Percutaneous injection of the 2-component Fibrin Sealant (Tisseel; Baxter int, Deerfield, IL) with the 2 active ingredients (Sealer Protein Solution and Thrombin Solution) was carried out with successful occlusion of the pseudoaneurysmal sac. The 6-month follow-up computed tomographic scan confirmed the ECAP thrombosis. The ECAP endovascular approach is less invasive and reduces the complications of the open surgical intervention, especially in high-risk patients or presenting with hostile neck.

### PMID 28466646 (2017) — The British journal of radiology
TITLE: Ultrasound-guided transvaginal thrombin injection of uterine arteries pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1259/bjr.20160913 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the utility of transvaginal ultrasound-guided thrombin injection (UGTI) to treat uterine artery pseudoaneurysms (UAPs) as an alternative to emergency arterial embolization.
METHODS: Two females presenting with heavy vaginal bleeding were diagnosed with UAPs by pelvic CT scan. After UAP identification by transvaginal ultrasound, 2&#x2009;cm3 of thrombin (Tissucol&#xae;; Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Munich, Germany) was slowly injected into the UAPs using a 30-cm long 22-gauge needle through a needle guide attached to the vaginal probe. The same procedure was performed in both cases, and the Doppler sign disappeared immediately and the bleeding stopped.
RESULTS: We describe two cases of UAPs treated with transvaginal UGTI: one after intrauterine tandem and vaginal colpostat insertion for brachytherapy after diagnosis of cervical cancer (Case 1) and the other after the insertion of a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (Case 2).
CONCLUSION: Transvaginal UGTI could be a minimally invasive tool to treat selected cases of UAPs with severe vaginal bleeding. Advances in knowledge: Transvaginal UGTI could avoid the need for uterine embolization and emergency hysterectomy in selected cases of UAPs diagnosed by CT scan.

### PMID 27817915 (2017) — Ophthalmology
TITLE: Evicel versus Tisseel versus Sutures for Attaching Conjunctival Autograft in Pterygium Surgery: A Prospective Comparative Clinical Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2016.09.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the outcome of pterygium surgery with conjunctival autograft using Vicryl sutures (Ethicon, NJ), Evicel fibrin glue (Omrix Biopharmaceuticals Ltd, Ramat-Gan, Israel), or Tisseel fibrin glue (Baxter Corp., Deerfield, IL).
DESIGN: Prospective, randomized study.
PARTICIPANTS: Eighty-nine adult patients with primary pterygium.
METHODS: Patients undergoing pterygium surgery with conjunctival autografting were randomized into groups receiving 10-0 Vicryl sutures, Evicel fibrin glue, or Tisseel fibrin glue.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Duration of surgery, level of patient discomfort, visual acuity (VA), surgically induced refractive change (SIRC), complications, and pterygium recurrence.
RESULTS: Eighty-nine patients participated: 25 in the Vicryl group, 29 in the Evicel group, and 35 in the Tisseel group. The patients' preoperative characteristics were similar in all groups. Fashioning and repositioning of the conjunctival autograft (flap time) was significantly shorter in the fibrin glue groups compared with the Vicryl group: 5.46 minutes for Evicel, 3.6 minutes for Tisseel, and 16.72 minutes for sutures (P &lt; 0.0001). The patient discomfort level during the first postoperative day was significantly lower in the fibrin glue groups compared with the suture group (P&#xa0;= 0.047). There were no significant group differences in the change in logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution VA before surgery and 3 months after surgery (P&#xa0;= 0.7). There were also no significant group differences in the SIRC (P&#xa0;= 0.108). The recurrence rate was 17.24% in the sutures group, 4.17% in the Evicel group, and 0% in the Tisseel group (P&#xa0;= 0.027 sutures vs. fibrin glue groups). Complications included 5 cases of conjunctival graft dislocation in the Evicel group, 1 case of pyogenic granuloma in the Tisseel group, and no complications in the sutures group (P&#xa0;= 0.019 sutures vs. fibrin glue groups).
CONCLUSIONS: Tisseel fibrin glue for the repositioning of conjunctival autografts in pterygium surgery was associated with a similar functional outcome as that of Vicryl sutures in terms of VA and SIRC. Pterygium recurrence, patient discomfort level, and surgery time were reduced markedly, as were flap dislocation and pterygium recurrence with Tisseel fibrin glue compared with Evicel fibrin glue.

### PMID 28888257 (2017) — The journal of allergy and clinical immunology. In practice
TITLE: Gelatin Anaphylaxis During Surgery: A Rare Cause of Perioperative Anaphylaxis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2017.06.030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 28358708 (2017) — In vivo (Athens, Greece)
TITLE: Improvement of Perioperative Outcomes in Major Gynecological and Gynecologic-Oncological Surgery with Hemostatic Gelatin-Thrombin Matrix.
DOI: 10.21873/invivo.11053 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: To assess the impact of the use of intraoperative hemostatic gelatin-thrombin matrix (HM) (Floseal&#xae;, Baxter Healthcare) on transfusion rates and short-term perioperative outcomes in gynecological surgery.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this retrospective, single-center study, we evaluated data of 215 patients (83 cases and 132 controls) undergoing extensive gynecological surgery (e.g. oncological procedures) with and without intraoperative HM application.
RESULTS: Cases and controls did not differ according to age, preoperative hemoglobin (Hb) concentration, and Hb or C-reactive protein (CRP) levels at discharge. Patients receiving HM had significantly reduced operative (168 vs. 199 min, p=0.02) and hospitalization (9 vs. 14 days, p&lt;0.001) times. The mean postoperative Hb drop (3.33 vs. 4.51 g/dl, p&lt;0.001), and the mean postoperative increase in CRP (94.9 vs. 149.1 mg/l, p&lt;0.001) were significantly less pronounced within the HM group. Despite more prevalent coagulopathy (48 vs. 31%, p=0.02), e.g. due to anticoagulant use (15.7 vs. 3%, p&lt;0.001), patients treated using HM needed less frequent transfusions of packed red blood cells [odds ratio (OR)= 0.13, 95% confidence interval (CI)=0.07-0.24) and fresh frozen plasma (OR=0.51, 95% CI=0.24-1.05). In comparison to controls, the need for surgical revisions (OR 0.1, CI 95% 0.02-0.42) and intensive-care unit admissions (OR 0.15, 95% CI=0.08-0.30) was lower in patients treated with HM.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, our study is the largest case-control study focusing on Floseal&#xae; use in gynecology. The use of HM was associated with significantly better short-term perioperative outcomes. Due to its local action, HM seems to be particularly useful in patients in which anticoagulant medication cannot be paused.

### PMID 27861945 (2017) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Rapid hemostasis in a sheep model using particles that propel thrombin and tranexamic acid.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.26408 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Bleeding during endoscopic sinus surgery and open surgeries can easily obstruct the surgeons' field of view and increase morbidity and risk of intraoperative complications. Intraoperative bleeding could potentially be addressed by a hemostatic agent that safely disperses itself through the escaping blood. We tested the safety and efficacy of a self-propelling formulation of thrombin and tranexamic acid (SPTT) in stopping bleeding in a paranasal sinus injury and in an open surgical carotid injury sheep model.
STUDY DESIGN: Interventional animal study.
METHODS: SPTT was tested in the sinonasal space following endoscopic injury to the inferior turbinate of six sheep, and to the common carotid artery following open surgical injury in eight sheep. In the nasal cavity, bleeding time and local inflammation were measured and compared to plain gauze. Following carotid arteriotomy, successful hemostasis and markers of thrombosis and coagulopathy were compared to Floseal.
RESULTS: SPTT significantly decreased bleeding times in the sinonasal space compared to plain gauze (mean difference = 3.8 minutes, P = .002). All of the carotid bleeds (100%) were successfully controlled with SPTT after 10 minutes of application under pressure, compared to 25% with Floseal. No adverse events were noted, and there was no evidence of thromboembolism.
CONCLUSIONS: SPTT significantly reduced bleeding time in a sheep model of surgical sinus bleeding and successfully stopped bleeding following catastrophic carotid artery injury, with no adverse events observed.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: NA Laryngoscope, 127:787-793, 2017.

### PMID 27490907 (2017) — ANZ journal of surgery
TITLE: Use of thrombin-based haemostatic matrix in head and neck reconstructions: a potential risk factor for pulmonary embolism.
DOI: 10.1111/ans.13618 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Haemostatic agents including thrombin-based haemostatic matrix are widely used in patients undergoing cardiac, vascular and spinal surgery. These agents promote local haemostasis through activation of the clotting cascade. To our knowledge, this case series is the first report of pulmonary embolization associated with FloSeal following head and neck oncology resection and free flap reconstruction.
METHODS: We present five patients who were diagnosed with symptomatic pulmonary embolism after oncologic head and neck free flap reconstructions in 2014 and 2015.
RESULTS: There were five patients consisting of three males and two females. The mean age was 67&#x2009;years, ranging from 60 to 74&#x2009;years. Pulmonary embolism occurred between 3 and 30&#x2009;days with a mean of 12 days. Four out of the five reported cases showed involvement of more than one lobe, and two cases had bilateral pulmonary involvement. All but one patient underwent infratemporal fossa dissections as part of the cancer resection. Ten millilitres of FloSeal was applied to the pterygoid plexi in the four patients to achieve haemostasis. All patients received heparin infusion followed by warfarin therapy for at least 6&#x2009;months with no mortality or complications relating to pulmonary embolism to date.
CONCLUSION: Although inconclusive due to study design and small numbers, this series raises the possibility that there may be an association between the use of haemostatic matrix in head and neck oncologic reconstructions and pulmonary embolism. Haemostatic matrix must be used in caution when there is a direct contact with venous endolumens such as the pterygoid plexus and soleus.

### PMID 29263757 (2017) — Journal of children's orthopaedics
TITLE: Sclerotherapy using Surgiflo and alcohol: a new alternative for the treatment of aneurysmal bone cysts.
DOI: 10.1302/1863-2548.11.170106 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This study aims to review the results of sclerotherapy using Surgiflo in addition to alcohol in primary aneurysmal bone cysts (ABC).
METHODS: A total of 16 consecutive patients with histologically confirmed diagnosis of primary ABC were treated by percutaneous Surgiflo and alcohol injection at our institution. Clinical follow-up included the assessment of pain, swelling, limping and functional impairment. Radiological parameters included tumour volume, physis-cyst distance, thickness of cyst cortex, and presence of intracystic septations. Mean follow-up was 35,6 months (24-71 months). Treatment was considered successful when the cyst volume decreased by a minimum of 10%, the bone cortex became thicker, and the distance to physis increased.
RESULTS: Mean age at presentation was 9.5 years (5.16-13.84 years). All ABC's were primary and all patients underwent a single Surgiflo and alcohol session except for two (12.5%) who required a second session. All patients had a good clinical result at final follow-up. Satisfactory cyst healing was achieved in 11 cases according to radiological parameters. Tumour volume decreased from a mean of 122 cm3 (111 to 133) before injection to 86 cm3 (76 to 96) at last follow-up (p &lt; 0.01). Physis-cyst distance increased from a mean of 1 cm (0.1 to 2) to 2.1 cm (0.5 to 4) at last follow-up (p &lt; 0.01). Cortical thickness improved from 1 mm (0.5 to 1.5) to 2 mm (1 to 3.5) at last follow-up (p &lt; 0.01).There were no treatment related complications. Surgery was performed in one patient having a C3 vertebra ABC after developing quadriparesis due to tumour progression.
CONCLUSION: Sclerotherapy using Surgiflo and alcohol may be used as an efficient, safe and minimally invasive alternative for the treatment of primary ABCs.

### PMID 28756421 (2017) — The Journal of invasive cardiology
TITLE: Arterial Cutaneous Femoral Fistulous Tract Closure Using Surgiflo Hemostatic Matrix: A Novel Adjunct for Post-TAVR Access-Site Management.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Several options are available to address hemostasis at the end of a cardiac catheterization or percutaneous transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) when conventional options are ineffective. To date, there have been few studies exploring the use of a topical thrombin preparation, as one of its main contraindications is that it cannot be used intravascularly due to risk of embolization. The following case shows safe utilization of Surgiflo hemostatic gel matrix under fluoroscopic guidance against an inflated balloon in order to achieve closure of a fistulous tract from a femoral artery access site during percutaneous TAVR.

### PMID 32264058 (2017) — Journal of materials chemistry. B
TITLE: Synthesis and properties of poly(DEX-GMA/AAc) microgel particle as a hemostatic agent.
DOI: 10.1039/c7tb00768j | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Immediate hemorrhage control without secondary injury is pivotal for saving lives. In this study, polymerized glycidyl methacrylate derivative dextran/acrylic acid (poly(DEX-GMA/AAc)) microgel particles were prepared via emulsion polymerization method as a hemostatic agent. Microgel particles with size distribution of 500-800 nm were chosen because they showed more appropriate characteristics of swelling ratio and gelation time. The results revealed that the microgel particles had excellent swelling ratio of 68.95 g g-1 (w/w), which was 8.4 times that of counterpart clinically used microporous polysaccharide hemospheres, Arista. And poly(DEX-GMA/AAc) showed very short gelation time of 10-13 s. As a result, a gelled film could be formed rapidly after poly(DEX-GMA/AAc) absorbed water in blood when used on wounds, and then staunched bleeding. Poly(DEX-GMA/AAc) microgel particles showed better clotting ability than commercial hemostatic agent Flashclot in vitro. In addition, poly(DEX-GMA/AAc) did not cause exothermic burn when absorbing liquid, which was superior to Flashclot. No obvious toxicity was found in cytotoxicity study and skin irritancy test. Blood loss and hemostasis time were dramatically reduced by poly(DEX-GMA/AAc) microgel particles in hemorrhage models of ear vein, ear artery, liver and femoral artery in rabbits. These results indicated that the poly(DEX-GMA/AAc) microgel particles are a potential hemostatic agent with almost no cytotoxicity and good biocompatibility.

### PMID 28301357 (2017) — Advances in skin &amp; wound care
TITLE: The Effect of Microporous Polysaccharide Hemospheres on Wound Healing and Scarring in Wild-Type and db/db Mice.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ASW.0000513149.43488.56 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemostasis, the initial phase of wound healing, sets the stage for tissue repair. Microporous polysaccharide hemosphere powder (MPH) is an FDA-approved hemostatic agent that may impact the wound-healing process.
OBJECTIVE: This study examined the role of MPH in murine wild-type and diabetic (db/db) wound-healing models and a foreign body response scarring model.
METHODS: The powder was topically applied to excisional wounds in wild-type C57BL/6 mice and db/db mice. The effect of MPH on scarring was evaluated by applying it to the expanded polytetrafluoroethylene tube implantation model.
RESULTS: In wild-type mice, topically applied MPH increased epithelial thickness. Levels of &#x3b1;-smooth muscle actin (&#x3b1;-SMA) were decreased in MPH-treated wild-type wounds, whereas Rho-associated protein kinase 2 (ROCK2) and transforming growth factor &#x3b2; levels were increased. In db/db mice, topical wound MPH application decreased epithelial thickness and delayed wound closure. The db/db wounds displayed an increased collagen index. The ROCK2 was increased in a similar manner to wild-type mice, whereas &#x3b1;-SMA and transforming growth factor &#x3b2; levels were decreased. The MPH-treated expanded polytetrafluoroethylene tube mice showed increased &#x3b1;-SMA levels and depressed ROCK2 levels. There were no changes in histologic parameters of the foreign body response.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that MPH does not adversely impact wound healing in wild-type mice, both topically and around implants, but prolongs time to closure and diminishes thickness in db/db wounds. The MPH application alters contractile proteins in all wound models. These changes could have downstream effects on the wound healing process, and further investigation into the use of MPH in altered or impaired states of wound healing is warranted.

### PMID 28436697 (2017) — AJR. American journal of roentgenology
TITLE: Liver Track Embolization After Islet Cell Transplant: Comparison of Two Techniques.
DOI: 10.2214/AJR.16.17148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to compare the efficacy and safety of microfibrillar collagen paste with those of gelatin sponge for liver track embolization after islet cell transplants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In a single-institution, retrospective study, 37 patients underwent 66 islet cell transplants from January 2005 through October 2015. Transplants were performed with 6-French transhepatic access, systemic anticoagulation, pretransplant and posttransplant portal venous pressure measurement, and image-guided liver track embolization with gelatin sponge (2005-2011) or microfibrillar collagen paste (2012-2015). The findings on 20 patients (two men, 18 women; mean age, 48 years) who underwent 35 gelatin sponge embolizations were compared with the findings on 13 patients (six men, seven women; mean age, 48 years) who underwent 22 microfibrillar collagen paste embolizations (four patients, nine procedures without embolization excluded). Medical record review was used to compare laboratory test results, portal venous pressures, and 30-day adverse bleeding events (classified according to Society of Interventional Radiology and Bleeding Academic Research Consortium criteria) between groups.
RESULTS: The technical success rates were 100% in the microfibrillar collagen paste group and 91% in the gelatin sponge group. Group characteristics were similar, there being no differences in platelet count, partial thromboplastin time, or number of islet cell transplants per patient (p &gt; 0.05). A statistical difference in international normalized ratio (1.0 versus 1.1) was not clinically significant (p = 0.012). Posttransplant portal venous pressure was slightly higher among patients treated with gelatin sponge (13 versus 9 mm Hg, p = 0.002). No bleeding occurred after microfibrillar collagen paste embolization, whereas nine bleeding events followed gelatin sponge embolization (0% versus 26%, p = 0.020). In univariate comparison of bleeding and nonbleeding groups, the use of gelatin sponge was statistically associated with postprocedure hemorrhage.
CONCLUSION: Microfibrillar collagen paste is effective and safe for liver track embolization to prevent bleeding after islet cell transplants. It appears to be more efficacious than gelatin sponge.

### PMID 29455488 (2017) — Zhongguo gu shang = China journal of orthopaedics and traumatology
TITLE: [Analysis of clinical effects of absorbable hemostatic fluid gelatin and absorbable gelatin sponge on the hemostasis during operation of unilateral open-door cervical expansive laminoplasty].
DOI: 10.3969/j.issn.1003-0034.2017.09.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To compare the hemostatic effect between absorbable hemostatic fluid gelatin (HFG) and absorbable gelatin sponge(GS) during operation of unilateral open-door cervical expansive laminoplasty.
METHODS: The clinical data of 83 patients underwent unilateral open-door cervical expansive laminoplasty from February 2014 to May 2016 were retrospectively analyzed. According to the used hemostatic materials, patients were divided into two groups. In HFG group, there were 30 males and 11 females, ranging in age from 29 to 81 years, with an average of(55.6&#xb1;11.6)years; 14 cases were simple cervical spinal stenosis, 9 were cervical spinal stenosis and ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament, and 18 were cervical spinal stenosis complicated with multiple cervical disc herniation. And in GS group, there were 32 males and 10 females, ranging in age from 36 to 78 years, with an average of (55.4&#xb1;11.1) years; 12 cases were simple cervical spinal stenosis, 10 were cervical spinal stenosis complicated with ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament, and 20 were cervical spinal stenosis complicated with multiple cervical disc herniation. There was no significant difference in the age, gender, and disease categories of patients between two groups (P&gt;0.05). The operative time, intraoperative bleeding, postoperative drainage, and postoperative complications were compared between two groups.
RESULTS: The average operative time, intraoperative bleeding, and postoperative drainage in HFG group were(137.2&#xb1;30.0) min, (156.1&#xb1;74.6) ml, and (212.1&#xb1;67.6) ml, respectively; and in GS group were (154.8&#xb1;33.5) min, (242.9&#xb1;120.7) ml, and(303.3&#xb1;115.5) ml, respectively. There were significantly differences in above items between two groups(P&lt;0.05). No acute heamatoma or related complications was found postoperatively.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with GS, HFG can obviously decrease operative time, intraoperative bleeding, and postoperative drainage. It is a safe and effective hemostatic material for the operation of unilateral open-door cervical expansive laminoplasty.

### PMID 29147154 (2017) — Annals of vascular diseases
TITLE: Successful Embolization Therapy through Reentry Tear in the Right Subclavian Artery for Treating Patent False Lumen in the Aortic Arch Formed after Type A Dissection Repair.
DOI: 10.3400/avd.cr.17-00009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 73-year-old woman had undergone hemiarch replacement with primary entry resection for treating acute type A dissection 6 years ago. Postoperative computed tomography (CT) showed a patent false lumen (FL) in the aortic arch and a reentry tear in the right subclavian artery. The remaining aortic arch enlarged, which resulted in formation of a 55-mm-diameter aneurysm. We performed reentry occlusion using embolization with glue and coil. The patient's clinical course after the procedure was uneventful, and subsequent CT showed that FL was thrombosed and had decreased in size.

### PMID 27751579 (2017) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Inducing false lumen thrombosis for retrograde type A aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2016.09.022 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: How to choose the proximal landing zone in endovascular interventions for a patient with a patent retrograde false lumen in dissection of the ascending aorta and aortic arch remains unclear. This study sought to report the safety and efficiency of inducing thrombosis of the retrograde false lumen to enhance a proximal landing zone to treat retrograde type A aortic dissection.
METHODS: This study included 9 patients with retrograde type A aortic dissection treated with a 2-stage operation strategy between January 2015 and January 2016. Coil and Onyx glue embolization was performed to create a thrombogenic environment in the retrograde false lumen of the ascending aorta and aortic arch as the first-stage operation, followed by thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) with the chimney technique as the second-stage operation.
RESULTS: Complete thrombosis in a retrograde false lumen of the ascending aorta and aortic arch was found in all 9 patients before the second-stage operation was performed. The rate of successful TEVAR was 100%, with the single-chimney technique performed in 6 patients to reconstruct the left subclavian artery and the double-chimney technique performed in 3 patients to reconstruct the left common carotid artery. No morbidities, no stent graft-induced new dissection, or deaths occurred in the hospital and during the 12-month follow-up period. Positive morphological remodeling was evidenced in all cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The short-term outcomes of the patients in this study were satisfactory. Inducing thrombosis of the retrograde false lumen to enhance the proximal landing zone for TEVAR may be a safe and effective approach to treating retrograde type A aortic dissection.

### PMID 29492443 (2017) — JA clinical reports
TITLE: Breakage and retention of thoracic paravertebral catheter: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s40981-016-0074-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Paravertebral catheters are generally inserted and removed without complications. However, catheter breakage occurs rarely. This is the first report describing breakage of a thoracic paravertebral catheter and retention of the catheter fragment within the patient.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 65-year-old female patient complained of an unusual sensation in her back during postoperative chemotherapy for lung cancer. A catheter fragment was identified in the soft tissues of the back on computed tomography. The paravertebral catheter had been placed 2&#xa0;years prior left lower lobectomy. The patient had neither neurological symptoms nor infection signs around the fragment. However, the potential side effects of chemotherapy, including coagulopathy and immunosuppression, increased the risk of late-onset hematoma and abscess formation around the fragment. Therefore, we surgically removed the catheter fragment. Analysis of the fragment revealed that the catheter had been severed by the cutting edge of the Tuohy needle or the suture needle.
CONCLUSION: In this report, a paravertebral catheter fragment was retained in the posterior mediastinum for 2&#xa0;years. The catheter was likely damaged during the insertion procedure. We suggest that catheters should not be withdrawn through the Tuohy needle, but be withdrawn together with the Tuohy needle. Although secure fixation of the catheter can be achieved with sutures, to reduce the risk of damage to the catheter, alternative methods, such as surgical tapes or skin glue should be considered. After removal of a catheter, its tip should be checked to ensure that the entire catheter has been completely removed. If a catheter fragment is retained within the patient, removal of the fragment should be considered according to the patient's condition and risks.

### PMID 28197224 (2017) — Annals of thoracic medicine
TITLE: A foreign body reaction to Surgicel&#xae; in a lymph node diagnosed by endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration.
DOI: 10.4103/1817-1737.197780 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgicel&#xae; (Ethicon, North Ryde, NSW, Australia) is an absorbable sheet of oxidized cellulose polyanhydroglucuronic acid polymer used as an hemostatic in cardiovascular and thoracic surgery. In some cases, the retained material may cause foreign body granulomatous reactions and simulate tumor recurrence, an abscess, an hematoma, or an infection. We report the case of a 55-year-old patient who was operated of a lung adenocarcinoma. In the thoracic computed tomography scan 1 year after the surgery, a right paratracheal lymph node was detected, so endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) was performed suspecting recurrence of the tumor. The cytology results of the lymph node showed a nonnecrotizing granulomatous reaction secondary to Surgicel&#xae;, used as an hemostatic during the surgery. The objective of presenting this case is to consider foreign body reaction to Surgicel&#xae; in the differential diagnosis of postoperative suspicion of neoplastic recurrence, and on the other hand, to note that EBUS-TBNA enables diagnosis.

### PMID 28802535 (2017) — The Journal of hand surgery
TITLE: The Effects of Autologous Platelet-Rich Fibrin on Flexor Tendon Healing in a Rabbit Model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2017.06.098 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Platelet-rich plasma containing large amounts of growth factors is purported to increase repaired flexor tendon strength. However, the use of bovine thrombin has the risk of antibody formation. We evaluated the effects of the newer generation autologous platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) on flexor tendon healing.
METHODS: We performed surgical repair of 32 flexor tendons from the index and ring digits of the hind paws of 8 New Zealand white rabbits. In the PRF group, the PRF membrane was either wrapped around or interposed between the repair sites. At 3 weeks after surgery, the tested tendons were subjected to range of motion analysis, cross-sectional area measurement, biomechanics testing, and histological analysis.
RESULTS: The results showed no significant increase in range of motion in the PRF group compared with the control group, but there was a significant increase in cross-sectional area of the tendons in the PRF group. The biomechanical testing suggested that the control had a higher load to failure and stress to failure but similar stiffness and modulus to the PRF group.
CONCLUSIONS: The PRF did not have a major influence on cellular organization. It also had an undesirable effect on the biomechanical properties of repaired flexor tendons.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The findings of this study suggest PRF may, in certain situations, hinder rather than enhance, the healing for repaired flexor tendons.

### PMID 28009236 (2017) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Increased blood cell phosphatidylserine exposure and circulating microparticles contribute to procoagulant activity after carotid artery stenting.
DOI: 10.3171/2016.8.JNS16996 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE Phosphatidylserine (PS) is a major component of the inner leaflet of membrane bilayers. During cell activation or apoptosis, PS is externalized to the outer membrane, providing an important physiological signal necessary for the release of the microparticles (MPs) that are generated through the budding of cellular membranes. MPs express PS and membrane antigens that reflect their cellular origin. PS exposure on the cell surface and the release of MPs provide binding sites for factor Xa and prothrombinase complexes that promote thrombin formation. Relatively little is known about the role of PS exposure on blood cells and MPs in patients with internal carotid artery (ICA) stenosis who have undergone carotid artery stenting (CAS). The authors aimed to investigate the extent of PS exposure on blood cells and MPs and to define its role in procoagulant activity (PCA) in the 7 days following CAS. METHODS The study included patients with ICA stenosis who had undergone CAS (n = 70), matched patients who had undergone catheter angiography only (n = 30), and healthy controls (n = 30). Blood samples were collected from all patients just before the procedure after an overnight fast and at 2, 6, 24, 48, and 72 hours and 7 days after the CAS procedure. Blood was collected from healthy controls after an overnight fast. Phosphatidylserine-positive (PS+) MPs and blood cells were analyzed by flow cytometry, while PCA was assessed with clotting time analysis, purified coagulation complex assays, and fibrin formation assays. RESULTS The authors found that levels of PS+ blood cells and PS+ blood cell-derived MPs (platelets and platelet-derived MPs [PMPs], neutrophils and neutrophil-derived MPs [NMPs], monocytes and monocyte-derived MPs [MMPs], erythrocytes and erythrocyte-derived MPs [RMPs], and endothelial cells and endothelial cell-derived MPs [EMPs]) were increased in the 7 days following the CAS procedure. Specifically, elevation of PS exposure on platelets/PMPs, neutrophils/NMPs, and monocytes/MMPs was detected within 2 hours of CAS, whereas PS exposure was delayed on erythrocytes/RMPs and EMPs, with an increase detected 24 hours after CAS. In addition, PS+ platelets/PMPs peaked at 2 hours, while PS+ neutrophils/NMPs, monocytes/MMPs, and erythrocytes/RMPs peaked at 48 hours. After their peak, all persisted at levels above baseline for 7 days post-CAS. Moreover, the level of PS+ blood cells/MPs was correlated with shortened coagulation time and significantly increased intrinsic and extrinsic Xase, thrombin generation, and fibrin formation. Pretreatment of blood cells with lactadherin at their peak time point after CAS blocked PS, resulting in prolonged coagulation times, decreased procoagulant enzyme activation, and fibrin production. CONCLUSIONS The results of this study suggest that increased exposure of PS on blood cells and MPs may contribute to enhanced PCA in patients with ICA stenosis who have undergone CAS, explaining the risk of perioperative thromboembolic complications in these patients. PS on blood cells and MPs may serve as an important biomarker for predicting, and as a pivotal target for monitoring and treating, acute postoperative complications after CAS. &#x25a0; CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE Type of question: association; study design: prospective cohort trial; evidence: Class I.

### PMID 27780127 (2017) — Spectrochimica acta. Part A, Molecular and biomolecular spectroscopy
TITLE: Highly sensitive turn-on fluorescence detection of thrombomodulin based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer.
DOI: 10.1016/j.saa.2016.10.022 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: As an integral glycoprotein on the surface of endothelial cells, thrombomodulin (TM) has very high affinity for thrombin. TM has been regarded to be a marker of endothelial damage since it can be released during endothelial cell injury. In this work, a highly sensitive fluorescence method for the quantitative detection of TM was developed. TM antibody (Ab) and bovine serum albumin (BSA) were bound on gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) to construct BSA-AuNPs-Ab nanocomposites and they were characterized by transmission electron microscope and UV-vis spectrophotometry. The fluorescence of acridine orange (AO) was quenched by the prepared gold nanocomposites based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). In the presence of TM, the fluorescence was turned on due to the effective separation of AO from the surface of gold nanocomposites. Under optimum conditions, the enhanced fluorescence intensity displayed a linear relationship with the logarithm of the TM concentration from 0.1pgmL-1 to 5ngmL-1 with a low detection limit of 12fgmL-1. The release of soluble thrombomodulin (sTM) by the injured HUVEC-C cells in the presence of H2O2 was investigated using the proposed method. The released sTM content in the growth medium was found to be increased with the enhancement of contact time of the cells with H2O2.

### PMID 28303245 (2017) — BioMed research international
TITLE: Biocompatibility and Effectiveness Evaluation of a New Hemostatic Embolization Agent: Thrombin Loaded Alginate Calcium Microsphere.
DOI: 10.1155/2017/1875258 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background. Until now, there has been no ideal embolization agent for hemorrhage in interventional treatment. In this study, the thrombin was encapsulated in alginate calcium microsphere using electrostatic droplet technique to produce new embolization agent: thrombin loaded alginate calcium microspheres (TACMs). Objectives. The present work was to evaluate the biocompatibility and hemostatic efficiency of TACMs. Methods. Cell cytotoxicity, hemolysis, and superselective embolization of dog liver arteries were performed to investigate the biocompatibility of TACMs. To clarify the embolic effect of TACMs mixed thrombus in vivo, hepatic artery injury animal model of 6 beagles was established and transcatheter artery embolization for bleeding was performed. Results. Coculture with VECs revealed the noncytotoxicity of TACMs, and the hemolysis experiment was negligible. Moreover, the histological study of TACMs in liver blood vessel showed signs of a slight inflammatory reaction. The results of transcatheter application of TACMs mixed thrombus for bleeding showed that the blood flow was shut down completely after the TACMs mixed thrombus was delivered and the postprocedural survival rate of animal models at 12 weeks was 100%. Conclusions. With their good biocompatibility and superior hemostatic efficiency, TACMs might be a promising new hemostatic agent with a wide range of potential applications.

### PMID 28082214 (2017) — American journal of obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Are perioperative bundles associated with reduced postoperative morbidity in women undergoing benign hysterectomy? Retrospective cohort analysis of 16,286 cases in Michigan.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2016.12.173 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Healthcare teams that frequently follow a bundle of evidence-based processes provide care with lower rates of morbidity. Few process bundles to improve surgical outcomes in hysterectomy have been identified.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate whether a bundle of 4 perioperative care processes is associated with fewer postoperative complications and readmissions for hysterectomies in the Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative.
STUDY DESIGN: A bundle of perioperative care process goals was developed retrospectively with 30-day peri- and postoperative outcome data from the Hysterectomy Initiative in Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative. All benign hysterectomies that had been performed between January 2013 and January 2015 were included. Based on evidence of lower complication rates after benign hysterectomy, the following processes were considered to be the "bundle": use of guideline-appropriate preoperative antibiotics, a minimally invasive surgical approach, operative duration &lt;120 minutes, and avoidance of intraoperative hemostatic agent use. Each process was considered present or absent, and the number of processes was summed for a bundle score that ranged from 0-4. Cases with a score of zero were excluded. Outcomes measured were rates of complications (any and major) and hospital readmissions, all within 30&#xa0;days of surgery. Postoperative events that were considered a "major complication" included acute renal failure, cardiac arrest that required cardiopulmonary resuscitation, central line infection, cerebral vascular accident, death, deep vein thrombosis, intestinal obstruction, myocardial infarction, pelvic abscess, pulmonary embolism, rectovaginal fistula, sepsis, surgical site infection (deep and organ-space), unplanned intubation, ureteral obstruction, and ureterovaginal and vesicovaginal fistula. The outcome "any complication" included all those events already described in addition to blood transfusion within 72 hours of surgery, urinary tract infection, and superficial surgical site infection. Outcomes were adjusted for patient demographics, surgical factors, and hospital-level clustering effects.
RESULTS: There were 16,286 benign hysterectomies available for analysis. Among all hysterectomies that were reviewed, 33.6% met criteria for all bundle processes; however, there was wide variation in the rate among the 56 hospitals in the study sample with 9.1% of cases at the lowest quartile and 60.4% at the highest quartile of hospitals that met criteria for all bundle processes. Overall, the rate of any complication was 6.8% and of any major complication was 2.3%. The rate of hospital readmissions was 3.6%. After adjustment for confounders, in cases in which all bundle criterion were met compared with cases in which all bundle criterion were not met, the rate of any complications increased from 4.3-7.8% (P&lt;.001); major complications increased from 1.7-2.6% (P&lt;.001), and readmissions increased from 2.6-4.1% (P&lt;.001). After adjustment for confounders, hospitals with greater rates of meeting all 4 criteria were associated significantly with lower hospital-level rates of postoperative complications (P&lt;.001) and readmissions (P&lt;.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This multiinstitutional evaluation reveals that reduced morbidity and readmission are associated with rates of bundle compliance. The proposed bundle is a surgical goal, which is not possible in every case, and there is significant variation in the proportion of cases meeting all 4 bundle processes in Michigan hospitals. Implementation of evidence-based process bundles at a healthcare system level are worthy of prospective study to determine whether improvements in patient outcomes are possible.

### PMID 27365070 (2016) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Coronary Embolism Probably Caused by Surgical Glue after Operation for Acute Aortic Dissection;Report of a Case].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 70-year-old female underwent an emergency replacement of the ascending aorta for acute aortic dissection. We used surgical adhesive BioGlue and teflon felt strips to reinforce the dissected aortic wall. On the 5th post operative day, electrocardiogram showed ischemic inverted T wave and the serum creatine phosphokinase level elevated without any symptoms such as chest pain or low blood pressure. By coronary angiography, severe stenosis was detected of the left descending coronary artery, and percutaneous coronary intervention was performed. Intravascular ultrasound images revealed that no atherosclerotic components were present in the embolic materials. As a result of in vitro examination, that material was probably a fragment of the BioGlue. The patient was discharged on foot 23 days after surgery.

### PMID 27047291 (2016) — Texas Heart Institute journal
TITLE: Minimally Invasive Repair of Left Ventricular Pseudoaneurysm after Transapical Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement.
DOI: 10.14503/THIJ-15-5159 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Transcatheter aortic valve replacement is becoming a routine procedure to treat severe symptomatic aortic stenosis. At most transcatheter aortic valve replacement centers, transapical access is a frequent alternative for use in patients whose ileofemoral access is inadequate. Transapical access is increasingly applied to a variety of other structural heart and aortic procedures as well. There is a caveat, however. When performed in elderly patients with friable myocardium, transapical access is associated with such serious sequelae as bleeding and left ventricular apical pseudoaneurysmal formation. Here, we describe the case of a 70-year-old woman who developed a left ventricular apical pseudoaneurysm 3 weeks after transapical transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Our successful repair took a minimally invasive left lateral approach that involved peripheral cardiopulmonary bypass cannulation, Foley catheter occlusion and primary defect closure, and BioGlue reinforcement.

### PMID 27437022 (2016) — Korean Journal of Spine
TITLE: Repair of Inaccessible Ventral Dural Defect in Thoracic Spine: Double Layered Duraplasty.
DOI: 10.14245/kjs.2016.13.2.87 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We propose a double layered (intradural and epidural patch) duraplasty that utilizes Lyoplant and Duraseal. We examined a 47-year-old woman after decompression for thoracic ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament was performed in another hospital. On postoperative day 7, she complained of weakness in both legs. Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection with cord compression. In the operative field, we found 2 large dural defects on the ventral dura mater. We performed a conventional fat graft with fibrin glue. However, the patient exhibited neurologic deterioration, and a postoperative MRI again showed CSF collection. We performed dorsal midline durotomy and inserted a intradural and epidural Lyoplant patch. She immediately experienced diminishing back pain postoperatively. Her visual analog scale and motor power improved markedly. Postoperative MRIs performed at 2 and 16 months showed no spinal cord compression or CSF leakage to the epidural space. We describe a new technique for double layered duraplasty. Although we do not recommend this technique for all dural repairs, double-layered duraplasty may be useful for repairing large inaccessible dural tears in cases of persistent CSF leakage refractory to conventional management.

### PMID 28082813 (2016) — World journal of gastroenterology
TITLE: Non-variceal upper gastrointestinal bleeding: Rescue treatment with a modified cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i48.10609 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of a modified cyanoacrylate [N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate associated with methacryloxysulfolane (NBCA + MS)] to treat non-variceal upper gastrointestinal bleeding (NV-UGIB).
METHODS: In our retrospective study we took into account 579 out of 1177 patients receiving endoscopic treatment for NV-UGIB admitted to our institution from 2008 to 2015; the remaining 598 patients were treated with other treatments. Initial hemostasis was not achieved in 45 of 579 patients; early rebleeding occurred in 12 of 579 patients. Thirty-three patients were treated with modified cyanoacrylate: 27 patients had duodenal, gastric or anastomotic ulcers, 3 had post-mucosectomy bleeding, 2 had Dieulafoy's lesions, and 1 had duodenal diverticular bleeding.
RESULTS: Of the 45 patients treated endoscopically without initial hemostasis or with early rebleeding, 33 (76.7%) were treated with modified cyanoacrylate glue, 16 (37.2%) underwent surgery, and 3 (7.0%) were treated with selective transarterial embolization. The mean age of patients treated with NBCA + MS (23 males and 10 females) was 74.5 years. Modified cyanoacrylate was used in 24 patients during the first endoscopy and in 9 patients experiencing rebleeding. Overall, hemostasis was achieved in 26 of 33 patients (78.8%): 19 out of 24 (79.2%) during the first endoscopy and in 7 out of 9 (77.8%) among early rebleeders. Two patients (22.2%) not responding to cyanoacrylate treatment were treated with surgery or transarterial embolization. One patient had early rebleeding after treatment with cyanoacrylate. No late rebleeding during the follow-up or complications related to the glue injection were recorded.
CONCLUSION: Modified cyanoacrylate solved definitively NV-UGIB after failure of conventional treatment. Some reported life-threatening adverse events with other formulations, advise to use it as last option.

### PMID 26982109 (2016) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Clinical Features and Treatment of Distal Intracranial Aneurysms.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000002439 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To analyze the clinical characteristics, therapies, and outcomes of distal intracranial aneurysms, the authors retrospectively studied the clinical and imaging data of 18 patients with distal intracranial aneurysms. There were 10 males and 8 females, aged from 11 months to 59 years (mean, 40.4&#x200a;&#xb1;&#x200a;11.4 years). All patients were diagnosed by digital subtract angiography. Aneurysm locations were as follows: distal anterior cerebral artery (n&#x200a;=&#x200a;5), distal middle cerebral artery (n&#x200a;=&#x200a;2), distal posterior cerebral artery (n&#x200a;=&#x200a;6), distal posterior inferior cerebellar artery (n&#x200a;=&#x200a;3), distal anterior inferior cerebellar artery (n&#x200a;=&#x200a;1), and distal superior cerebellar artery (n&#x200a;=&#x200a;1). Endovascular embolization was performed on 16 patients, including coil embolization on 10 patients and embolization using Glubran 2 surgical glue on 6 patients, and 7 of the 16 patients also underwent parent artery occlusion. Aneurysms were all completely embolized at the first phase for these 16 patients. The other 2 patients underwent craniotomy with hematoma evacuation and complete aneurysm clipping. Postoperatively, 14 patients showed a good recovery, 2 patients had neurological deficits, 1 patient had seizures and was managed with drugs, 1 patient developed hydrocephalus, and a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt was performed. Follow-up angiographies showed no aneurysm recurrence. Clinical manifestations of distal intracranial aneurysms are varied. Their treatment should follow the principle of individual choice. Endovascular embolization is an effective way to treat distal intracranial aneurysms; and for those with intracranial hematoma, craniotomy with hematoma evacuation and aneurysm clipping may be a feasible treatment.

### PMID 26613173 (2016) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Rescue N-butyl-2 cyanoacrylate embolectomy using a Solitaire FR device after venous glue migration during arteriovenous malformation embolization: technical note.
DOI: 10.3171/2015.5.JNS15145 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: One of the procedural risks in arteriovenous malformation (AVM) embolization is possible migration of the embolic agent into the venous drainage with an incomplete nidus occlusion, which may lead to severe hemorrhagic complications. This report presents the case of a 29-year-old man who presented with a deep intraparenchymal hematoma on the left side secondary to the spontaneous rupture of a claustral AVM. Upon resorption of the hematoma, the patient underwent an initial therapeutic session of N-butyl-2 cyanoacrylate endovascular embolization, with the purpose of reducing the AVM volume and flow before performing Gamma Knife radiosurgery. After glue injection into one of the arterial feeders, the control angiography showed a partial migration of the glue cast into the straight sinus, with most of the nidus still visible. Because of the bleeding risk due to possible venous hypertension, it was decided to try to retrieve the glue from the vein by using a stent retriever via jugular access. This maneuver allowed a nearly complete removal of the glue cast, thereby restoring normal venous flow drainage. The patient showed no clinical worsening after the procedure. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first report of the use of the Solitaire FR device as a rescue glue retriever. This method should be considered by physicians in cases of unintended glue migration into the venous circulation during AVM embolization.

### PMID 28051764 (2016) — Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)
TITLE: The use of fibrin sealant during non-emergency surgery: a systematic review of evidence of benefits and harms.
DOI: 10.3310/hta20940 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants are used in different types of surgery to prevent the accumulation of post-operative fluid (seroma) or blood (haematoma) or to arrest haemorrhage (bleeding). However, there is uncertainty around the benefits and harms of fibrin sealant use.
OBJECTIVES: To systematically review the evidence on the benefits and harms of fibrin sealants in non-emergency surgery in adults.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic databases [MEDLINE, EMBASE and The Cochrane Library (including the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects, the Health Technology Assessment database and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials)] were searched from inception to May 2015. The websites of regulatory bodies (the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, the European Medicines Agency and the Food and Drug Administration) were also searched to identify evidence of harms.
REVIEW METHODS: This review included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies using any type of fibrin sealant compared with standard care in non-emergency surgery in adults. The primary outcome was risk of developing seroma and haematoma. Only RCTs were used to inform clinical effectiveness and both RCTs and observational studies were used for the assessment of harms related to the use of fibrin sealant. Two reviewers independently screened all titles and abstracts to identify potentially relevant studies. Data extraction was undertaken by one reviewer and validated by a second. The quality of included studies was assessed independently by two reviewers using the Cochrane Collaboration risk-of-bias tool for RCTs and the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination guidance for adverse events for observational studies. A fixed-effects model was used for meta-analysis.
RESULTS: We included 186 RCTs and eight observational studies across 14 surgical specialties and five reports from the regulatory bodies. Most RCTs were judged to be at an unclear risk of bias. Adverse events were inappropriately reported in observational studies. Meta-analysis across non-emergency surgical specialties did not show a statistically significant difference in the risk of seroma for fibrin sealants versus standard care in 32 RCTs analysed [n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3472, odds ratio (OR) 0.84, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.68 to 1.04; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.13; I2&#x2009;=&#x2009;12.7%], but a statistically significant benefit was found on haematoma development in 24 RCTs (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;2403, OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.86; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01; I2&#x2009;=&#x2009;0%). Adverse events related to fibrin sealant use were reported in 10 RCTs and eight observational studies across surgical specialties, and 22 RCTs explicitly stated that there were no adverse events. One RCT reported a single death but no other study reported mortality or any serious adverse events. Five regulatory body reports noted death from air emboli associated with fibrin sprays.
LIMITATIONS: It was not possible to provide a detailed evaluation of individual RCTs in their specific contexts because of the limited resources that were available for this research. In addition, the number of RCTs that were identified made it impractical to conduct independent data extraction by two reviewers in the time available.
CONCLUSIONS: The effectiveness of fibrin sealants does not appear to vary according to surgical procedures with regard to reducing the risk of seroma or haematoma. Surgeons should note the potential risk of gas embolism if spray application of fibrin sealants is used and not to exceed the recommended pressure and spraying distance. Future research should be carried out in surgery specialties for which only limited data were found, including neurological, gynaecological, oral and maxillofacial, urology, colorectal and orthopaedics surgery (for any outcome); breast surgery and upper gastrointestinal (development of haematoma); and cardiothoracic heart or lung surgery (reoperation rates). In addition, studies need to use adequate sample sizes, to blind participants and outcome assessors, and to follow reporting guidelines.
STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42015020710.
FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.

### PMID 27107043 (2016) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Effectiveness and predictability of pleurodesis with the Tachosil&#xae; surgical patch compared with talc poudrage: an experimental study.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezw118 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The human fibrinogen/thrombin surgical patch is proposed for videothoracoscopic pleurodesis after recurrent observation in routine clinical practice of site-specific pleuro-pulmonary adhesions.
METHODS: A total of 36 experimental videothoracoscopies were performed on 18 pigs, all of which underwent a bilateral sequential procedure. The right or left side was casually approached and two 4.8 &#xd7; 4.8 cm Tachosil&#xae; patches were placed over the dorsal lung surface in the highest antigravitary position through a double-port thoracoscopy. The contralateral side was subsequently entered by a single-port thoracoscopy to perform talc poudrage in accordance with current recommendations (1 g/18 kg). Thoracoscopy and autopsy were performed after 60 days to evaluate the outcome. Pleurodesis was graded on a predefined three-tier scale (none-moderate-firm); specimens were then submitted to the pathologist. The statistical analyses performed were: frequencies distribution, variables association test and hypothesis testing using binomial distribution.
RESULTS: Pleurodesis was firm in 15/18 cases (P = 0.004), moderate in 2/18, and none in 1/18 cases with the sealant matrix. Talc pleurodesis was firm in 7/18 cases and moderate in 11/18. No surgical, medical, behavioural or growth disorders were recorded. There was complete correspondence between lung surface covered by the sealant patch and pleural adhesion topography (P &lt; 0.001) and no other sites of adhesion were found at autopsy, whereas talc effect was commonly found to produce random pleural cavity obliteration, most frequently in declivous places, with inhomogeneous pleural adhesion for tissue density and rough/smooth outline (P &lt; 0.001). The pathologist disclosed that talc creates a variable and unpredictable inflammatory background, sometimes severe, with the development of many granulomas. Fibrin sealant patch pleurodesis is caused by connective tissue irrespective of the pleural and pulmonary anatomy.
CONCLUSIONS: The fibrin sealant patch is effective in producing localized pleurodesis in swine. The morphology and topography of the adhesions, 2 months after the patch placement, are consistent and more predictable than after talc poudrage. The latter causes a diffuse pleurodesis which is not predictable, with a predominantly gravitational location and produces a much more serious inflammatory response.

### PMID 27011040 (2016) — Heart, lung &amp; circulation
TITLE: Novel Technique Using Polyester Fabric and Fibrin Sealant Patch for Acute Aortic Dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.hlc.2016.02.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe a simple and effective technique for acute aortic dissection using a combination of polyester fabric and a fibrin sealant patch (FSP) to achieve effective reinforcement and haemostasis of the aortic stump. Firstly, the 0.61mm thick knitted polyester fabric sheet was cut to half of the size of the FSP. Next, fibrin glue was sprayed onto the collagen layer of the FSP. Subsequently, a fabric sheet was placed upon it, and the FSP was put together with the irrigated collagen layer, and then completely dried to bind the patch. As a result, the dry fibrinogen/thrombin layers, as an adhesive surface, faced outward. This patch was trimmed to a 10-15-mm-wide strip. The composite patch was inserted into the false lumen. The stump was gently pressed to fix the aortic intima and adventitia. There are several advantages: the combined patch can be prepared during systemic cooling, and therefore can minimise the circulatory arrest time; secondly, the false lumen is not directly exposed to fibrin glue and so the risk of embolism is extremely low; thirdly, the expected haemostatic effect is greater as FSP lines the exterior of the intima, achieving haemostasis for suture holes.

### PMID 26166293 (2016) — The Thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon
TITLE: Validation of an External Support for Coronary Artery Saphenous Vein Grafts without Fibrin Sealant.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1556083 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: &#x2003;The aim of the study is to report on a new technique for applying the eSVS Mesh (Kips Bay Medical, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States), an external saphenous vein support system, without the use of fibrin sealant.
METHODS: &#x2003;The mesh covers the entire body of the graft with the exception of both anastomoses. Fibrin sealant was not used to fix the mesh. Two patients underwent surgery using this preparation.
EVALUATION: &#x2003;At 4 weeks, computed tomographic angiography revealed no signs of mesh compression at either anastomotic area. The proximal anastomosis inflow diameter was greater than the diameter of the mesh-supported body of the graft.
CONCLUSION: &#x2003;This technique successfully eliminates the need for the use of sealant and supports favorable anastomotic geometry.

### PMID 27843896 (2016) — Ocular oncology and pathology
TITLE: Surgical Reconstruction of Ocular Surface Tumors Using Fibrin Sealant Tissue Adhesive.
DOI: 10.1159/000444532 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the surgical outcomes of ocular surface reconstruction in corneal-conjunctival tumors using fibrin tissue adhesive.
METHODS: A prospective noncomparative study was performed between May 2013 and February 2015. Patients were submitted to routine surgical procedure for corneal-conjunctival tumor excision followed by amniotic membrane graft transplantation using fibrin tissue adhesive (Evicel&#xae;, Omrix Biopharmaceuticals Ltd., Israel). Results were assessed on the 1st, 7th, 15th and 30th postoperative days to analyze subjective complaints, adhesiveness and positioning of the graft, potential complications and recurrences.
RESULTS: Twenty-five eyes were analyzed (male, 14). The diagnosis after the treatment was categorized as squamous cell neoplasia, dysplasia, actinic keratosis, squamous papilloma and compound melanocytic nevus. Few significant symptoms were reported, such as mild hyperemia and ocular dyscomfort. One case developed a conjunctival granuloma which regressed after topical treatment. All grafts were successful with no displacements or retraction postoperatively. There was no clinical recurrence of the tumor in a mean time of follow-up of 11 months.
CONCLUSION: Fibrin tissue adhesive is safe and effective in the surgery of ocular surface tumor. In this series, sutureless amniotic membrane transplantation using fibrin glue has the potential to shorten the surgical time, mitigate inflammation postoperatively and improve patient discomfort.

### PMID 26843467 (2016) — Experimental dermatology
TITLE: Platelet-released growth factors induce the antimicrobial peptide human beta-defensin-2 in primary keratinocytes.
DOI: 10.1111/exd.12966 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Platelet-released growth factors (PRGF) and its related clinically used formulations [e.g. Vivostat platelet-rich fibrin (PRF(&#xae;) )] are thrombocyte concentrate lysates that support healing of chronic, hard-to-heal and infected wounds. Human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) is an antimicrobial peptide expressed in human keratinocytes exhibiting potent antimicrobial activity against wound-related bacteria. In this study, we analysed the influence of PRGF on hBD-2 expression in human primary keratinocytes and the influence of Vivostat PRF(&#xae;) on hBD-2 expression in experimentally generated skin wounds in vivo. Treatment of primary keratinocytes with PRGF caused a significant increase in hBD-2 gene and protein expressions in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. The use of blocking antibodies revealed that the PRGF-mediated hBD-2 induction was partially mediated by the epidermal growth factor receptor and the interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R). Luciferase gene reporter assays indicated that the hBD-2 induction through PRGF required activation of the transcription factor activator protein 1 (AP-1), but not of NF-kappaB. In concordance with these cell culture data, Vivostat PRF(&#xae;) induced hBD-2 expression when applied to experimentally generated skin wounds. Together, our results indicate that the induction of hBD-2 by thrombocyte concentrate lysates can contribute to the observed beneficial effects in the treatment of chronic and infected wounds.

### PMID 27713677 (2016) — The journal of pediatric pharmacology and therapeutics : JPPT : the official journal of PPAG
TITLE: Intraoperative Anaphylactic Reaction: Is it the Floseal?
DOI: 10.5863/1551-6776-21.4.358 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: When hemodynamic or respiratory instability occurs intraoperatively, the inciting event must be determined so that a therapeutic plan can be provided to ensure patient safety. Although generally uncommon, one cause of cardiorespiratory instability is anaphylactic reactions. During anesthetic care, these most commonly involve neuromuscular blocking agents, antibiotics, or latex. Floseal is a topical hemostatic agent that is frequently used during orthopedic surgical procedures to augment local coagulation function and limit intraoperative blood loss. As these products are derived from human thrombin, animal collagen, and animal gelatin, allergic phenomenon may occur following their administration. We present 2 pediatric patients undergoing posterior spinal fusion who developed intraoperative hemodynamic and respiratory instability following use of the topical hemostatic agent, Floseal. Previous reports of such reactions are reviewed, and the perioperative care of patients with intraoperative anaphylaxis is discussed.

### PMID 27621746 (2016) — Korean journal of hepato-biliary-pancreatic surgery
TITLE: Efficacy evaluation of SurgiGuard&#xae; in partially hepatectomized pigs.
DOI: 10.14701/kjhbps.2016.20.3.102 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUNDS/AIMS: This study evaluated the hemostatic effects of a novel oxidized regenerated cellulose, SurgiGuard&#xae;, during liver surgery, using a reproducible and clinically relevant animal model.
METHODS: Fifteen mini-pigs underwent left partial hepatectomy. They were randomized to treatment of the resected surface with SurgiGuard&#xae; (Group C [test], n=5), Surgicel&#xae; (Group B [reference], n=5), or nothing (Group A [control], n=5). Blood loss was measured 5, 7 and 9 min after resection. Time to hemostasis was recorded. Mini-pigs were necropsied 4 or 6 weeks postoperatively to evaluate toxicity changes and material dissolution.
RESULTS: The median resected liver weight was 2.13 g (2.02-2.20) in control group, 2.04 g (2.01-2.13) in reference group, and 2.01 g (1.99-2.12) in test group (p=0.024). Median total blood loss was 57.18 g (52.02-59.54) in control group, 32.52 g (27.66-35.10) in reference group, and 35.52 g (25.70-38.71) in test group (p=0.008). Blood loss at 0-5 minutes and 7-9 minutes was significantly different between groups (p=0.009 and p=0.006, respectively). At necropsy, no hematomas, granulomas, or adhesions were noted in any group. Histopathological analysis revealed no changes suggesting toxicity related to SurgiGuard&#xae;.
CONCLUSIONS: SurgiGuard&#xae; is as effective as Surgicel&#xae; in achieving hemostasis after porcine partial liver resection.

### PMID 26884411 (2016) — Comparative medicine
TITLE: Granuloma Due to Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose in an Aged Rhesus Macaque (Macaca mulatta).
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bioabsorbable hemostatic agents such as oxidized regenerated cellulose are widely used to control intraoperative diffuse capillary bleeding. Compared with electrocautery or ligation, oxidized regenerated cellulose has the advantage of controlling bleeding without occluding the vessel lumen or causing thermal injuries to adjacent tissue. Although the manufacturer recommends removal of the material once hemostasis is achieved, oxidized regenerated cellulose is a bioabsorbable hemostatic agent and is often left in the surgical bed to prevent subsequent bleeding after surgical closure. However, noninvasive imaging techniques have revealed granulomatous foreign-body reactions that mimic infection or tumor recurrence. We present a case report of sterile peritonitis and granuloma formation secondary to the presence of oxidized regenerated cellulose after intestinal resection to excise a colonic adenocarcinoma in an aged rhesus macaque.

### PMID 27466878 (2016) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Prospective Randomized Clinical Trial of HEMOPATCH Topical Sealant in Cardiac Surgery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Hemostasis is a critical component of all surgical procedures and especially cardiac surgery. In addition to traditional means, topical hemostatic agents have been reported to be extremely effective in terminating bleeding during cardiac procedures. We compared a hemostatic matrix sealant agent (HEMOPATCH Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Deerfield, IL) with alternative topical hemostatic treatment in patients undergoing ascending aorta surgery with moderate bleeding.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Following sample size calculation, in a prospective randomized study design, 85 patients were treated with HEMOPATCH matrix sealant and 85 patients received alternative treatment (dry or wet gauze compression or similar [control group]). The primary outcome measure was the percentage of patients with successful hemostasis within three minutes of HEMOPATCH or traditional treatment application. Other study outcome measures were postoperative blood loss and the rate of transfusion of blood products.
RESULTS: A statistically higher rate of successful hemostasis within three minutes was observed in the HEMOPATCH group (97.6% [83/85] vs. 65.8% [56/85] in the control group; p&lt; 0.001). The percentages of patients with postoperative bleeding and the rate of transfusion were lower in the HEMOPATCH group than in the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of HEMOPATCH is effective in terminating bleeding in patients undergoing ascending aorta cardiac procedures. Fewer patients treated with HEMOPATCH required blood transfusion. The cost-utility profile of HEMOPATCH should be addressed in dedicated trials.

### PMID 27670565 (2016) — The American surgeon
TITLE: Closure of a Traumatic Esophagomediastinal Fistula in a Child by Endoscopic Fulguration and Fibrin Injection.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Posttraumatic esophagomediastinal fistula is an uncommon clinical entity that warrants surgical awareness due to its life-threatening potential. Its management, especially in previously operated field, is controversial and several endoscopic methods are being proposed as alternatives. Ours is the first report of endoscopic fulguration and fibrin injection in successful closure of such fistula. A 9-year-old female sustained complete tracheoesophageal transection from a gunshot wound to the neck and underwent immediate primary repair. She presented nine months later with fevers and swelling over anterior neck. CT revealed air tracking posteriorly to the dorsal neck and inferiorly to the mediastinum. Considering difficulty of open surgical approach, endoscopic intervention was attempted. Posterior wall fistula was identified via microlaryngoscopy above the esophageal anastomosis. The fistula tract was de-epithelialized via a Bugbee fulgurating electrode and then sealed with fibrin glue. Consequent imaging studies demonstrated complete occlusion of the fistula. Posterior posttraumatic esophagomediastinal fistula presents a challenging scenario from a surgical standpoint, as it combines difficulty of safe approach, high rate of injury to surrounding structures, and significant postoperative recurrence rate. Endoscopic Bugbee fulguration and fibrin glue injection are a safe and effective alternative to the traditional approach.

### PMID 27125565 (2016) — Transfusion
TITLE: Transfusion management of factor V deficiency: three case reports and review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1111/trf.13623 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Factor V (FV) deficiency may be inherited as an autosomal recessive disease or acquired as a result of autoantibody formation, either spontaneously or secondary to exposure to bovine thrombin or medications. Congenital FV deficiency has traditionally been treated with plasma transfusions. However, recent evidence has suggested that platelet (PLT) transfusions may be a better alternative as FV stored within PLT alpha granules has greater procoagulant potential and is released locally at sites of vascular injury. We report three cases of FV deficiency, one congenital and two acquired, and emphasize the different management approaches.
CASE REPORTS: Patient 1 was a 30-year-old man with congenital FV deficiency who presented with a trauma-induced hematoma of his lower extremity. He was treated with 5 PLT units over 48 hours. Patient 2 was a 64-year-old woman who presented with an upper-extremity thrombus and was discovered to have a FV inhibitor, likely secondary to antibiotics. Patient 3 was a 75-year-old woman with hepatitis C virus (HCV) who presented with minor ecchymosis and was found to have a FV inhibitor secondary to either HCV or antibiotic exposure. Corticosteroids alone were able to eradicate the inhibitors in both patients with acquired inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: FV deficiency can present with a diverse range of symptoms. For bleeding patients, PLT transfusions should be the initial therapy. In patients with thrombosis, the risks and benefits of anticoagulation must be carefully assessed before treatment. For patients with minor bleeds, transfusions may be withheld, and elimination of the inhibitor should be the primary objective.

### PMID 26786060 (2016) — Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
TITLE: Structure-function relationships in thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor.
DOI: 10.1111/jth.13261 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) is an important regulator in the balance of coagulation and fibrinolysis. TAFI is a metallocarboxypeptidase that circulates in plasma as zymogen. Activated TAFI (TAFIa) cleaves C-terminal lysine or arginine residues from peptide substrates. The removal of C-terminal lysine residues from partially degraded fibrin leads to reduced plasmin formation and thus attenuation of fibrinolysis. TAFI also plays a role in inflammatory processes via the removal of C-terminal arginine or lysine residues from bradykinin, thrombin-cleaved osteopontin, C3a, C5a and chemerin. TAFI has been studied extensively over the past three decades and recent publications provide a wealth of information, including crystal structures, mutants and structural data obtained with antibodies and peptides. In this review, we combined and compared available data on structure/function relationships of TAFI.

### PMID 27306661 (2016) — Diagnostic and interventional radiology (Ankara, Turkey)
TITLE: Splenic artery embolization with Ankaferd blood stopper in a sheep model.
DOI: 10.5152/dir.2015.15382 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Splenic artery embolization is a minimally invasive therapeutic procedure utilized in a number of disorders. Ankaferd blood stopper (ABS) is a novel hemostatic agent with a new mechanism of action independent of clotting factors. We aimed to investigate the safety and efficiency of ABS for splenic artery embolization in a sheep model.
METHODS: Seven adult female sheep were included in the study. Selective celiac angiography was performed using a 5F diagnostic catheter and then a 2.7F hydrophilic coating microcatheter was advanced coaxially to the distal part of the main splenic artery. Under fluoroscopic guidance, 6 mL mixture composed of half-and-half ABS and contrast agent was slowly injected. Fluoroscopy was used to observe the deceleration and stagnation of the flow. Control celiac angiograms were obtained immediately after the embolization. After the procedure, the animals were observed for one day and then sacrificed with intravenous sodium thiopental.
RESULTS: Technical success rate was 100%. None of the animals died or experienced a major systemic adverse event during the procedure. All of the spleens appeared dark on macroscopic examination due to excessive thrombosis. Microscopically, the majority of the splenic sinusoids (90%-95%) were necrotic.
CONCLUSION: In our study, splenic artery embolization by ABS was found to be safe and effective in the short-term. Further studies are needed to better understand the embolizing potential of this novel hemostatic agent.

### PMID 25848302 (2015) — Vascular health and risk management
TITLE: Experimental study of sutureless vascular anastomosis with use of glued prosthesis in rabbits.
DOI: 10.2147/VHRM.S73104 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to explore the feasibility and efficacy of a new technique for sutureless vascular anastomosis, using glued prosthesis, as a sole anastomosis fixation method in rabbits.
METHODS: Ten rabbits were randomly selected to conduct the experiment. Five rabbits underwent direct anastomosis of infrarenal abdominal aorta, with glued prosthesis. In five other rabbits, reconstruction was done by sutured anastomosis. All animals were immediately examined by echo-Doppler for patency of anastomosis. The burst pressure of the glued anastomosis was measured and compared with that of a sutured artery. The animals were euthanized, and tissue samples were taken for histological examination immediately after the experiment.
RESULTS: Compared to conventional anastomoses, sutureless vascular anastomoses required shorter time of creation and significantly reduced blood loss (P&lt;5%). There was no significant difference on the average blood flow through the anastomosis between two groups at the end of surgery. All anastomoses with glued prosthesis, examined by echo-Doppler, were patent at the anastomotic site, except one, which was stenosed immediately after surgery. In the control group, except one with stenosis, all conventional anastomoses were patent. Mean burst pressure at the anastomotic site for sutureless anastomoses was lower than in control group. Macroscopically, the BioGlue did not demonstrate any adhesion to the surrounding tissue as it was covered by the vascular prosthesis. Histological examination showed low-grade inflammatory reaction in glued anastomoses versus no inflammatory reaction at the sutured anastomoses.
CONCLUSION: This technique may provide a feasible and successful alternative in vascular surgery. However, further long-term studies are necessary to elucidate the break pressure and degree of inflammation at the anastomotic site.

### PMID 25264182 (2015) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: Delayed cauda equina compression after spinal dura repair with BioGlue: magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography aspects of two cases of "glue-oma".
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2014.09.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Bovine serum albumin and glutaraldehyde (BSAG) (BioGlue) is a surgical adhesive widely used for off-label applications in neurosurgical procedures to minimize the risk of cerebrospinal fluid leakage after dural closure.
PURPOSE: To describe magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) aspects of two cases of postoperative BSAG expansion causing delayed cauda equina compression requiring further surgery.
STUDY DESIGN: A case report.
PATIENT SAMPLE: Two cases of delayed cauda equina compression complicating the closure, with BSAG, of small unintentional tears in the dura requiring lumbar decompressive surgery.
OUTCOME MEASURES: They included postoperative CT and MRI findings.
METHODS: We compared postoperative imaging and perioperative findings during subsequent surgery.
RESULTS: In both cases, imaging showed cauda equina compression due to epidural masses found during subsequent surgery comprising BioGlue. These masses appeared slightly hyperdense on CT scans and markedly hypointense on T2-weighted MRI scans.
CONCLUSIONS: When applied as a thick layer during use as a dural sealant, BSAG may swell, leading to a symptomatic "glue-oma" giving a hypointense image on T2-weighted MRI scans.

### PMID 25646746 (2015) — Spine
TITLE: Spinal sealant system provides better intraoperative watertight closure than standard of care during spinal surgery: a prospective, multicenter, randomized controlled study.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000000810 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Prospective, 3:1 randomized, single-blind, multicenter investigational study.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the safety and efficacy of a low-swell spinal sealant when used as an adjunct to sutured dural repair compared with standard of care methods to obtain watertight dural closure in subjects undergoing spinal surgery.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Watertight dural closure is paramount in spinal surgery to avoid complications of cerebrospinal fluid leak. Prior reports have proven the efficacy of a synthetic, absorbable polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel sealant in spinal surgery compared with standard of care. Given the potential concerns of swelling in spinal applications, the hydrogel was modified to a low-swell formulation.
METHODS: The primary endpoint was success rate in obtaining intraoperative watertight dural closure in subjects receiving PEG hydrogel sealant versus a control group of subjects receiving any standard method designed to provide intraoperative watertight closure. Subjects were evaluated at discharge and at 30 and 90 days postprocedure for cerebrospinal fluid leaks, surgical site infections, and adverse events.
RESULTS: Between May 2007 and May 2009, 98 subjects (74 PEG hydrogel spinal sealant, 24 control) were randomized at 14 clinical sites in the United States. Patients treated with the PEG hydrogel spinal sealant had a significantly higher rate of watertight closure than the control (98.6% vs. 79.2%, P = 0.003). No statistical differences were seen in postoperative cerebrospinal fluid, infection, and wound healing. No neurological deficits were seen attributable to the sealant.
CONCLUSION: The low-swell PEG hydrogel spinal sealant evaluated in this study has been proven safe and effective for providing watertight closure when used as an adjunct to sutured closure of intentional durotomies during spinal surgery. PEG hydrogel sealants have again proved superior to other standard of care technologies for safe, efficacious dural closure.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 2.

### PMID 26807362 (2015) — Quantitative imaging in medicine and surgery
TITLE: Comparison of three different embolic materials for varicocele embolization: retrospective study of tolerance, radiation and recurrence rate.
DOI: 10.3978/j.issn.2223-4292.2015.10.10 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To evaluate pain, radiation and recurrence rates in patients undergoing varicocele embolization with three different embolic materials.
METHODS: Retrospective study of 182 consecutive patients who underwent transcatheter retrograde varicocele embolization from July 2011 to May 2015 with glue (Glubran(&#xae;)2) (group 1, n=63), mechanical agents (coils and/or plugs) (group 2, n=53) or a sclerosing agent (polidocanol) (group 3, n=66). Patients were asked by telephone interview to evaluate pain during embolization and at 1, 7 and 30 days using a quantitative pain scale ranging from 0 to 10. Duration of scopy, kinetic energy released per unit mass (kerma) and dose area product (DAP) were assessed as radiation parameters during embolization procedures. Recurrence rates after treatment were also evaluated. Statistical analyses were performed using parametric and non-parametric tests.
RESULTS: Patients in the three study groups were comparable for age, clinical indication and embolization side. No difference was noted for significant pain (pain score &#x2265;3) during embolization and at 1, 7 and 30 days after treatment. Discomfort (pain score &lt;3) was more frequent in group 1 than in groups 2 and 3 at 7 days after the procedure (P=0.049). No difference in discomfort was noted during embolization or at 1 and 30 days. Duration of scopy was shorter (P&lt;0.0001) and kerma was lower (P=0.0087) in group 1 than in groups 2 and 3. DAP was lower in group 1 than in group 2 (P=0.04) but no difference was noted between groups 1 and 3, and groups 2 and 3. The recurrence rate at a mean follow-up of 24.4 months (range, 2-53 months) was significantly lower in group 1 than in the two other groups (P=0.032).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of Glubran(&#xae;)2 acrylic glue for varicocele embolization is safe and leads to less radiation and lower recurrence rates than is the case for other embolic materials without any more significant pain.

### PMID 25921595 (2015) — Scandinavian journal of gastroenterology
TITLE: Using Glubran 2 acrylic glue to maximize results of transcatheter arterial embolization for refractory upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
DOI: 10.3109/00365521.2015.1040996 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter, Comment
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 25735529 (2015) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Proximal ureteric obstruction caused by glue migration following selective renal artery embolization.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2014.11.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 25208903 (2015) — Vascular
TITLE: Endovascular embolization of a muscular symptomatic arteriovenous malformation with Glubran 2 acrylic glue.
DOI: 10.1177/1708538114550736 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Few cases of muscle arteriovenous malformations have been reported in literature to date.
CASE REPORT: We report the case of a 32-year-old man presenting a muscle arteriovenous malformation involving the vastus lateralis muscle with recurrent episodes of pain. The patient was treated by transcatheter embolization with Glubran 2 acrylic glue. There were no periprocedural or subsequent clinical complications, the glue resulted in successful selective occlusion and the patient showed resolution of symptoms at the six-months follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Endovascular therapy has been shown to be beneficial in patients with high surgical risks and is the treatment of choice for arteriovenous malformation lesions that extend beyond the deep fascia and involve muscle, tendon, and bone. Glubran 2 constitutes a useful tool to attempt embolization of the muscle arteriovenous malformation nidus, with easier handling and promising results.

### PMID 24902686 (2015) — Surgical innovation
TITLE: Systematic review of cyanoacrylate embolization for refractory gastrointestinal fistulae: a promising therapy.
DOI: 10.1177/1553350614535860 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Surgical management of gastrointestinal fistulae has been reported to carry a 30-day morbidity rate up to 82% and a mortality rate ranging from 2% to 4.8%; thus nonoperative alternatives are required. The aim of the present study was to assess the current experience on the use of cyanoacrylates in the management of these fistulae.
METHODS: A systematic review was carried out on Medline, Embase, The Cochrane database, Academic Search Complete, MedicLatina, and SciELO for English, Spanish, and Portuguese articles dealing with refractory fistulae by means of cyanoacrylate embolization therapy. Publication dates were restricted from 1969 to present. Outcome parameters were study design, number of participants, etiology of the fistula, approach, material used, success rate, complications, and mortality.
RESULTS: Electronic search yielded a total of 377 articles. After a meticulous screening, only 14 studies dealing with foregut/midgut fistulae and 6 addressing hindgut fistulae were included. All the included articles were prospective and retrospective case series. Cumulative success rate was 81% (range 0% to 100%) and 3 out of 203 patients (1%) developed minor complications.
CONCLUSION: Cyanoacrylate embolization of nearly all types of refractory gastrointestinal fistulae is a feasible and harmless technique. Prospective controlled studies are required to support the available evidence.

### PMID 25984391 (2015) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat(&#xae;)) in the neurosurgical practice: Part I: Intracranial surgical procedure.
DOI: 10.4103/2152-7806.156871 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemorrhages, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistula and infections are the most challenging postoperative complications in Neurosurgery. In this study, we report our preliminary results using a fully autologous fibrin sealant agent, the Vivostat(&#xae;) system, in achieving hemostasis and CSF leakage repair during cranio-cerebral procedures.
METHODS: From January 2012 to March 2014, 77 patients were studied prospectively and data were collected and analyzed. Autologous fibrin sealant, taken from patient's blood, was prepared with the Vivostat(&#xae;) system and applied on the resection bed or above the dura mater to achieve hemostasis and dural sealing. The surgical technique, time to bleeding control and associated complications were recorded.
RESULTS: A total of 79 neurosurgical procedures have been performed on 77 patients. In the majority of cases (98%) the same autologous fibrin glue provided rapid hemostasis and dural sealing. No patient developed allergic reactions or systemic complications in association with its application. There were no cases of cerebral hematoma, swelling, infection, or epileptic seizures after surgery whether in the immediate or in late period follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary study, the easy and direct application of autologous fibrin sealant agent helped in controlling cerebral bleeding and in providing prompt and efficient dural sealing with resolution of CSF leaks. Although the use of autologous fibrin glue seems to be safe, easy, and effective, further investigations are strongly recommended to quantify real advantages and potential limitations.

### PMID 26316398 (2015) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: A Novel Use of Direct Platelet Application During Surgery for Clopidogrel-Associated Intracerebral Hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2015.08.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Dual antiplatelet therapy is associated with increased rates of intracerebral hemorrhage, especially in the context of subarachnoid hemorrhage. We present a case of a spontaneous hemorrhage in a patient treated with a Pipeline stent for a ruptured dissecting vertebrobasilar aneurysm and the novel use of direct application of platelets during surgery to control bleeding.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 54-year-old previously healthy woman presented with an intradural right vertebral artery dissection with a ruptured 6-mm pseudoaneurysm. The patient was started on aspirin and clopidogrel and the vessel was reconstructed with 2 Pipeline Embolization Devices. On postbleed day number 14, she became obtunded with a blown right pupil; computed tomography of the head demonstrated a large right temporal intracerebral hematoma. The patient was taken emergently to the operating room for evacuation of the clot. Intraoperatively, satisfactory control of bleeding was not achieved despite transfusing several units of platelets intravenously. Ultimately, a mixture of Floseal and platelets applied directly to the hematoma wall allowed prompt hemostasis. At 3 months the patient was doing extremely well clinically and angiography demonstrated occlusion of the aneurysm.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first reported description of direct application of platelets to achieve intraoperative hemostasis. Platelets are activated by thrombin and collagen and the use of Floseal (a bovine-derived, gelatin matrix and human-derived thrombin) further potentiated the effectiveness of this strategy. With the increased incidence of intracerebral hemorrhage associated with dual antiplatelet therapy, this technique may provide a useful tool in the neurosurgical armamentarium.

### PMID 26267401 (2015) — Plastic and reconstructive surgery
TITLE: Risk of Thromboembolus after Application of Different Tissue Glues during Microvascular Anastomosis.
DOI: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000001808 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tissue glues are a useful tool for hemostasis and a potential tool for microvascular anastomosis. The hemostatic power and thrombotic risk of these surgical aids have been the subject of debate, but studies regarding thromboembolic risks of tissue glues are lacking.
METHODS: The authors compared the thromboembolic risk of three different tissue glues (six interrupted sutures complemented with fibrin, FloSeal, or TachoSil) against a control group (12 interrupted sutures) in the aorta-filter model in the rat. Each group consisted of 10 rats, examined 4 hours and 14 days postoperatively (total n = 80) using a structured protocol to assess the patency and condition of the filter, amount of thromboembolic material, and histologic appearance of the vessel wall.
RESULTS: In total, 160 anastomoses were performed in 80 rats. The overall patency rate for the groups was 90 percent (control), 35 percent (fibrin glue), 25 percent (FloSeal), and 10 percent (TachoSil). All experimental groups had significantly faster mean anastomotic times and less blood loss compared with the control group. Patency rates were reduced and thromboembolic material was significantly increased in all experimental groups. Histologically, the use of tissue glue reduced the incidence of irritation of the internal elastic lamina and was associated with an increased incidence of fibrocyte infiltration of the media, hypercellularity of the adventitia, and adventitial neovascularization and lymphangiogenesis.
CONCLUSION: The application of tissue glues in microvascular anastomosis reduces the time needed for anastomosis but was associated with a statistically significant increase in thromboembolism.

### PMID 25972952 (2015) — Asian journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Anaphylactic reaction after autologous blood transfusion: A case report and review of the literature.
DOI: 10.4103/1793-5482.154983 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Autologous blood transfusion as a cause of intraoperative anaphylaxis is very rare. We encountered one such life-threatening event in a 72-year-old patient undergoing laminectomy and pedicle screw fixation. The probable cause identified was the floseal mixed autologous blood transfusion. Review of literature has been done, and measures to avoid such an event in the future are discussed.

### PMID 25577629 (2015) — The journal of allergy and clinical immunology. In practice
TITLE: Life-threatening intraoperative anaphylaxis to gelatin in Floseal during pediatric spinal surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2014.05.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 25767949 (2015) — Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology Canada : JOGC = Journal d'obstetrique et gynecologie du Canada : JOGC
TITLE: The management of uterine leiomyomas.
DOI: 10.1016/S1701-2163(15)30338-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Practice Guideline
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The aim of this guideline is to provide clinicians with an understanding of the pathophysiology, prevalence, and clinical significance of myomata and the best evidence available on treatment modalities.
OPTIONS: The areas of clinical practice considered in formulating this guideline were assessment, medical treatments, conservative treatments of myolysis, selective uterine artery occlusion, and surgical alternatives including myomectomy and hysterectomy. The risk-to-benefit ratio must be examined individually by the woman and her health care provider.
OUTCOMES: Implementation of this guideline should optimize the decision-making process of women and their health care providers in proceeding with further investigation or therapy for uterine leiomyomas, having considered the disease process and available treatment options, and reviewed the risks and anticipated benefits.
EVIDENCE: Published literature was retrieved through searches of PubMed, CINAHL, and Cochrane Systematic Reviews in February 2013, using appropriate controlled vocabulary (uterine fibroids, myoma, leiomyoma, myomectomy, myolysis, heavy menstrual bleeding, and menorrhagia) and key words (myoma, leiomyoma, fibroid, myomectomy, uterine artery embolization, hysterectomy, heavy menstrual bleeding, menorrhagia). The reference lists of articles identified were also searched for other relevant publications. Results were restricted to systematic reviews, randomized control trials/controlled clinical trials, and observational studies. There were no date limits but results were limited to English or French language materials. Searches were updated on a regular basis and incorporated in the guideline to January 2014. Grey (unpublished) literature was identified through searching the websites of health technology assessment and health technology-related agencies, clinical practice guideline collections, and national and international medical specialty societies.
BENEFITS, HARMS, AND COSTS: The majority of fibroids are asymptomatic and require no intervention or further investigations. For symptomatic fibroids such as those causing menstrual abnormalities (e.g. heavy, irregular, and prolonged uterine bleeding), iron defficiency anemia, or bulk symptoms (e.g., pelvic pressure/pain, obstructive symptoms), hysterectomy is a definitive solution. However, it is not the preferred solution for women who wish to preserve fertility and/or their uterus. The selected treatment should be directed towards an improvement in symptomatology and quality of life. The cost of the therapy to the health care system and to women with fibroids must be interpreted in the context of the cost of untreated disease conditions and the cost of ongoing or repeat investigative or treatment modalities.
VALUES: The quality of evidence in this document was rated using the criteria described in the Report of the Caadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care (Table 1). Summary Statements 1. Uterine fibroids are common, appearing in 70% of women by age 50; the 20% to 50% that are symptomatic have considerable social and economic impact in Canada. (II-3) 2. The presence of uterine fibroids can lead to a variety of clinical challenges. (III) 3. Concern about possible complications related to fibroids in pregnancy is not an indication for myomectomy except in women who have had a previous pregnancy with complications related to these fibroids. (III) 4. Women who have fibroids detected in pregnancy may require additional maternal and fetal surveillance. (II-2) 5. Effective medical treatments for women with abnormal uterine bleeding associated with uterine fibroids include the levonorgestrel intrauterine system, (I) gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues, (I) selective progesterone receptor modulators, (I) oral contraceptives, (II-2) progestins, (II-2) and danazol. (II-2) 6. Effective medical treatments for women with bulk symptoms associated with fibroids include selective progesterone receptor modulators and gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues. (I) 7. Hysterectomy is the most effective treatment for symptomatic uterine fibroids. (III) 8. Myomectomy is an option for women who wish to preserve their uterus or enhance fertility, but carries the potential for further intervention. (II-2) 9. Of the conservative interventional treatments currently available, uterine artery embolization has the longest track record and has been shown to be effective in properly selected patients. (II-3) 10. Newer focused energy delivery methods are promising but lack long-term data. (III) Recommendations 1. Women with asymptomatic fibroids should be reassured that there is no evidence to substantiate major concern about malignancy and that hysterectomy is not indicated. (III-D) 2. Treatment of women with uterine leiomyomas must be individualized based on symptomatology, size and location of fibroids, age, need and desire of the patient to preserve fertility or the uterus, the availability of therapy, and the experience of the therapist. (III-B) 3. In women who do not wish to preserve fertility and/or their uterus and who have been counselled regarding the alternatives and risks, hysterectomy by the least invasive approach possible may be offered as the definitive treatment for symptomatic uterine fibroids and is associated with a high level of satisfaction. (II-2A) 4. Hysteroscopic myomectomy should be considered first-line conservative surgical therapy for the management of symptomatic intracavitary fibroids. (II-3A) 5. Surgical planning for myomectomy should be based on mapping the location, size, and number of fibroids with the help of appropriate imaging. (III-A) 6. When morcellation is necessary to remove the specimen, the patient should be informed about possible risks and complications, including the fact that in rare cases fibroid(s) may contain unexpected malignancy and that laparoscopic power morcellation may spread the cancer, potentially worsening their prognosis. (III-B) 7. Anemia should be corrected prior to proceeding with elective surgery. (II-2A) Selective progesterone receptor modulators and gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues are effective at correcting anemia and should be considered preoperatively in anemic patients. (I-A) 8. Use of vasopressin, bupivacaine and epinephrine, misoprostol, peri-cervical tourniquet, or gelatin-thrombin matrix reduce blood loss at myomectomy and should be considered. (I-A) 9. Uterine artery occlusion by embolization or surgical methods may be offered to selected women with symptomatic uterine fibroids who wish to preserve their uterus. Women choosing uterine artery occlusion for the treatment of fibroids should be counselled regarding possible risks, including the likelihood that fecundity and pregnancy may be impacted. (II-3A) 10. In women who present with acute uterine bleeding associated with uterine fibroids, conservative management with estrogens, selective progesterone receptor modulators, antifibrinolytics, Foley catheter tamponade, and/or operative hysteroscopic intervention may be considered, but hysterectomy may become necessary in some cases. In centres where available, intervention by uterine artery embolization may be considered. (III-B).

### PMID 25494314 (2015) — Spine
TITLE: Injectable gelatin used as hemostatic agent to stop pedicle bleeding in long deformity surgical procedures: does it embolize?
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000000723 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Prospective porcine animal model.
OBJECTIVE: Determine if injecting FloSeal into pedicles for hemostasis causes emboli.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Bleeding from spinal deformity cases can be substantial, especially when surgical procedures involve bilateral fixation at multiple segments. It is not unusual to observe hemorrhage from vascular pedicles during each step of pedicle screw tract preparation. When multiple fixation points are required, blood loss can be excessive. To minimize estimated blood loss and associated morbidity, surgeons have injected liquefied gelatin into pedicles after drilling, palpating, and/or tapping. FloSeal is one of the most popular commercially available injectable agents and we sought to investigate the potential for embolization when used as an intrapedicular hemostatic agent.
METHODS: Two adult minipigs were anesthetized and underwent sequential bilateral pedicle cannulation from T-spine to sacrum. At every level, tracts were cannulated, palpated, and tapped. In every tract, FloSeal was injected into each pedicle until back pressure was detected on the syringe or to a maximum volume of 2 mL, then pedicle screws were inserted. The right ventricular outflow tract was visualized real time using transesophageal echocardiography. Postmortem evaluation of heart and lungs was performed.
RESULTS: FloSeal injected into pedicles caused a consistent large showering of the right ventricular outflow tract in both pigs as visualized on intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography. A second large showering occurred during screw insertion after FloSeal was injected. Microscopic examination of lungs clearly identified amphophilic amorphous material in many small vessels consistent with FloSeal.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests caution when injecting gelatin hemostatic agents into pedicles to stop bleeding during spinal surgery as we saw clear evidence of fat and gelatin emboli when used in this animal model. Further investigation into how to minimize this embolic showering may help the cardiopulmonary at risk patient who requires spinal surgery, especially when multiple points of pedicle screw fixation are used.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: N/A.

### PMID 26649116 (2015) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Intraovarian oxidized cellulose (Surgicel) mimicking acute ovarian pathology after recent pelvic surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2015.08.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidized regenerated cellulose (Ethicon Surgicel) is often used during surgery to achieve hemostasis. The appearance of Surgicel on postoperative computed tomography (CT) may be mistaken for abscess. Meanwhile, the literature regarding its ultrasound appearance remains scant. We report the CT and sonographic appearances of Surgicel in the right ovary of a 21-year-old woman presenting to the emergency department with pelvic pain 7 days after ovarian cystectomy. The patient was discharged home with only supportive measures, and follow-up ultrasound obtained 26 days later demonstrated resolution of the sonographic abnormality. This case stresses the importance of familiarity with common imaging appearances of topical hemostatic agents and the need to correlate radiologic findings with the patient's clinical condition and prior operative reports to identify patients suitable for conservative management.

### PMID 25266604 (2015) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Efficacy of hemostatic matrix and microporous polysaccharide hemospheres.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2014.08.026 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Microporous Polysaccharide Hemospheres (MPH) are a new plant-derived polysaccharide powder hemostat. Previous studies investigated MPH as a replacement to nonflowable hemostatic agents of different application techniques (e.g., oxidized cellulose, collagen); therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine if MPH is a surrogate for flowable hemostatic agents of similar handling and application techniques, specifically a flowable thrombin-gelatin hemostatic matrix.
METHODS: Hemostatic efficacy was compared using a heparinized porcine abrasion model mimicking a capsular tear of a parenchymal organ. MPH (ARISTA, 1 g) and hemostatic matrix (Floseal, 1 mL) were applied, according to a randomized scheme, to paired hepatic abrasions (40 lesions per group). Hemostatic success, control of bleeding, and blood loss were assessed 2, 5, and 10 min after treatment. Hemostatic success and control of bleeding were analyzed using odds ratios and blood loss using mean differences.
RESULTS: Hemostatic matrix provided superior hemostatic success relative to MPH at 5 (odds ratio: 0.035, 95% confidence interval: 0.004-0.278) and 10 min (0.032, 0.007-0.150), provided superior control of bleeding at 5 (0.006, &lt;0.001-0.037) and 10 min (0.009, 0.001-0.051), and had significantly less blood loss at 5 (mean difference: 0.3118 mL/min, 95% confidence interval: 0.0939-0.5296) and 10 min (0.5025, 0.2489-0.7561).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings corroborate other MPH investigations regarding its low-level efficacy and suggest that MPH is not an appropriate surrogate for hemostatic matrix despite similar application techniques. The lack of a procoagulant within MPH may likely be the reason for its lower efficacy and need for multiple applications.

### PMID 25884946 (2015) — PloS one
TITLE: Renal denervation suppresses atrial fibrillation in a model of renal impairment.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124123 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A close association exists between renal impairment (RI) and atrial fibrillation (AF) occurrence. Increased activity of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) may contribute to the development of AF associated with RI. Renal denervation (RDN) decreases central sympathetic activity.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective of the study was to explore the effects of RDN on AF occurrence and its possible mechanisms in beagles with RI.
METHODS: Unilateral RI was induced in beagles by embolization of small branches of the renal artery in the right kidney using gelatin sponge granules in Model (n = 6) and RDN group (n = 6). The Sham group (n = 6) underwent the same procedure, except for embolization. Then animals in RDN group underwent radiofrequency ablation of the renal sympathetic nerve. Cardiac electrophysiological parameters, blood pressure, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, and AF inducibility were investigated. The activity of the SNS, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), inflammation and atrial interstitial fibrosis were measured.
RESULTS: Embolization of small branches of the renal artery in the right kidney led to ischemic RI. Heart rate, P wave duration and BP were increased by RI, which were prevented or attenuated by RDN. Atrial effective refractory period was shortened and AF inducibility was increased by RI, which were prevented by RDN. Antegrade Wenckebach point was shortened, atrial and ventricular rates during AF were increased by RI, which were attenuated or prevented by RDN. Levels of norepinephrine, renin and aldosterone in plasma, norepinephrine, angiotensin II, aldosterone, interleukin-6 and high sensitivity C-reactive protein in atrial tissue were elevated, and atrial interstitial fibrosis was enhanced by RI, which were attenuated by RDN.
CONCLUSIONS: RDN significantly reduced AF inducibility, prevented the atrial electrophysiological changes in a model of RI by combined reduction of sympathetic drive and RAAS activity, and inhibition of inflammation activity and fibrotic pathway in atrial tissue.

### PMID 26191528 (2015) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: Results from a First-in-Human Trial of a Novel Vascular Sealant.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2015.00029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Suture hole bleeding from synthetic grafts presents a hemostatic challenge. The designs of many vascular sealants are not optimal (non-adherence to wet surfaces, excessive swelling, inflexible). PreveLeak&#x2122; (formerly ArterX ((&#xae;)) ) is a polyaldehyde-bovine serum albumin-based sealant whose efficacy, safety, and performance were evaluated in this first-in-human study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective, single-arm, multicenter study was performed in patients undergoing open vascular reconstructions with prosthetic grafts. Sealant was applied to the suture line after completion of the anastomosis. The primary endpoint was the incidence of immediate sealing (without clinically significant bleeding) upon clamp release. Secondary endpoints were time to sealing, safety, and assessment of product performance.
RESULTS: Fifty-six anastomoses were performed in 32 patients. Grafts were Dacron (66% of sites), polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE; 32%), or both Dacron and PTFE (2%). The femoral artery was the most common site of anastomosis (41% of sites). Immediate sealing after clamp release was achieved at all anastomoses (100%); 93% had no bleeding and 7% had oozing. No rebleeding occurred during 10&#x2009;min of observation. The three most common adverse events were graft or bypass occlusion (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5 patients), infection (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4), and seroma (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3); none were device related. The sealant was considered easy to apply, quickly forming a soft gel, and adhering to tissue and grafts.
CONCLUSION: PreveLeak effectively sealed anastomotic suture lines during vascular reconstruction procedures and was considered easy to use. Adverse events were consistent with those commonly observed in patients undergoing surgical procedures. These results provided the support for conducting a larger controlled clinical trial.

### PMID 26333113 (2015) — Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
TITLE: A critical appraisal of point-of-care coagulation testing in critically ill patients.
DOI: 10.1111/jth.13126 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Derangement of the coagulation system is a common phenomenon in critically ill patients, who may present with severe bleeding and/or conditions associated with a prothrombotic state. Monitoring of this coagulopathy can be performed with conventional coagulation assays; however, point-of-care tests have become increasingly attractive, because not only do they yield a more rapid result than clinical laboratory testing, but they may also provide a more complete picture of the condition of the hemostatic system. There are many potential areas of study and applications of point-of-care hemostatic testing in critical care, including patients who present with massive blood loss, patients with a hypercoagulable state (such as in disseminated intravascular coagulation), and monitoring of antiplatelet treatment for acute arterial thrombosis, mostly acute coronary syndromes. However, the limitations of near-patient hemostatic testing has not been fully appreciated, and are discussed here. The currently available evidence indicates that point-of-care tests may be applied to guide appropriate blood product transfusion and the use of hemostatic agents to correct the hemostatic defect or to ameliorate antithrombotic treatment. Disappointingly, however, only in cardiac surgery is there adequate evidence to show that application of near-patient thromboelastography leads to an improvement in clinically relevant outcomes, such as reductions in bleeding-related morbidity and mortality, and cost-effectiveness. More research is required to validate the utility and cost-effectiveness of near-patient hemostatic testing in other areas, especially in traumatic bleeding and postpartum hemorrhage.

### PMID 26215747 (2015) — Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)
TITLE: Viscoelastic point-of-care testing to assist with the diagnosis, management and monitoring of haemostasis: a systematic review and cost-effectiveness analysis.
DOI: 10.3310/hta19580 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Patients with substantive bleeding usually require transfusion and/or (re-)operation. Red blood cell (RBC) transfusion is independently associated with a greater risk of infection, morbidity, increased hospital stay and mortality. ROTEM (ROTEM&#xae; Delta, TEM International GmbH, Munich, Germany; www.rotem.de), TEG (TEG&#xae; 5000 analyser, Haemonetics Corporation, Niles, IL, USA; www.haemonetics.com) and Sonoclot (Sonoclot&#xae; coagulation and platelet function analyser, Sienco Inc., Arvada, CO) are point-of-care viscoelastic (VE) devices that use thromboelastometry to test for haemostasis in whole blood. They have a number of proposed advantages over standard laboratory tests (SLTs): they provide a result much quicker, are able to identify what part of the clotting process is disrupted, and provide information on clot formation over time and fibrinolysis.
OBJECTIVES: This assessment aimed to assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of VE devices to assist with the diagnosis, management and monitoring of haemostasis disorders during and after cardiac surgery, trauma-induced coagulopathy and post-partum haemorrhage (PPH).
METHODS: Sixteen databases were searched to December 2013: MEDLINE (OvidSP), MEDLINE In-Process and Other Non-Indexed Citations and Daily Update (OvidSP), EMBASE (OvidSP), BIOSIS Previews (Web of Knowledge), Science Citation Index (SCI) (Web of Science), Conference Proceedings Citation Index (CPCI-S) (Web of Science), Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE), Health Technology Assessment (HTA) database, Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature (LILACS), International Network of Agencies for Health Technology Assessment (INAHTA), National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) HTA programme, Aggressive Research Intelligence Facility (ARIF), Medion, and the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO). Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were assessed for quality using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool. Prediction studies were assessed using QUADAS-2. For RCTs, summary relative risks (RRs) were estimated using random-effects models. Continuous data were summarised narratively. For prediction studies, the odds ratio (OR) was selected as the primary effect estimate. The health-economic analysis considered the costs and quality-adjusted life-years of ROTEM, TEG and Sonoclot compared with SLTs in cardiac surgery and trauma patients. A decision tree was used to take into account short-term complications and longer-term side effects from transfusion. The model assumed a 1-year time horizon.
RESULTS: Thirty-one studies (39 publications) were included in the clinical effectiveness review. Eleven RCTs (n=1089) assessed VE devices in patients undergoing cardiac surgery; six assessed thromboelastography (TEG) and five assessed ROTEM. There was a significant reduction in RBC transfusion [RR 0.88, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.80 to 0.96; six studies], platelet transfusion (RR 0.72, 95% CI 0.58 to 0.89; six studies) and fresh frozen plasma to transfusion (RR 0.47, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.65; five studies) in VE testing groups compared with control. There were no significant differences between groups in terms of other blood products transfused. Continuous data on blood product use supported these findings. Clinical outcomes did not differ significantly between groups. There were no apparent differences between ROTEM or TEG; none of the RCTs evaluated Sonoclot. There were no data on the clinical effectiveness of VE devices in trauma patients or women with PPH. VE testing was cost-saving and more effective than SLTs. For the cardiac surgery model, the cost-saving was &#xa3;43 for ROTEM, &#xa3;79 for TEG and &#xa3;132 for Sonoclot. For the trauma population, the cost-savings owing to VE testing were more substantial, amounting to per-patient savings of &#xa3;688 for ROTEM compared with SLTs, &#xa3;721 for TEG, and &#xa3;818 for Sonoclot. This finding was entirely dependent on material costs, which are slightly higher for ROTEM. VE testing remained cost-saving following various scenario analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: VE testing is cost-saving and more effective than SLTs, in both patients undergoing cardiac surgery and trauma patients. However, there were no data on the clinical effectiveness of Sonoclot or of VE devices in trauma patients.
STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42013005623.
FUNDING: The NIHR Health Technology Assessment programme.

### PMID 25440401 (2015) — Anaesthesia
TITLE: Haemostatic management of cardiac surgical haemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1111/anae.12898 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Almost 30,000 cardiopulmonary bypass operations are performed in the UK every year, consuming a considerable portion of the UK blood supply. Each year, in cardiac surgery, 90% of blood products are used by only 10% of patients, and over the past 25 years, much innovation and research has gone into improving peri-operative diagnosis and therapy for these patients. Visco-elastic tests performed at the bedside, with modifications to allow direct quantification of fibrinogen levels, are probably the biggest advancement. There is no clear advantage of thromboelastometry over thromboelastography, and the published literature remains scarce. Visco-elastic testing has recently been coupled with the systematic replacement of clotting factors by means of factor concentrates, with objective improvement in terms of blood loss, red blood cell usage and surgical re-exploration. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence has reviewed the available evidence and recommended visco-elastic tests as cost effective in cardiac surgery. Factor concentrates, however, carry significant risks, particularly unnecessary donor exposures, potential selective over-correction of partial deficiencies and the possibility that the postoperative risk of venous thromboembolism is increased; as yet there are no data on risk-benefit analysis. There are a number of promising drugs used in topical haemostasis, but the requirement to apply these before major bleeding is manifest limits their use considerably. Hyperfibrinolysis is less important than in the past due to the wide spread adoption of antifibrinolytic agents and close intra-operative monitoring of heparin effect.

### PMID 30363577 (2015) — BJR case reports
TITLE: Endovascular treatment of a pulmonary artery pseudoaneurysm caused by Swan-Ganz catheter deployment in an anticoagulated patient.
DOI: 10.1259/bjrcr.20150064 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a case report of an anticoagulated 78-year old man presenting a pulmonary artery pseudoaneurysm following Swan-Ganz catheter deployment after an aortic valve and aortic root replacement. Diagnosis was established by cone beam CT angiography and catheter angiographyand embolisation was achieved via a combination of plug and glue. This case emphasises the importance of endovascular techniques in the management of iatrogenic pulmonary pseudoaneurysms and shows the benefit of using highly hemostatic polymeric agent in anticoagulated patients to obtain a rapid and effective occlusion.

### PMID 26683839 (2015) — Journal of medical case reports
TITLE: Life-threatening pleural hemorrhage following intrapleural enzyme therapy and successful treatment with fibrin-thrombin sealant pleurodesis: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s13256-015-0775-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Intrapleural fibrinolytic enzyme therapy is a potentially surgery-sparing treatment for poorly resolving parapneumonic effusion and empyema. It is safe in the majority of patients, however the most significant risk associated with this treatment is severe bleeding secondary to pleural hemorrhage. Contraindications for intrapleural enzyme therapy are not widely agreed upon and little is known about how to treat this difficult and potentially lethal hemorrhagic complication.
CASE PRESENTATION: An independent 82-year-old Caucasian man presented to hospital with an empyema complicating community-acquired pneumonia and coincidental pulmonary embolus. He was initially commenced on intravenous antibiotics, pleural drainage and anticoagulation, however failed to improve significantly and was commenced on intrapleural fibrinolytic enzyme therapy. Shortly after, he suffered severe pleural hemorrhage that was uncontrollable despite emergency thoracotomy and washout. Subsequent hemostasis was achieved after re-exploration and application of topical fibrin-thrombin sealant spray. The patient survived and was discharged home.
CONCLUSIONS: Intrapleural enzyme therapy can be effective in loculated parapneumonic effusion and empyema, but massive pleural hemorrhage can complicate its use. Pleural hemorrhage appears to be associated with anticoagulation or coagulopathy, and can be difficult to manage. This case adds to the body of data on bleeding complications following intrapleural enzyme therapy, and to the best of our knowledge is the first report of fibrin-thrombin sealant use in this setting.

### PMID 26254451 (2015) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Randomized trial of a dry-powder, fibrin sealant in vascular procedures.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2015.05.038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Topical hemostats are important adjuncts for stopping surgical bleeding. The safety and efficacy of Fibrocaps, a dry-powder, fibrin sealant containing human plasma-derived thrombin and fibrinogen, was evaluated in patients undergoing vascular surgical procedures.
METHODS: In this single-blind trial (clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01527357), adult patients were randomized 2:1 to Fibrocaps plus gelatin sponge (Fibrocaps) vs gelatin sponge alone. Results are presented for the patient subset undergoing vascular procedures with suture hole bleeding. The primary efficacy endpoint compared time to hemostasis (TTH) over 5&#xa0;minutes. Safety follow-up continued to day&#xa0;29.
RESULTS: A total of 175 patients were randomized and treated (Fibrocaps, 117; gelatin sponge, 58). Patients were predominately male (69%) and underwent arterial bypass (81%), arteriovenous graft formation (9%), or carotid endarterectomy (9%). Fibrocaps significantly reduced TTH compared with gelatin sponge (hazard ratio [HR], 2.1; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.5-3.1; median TTH, 2&#xa0;minutes; 95% CI, 1.5-2.5 vs 4&#xa0;minutes; 95% CI, 3.0-5.0; P&#xa0;&lt; .002). Significant reductions were also observed in patients receiving concomitant antiplatelet agents alone (HR, 2.8; 95% CI, 1.0-7.4; P&#xa0;= .03; n&#xa0;= 33), anticoagulants alone (HR, 2.0; 95% CI, 1.0-4.0; P&#xa0;= .04; n&#xa0;= 43), or both antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants (Fibrocaps vs gelatin sponge, HR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.2-4.3; P&#xa0;= .008; n&#xa0;= 65). Incidences of common adverse events (procedural pain, nausea, constipation) were generally comparable between treatment arms. Anti-thrombin antibodies developed in 2% of Fibrocaps-treated patients and no-gelatin-sponge patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrocaps, a ready-to-use, dry-powder fibrin sealant, was well-tolerated and reduced TTH in patients undergoing vascular procedures, including those receiving antiplatelet agents and/or anticoagulants, demonstrating its safety and usefulness as an adjunct to hemostasis.

### PMID 26003458 (2015) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Anaphylactic reaction to bovine thrombin in ultrasound-guided treatment of femoral pseudoaneurysm.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2015.02.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 25777803 (2015) — Arthritis care &amp; research
TITLE: Treatment Algorithms in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
DOI: 10.1002/acr.22589 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To establish agreement on systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) treatment.
METHODS: SLE experts (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;69) were e-mailed scenarios and indicated preferred treatments. Algorithms were constructed and agreement determined (&#x2265;50% respondents indicating &#x2265;70% agreement).
RESULTS: Initially, 54% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;37) responded suggesting treatment for scenarios; 13 experts rated agreement with scenarios. Fourteen of 16 scenarios had agreement as follows: discoid lupus: first-line therapy was topical agents and hydroxychloroquine and/or glucocorticoids then azathioprine and subsequently mycophenolate (mofetil); uncomplicated cutaneous vasculitis: initial treatment was glucocorticoids&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;hydroxychloroquine&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;methotrexate, followed by azathioprine or mycophenolate and then cyclophosphamide; arthritis: initial therapy was hydroxychloroquine and/or glucocorticoids, then methotrexate and subsequently rituximab; pericarditis: first-line therapy was nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, then glucocorticoids with/without hydroxychloroquine, then azathioprine, mycophenolate, or methotrexate and finally belimumab or rituximab, and/or a pericardial window; interstitial lung disease/alveolitis: induction was glucocorticoids and mycophenolate or cyclophosphamide, then rituximab or intravenous gamma globulin (IVIG), and maintenance followed with azathioprine or mycophenolate; pulmonary hypertension: glucocorticoids and mycophenolate or cyclophosphamide and an endothelin receptor antagonist were initial therapies, subsequent treatments were phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors and then prostanoids and rituximab; antiphospholipid antibody syndrome: standard anticoagulation with/without hydroxychloroquine, then a thrombin inhibitor for venous thrombosis, versus adding aspirin or platelet inhibition drugs for arterial events; mononeuritis multiplex and central nervous system vasculitis: first-line therapy was glucocorticoids and cyclophosphamide followed by maintenance with azathioprine or mycophenolate, and then rituximab, IVIG, or plasmapheresis; and serious lupus nephritis: first-line therapy was glucocorticoids and mycophenolate, then cyclophosphamide then rituximab.
CONCLUSION: We established variable agreement on treatment approaches. For some treatment decisions there was good agreement between experts even if no randomized controlled trial data were available.

### PMID 25458801 (2015) — Journal of the American College of Surgeons
TITLE: The FINISH-3 trial: a phase 3, international, randomized, single-blind, controlled trial of topical fibrocaps in intraoperative surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2014.09.019 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This Phase 3, international, randomized, single-blind, controlled trial (FINISH-3) compared the efficacy and safety of Fibrocaps, a ready-to-use, dry-powder fibrin sealant containing human plasma-derived thrombin and fibrinogen, vs gelatin sponge alone for use as a hemostat for surgical bleeding in 4 indications (ie, spinal, hepatic, vascular, soft tissue dissection).
STUDY DESIGN: Adults with mild to moderate surgical bleeding (randomized 2:1; Fibrocaps vs gelatin sponge) were treated at a single bleeding site (day 1). Time to hemostasis (TTH) during 5 minutes was compared (log-rank statistic) within each indication. Safety follow-up continued to day&#xa0;29.
RESULTS: Patients were treated (Fibrocaps, n&#xa0;= 480; gelatin sponge, n&#xa0;= 239) when undergoing spinal (n&#xa0;= 183), vascular (n&#xa0;= 175), hepatic (n&#xa0;= 180), or soft-tissue (n&#xa0;= 181) procedures. Fibrocaps was applied by spray device in 53% of all procedures (94% of hepatic and soft-tissue procedures). Fibrocaps significantly reduced TTH compared with gelatin sponge; estimated hazard ratios were 3.3, 2.1, 2.3, and 3.4 for the 4 surgical indications, respectively (each p &lt; 0.001; primary end point). Fibrocaps significantly reduced median TTH for each indication (p &lt; 0.001) and was superior for secondary efficacy end points of restricted mean TTH (p &lt; 0.001) and probability of hemostasis at 3 (p &lt; 0.001) and 5 (p &#x2264; 0.002) minutes. Adverse event incidences were generally similar between treatment arms. Non-neutralizing, anti-thrombin antibodies developed in 2% of Fibrocaps-treated and 3% of gelatin sponge-treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrocaps was well tolerated and significantly reduced TTH relative to gelatin sponge alone in all 4 surgical indications. These findings demonstrate the broad utility of Fibrocaps as a hemostatic agent for mild to moderate surgical bleeding.

### PMID 25310484 (2015) — Biosensors &amp; bioelectronics
TITLE: A simple and sensitive label-free fluorescent approach for protein detection based on a Perylene probe and aptamer.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bios.2014.09.095 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Highly sensitive detection of proteins is of great importance for effective clinical diagnosis and biomedical research. However, so far most detection methods rely on antibody-based immunoassays and are usually laborious and time-consuming with poor sensitivity. Here, we developed a simple and ultra-sensitive method to detect a biomarker protein-thrombin by taking advantage of the fluorescent probe Perylene tetracarboxylic acid diimide (PTCDI) derivatives and thrombin aptamer. The water-soluble dye PTCDI shows strong fluorescence in buffer solution for the existence of free dye monomer, but becomes weak after aggregation through self-assembly on nucleic acid aptamer. In the presence of thrombin, it specifically binds to thrombin aptamer which causes the conformational transition between aptamer and PTCDI and results in a significant fluorescence recovery. The results showed that as low as 40 pM of thrombin could be detected by this method. The high sensitivity of the developed sensing system mainly attributes to the ultra-sensitivity of the fluorescence intensity changes of PTCDI. With the specificity of aptamer, the assay exhibited high selectivity for thrombin against three other proteins (bovine serum albumin, lysozyme, mouse IgG) and 1% diluted fetal bovine serum. The detection method might be extended to sensitive detection of a variety of proteins for its advantages of isothermal conditions required, simple and rapid without multiple separation and washing steps.

### PMID 25577672 (2015) — American journal of obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Use of Monsel solution to treat obstetrical hemorrhage: a review and comparison to other topical hemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2014.12.029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: Peripartum hemorrhage accounts for 8% of maternal deaths in the United States, and nearly 27% worldwide. A growing need exists for tactics to spare morbidity given a rise of abnormal placentation that contributes to excessive blood loss at the time of delivery. Approaches such as compression sutures, balloon tamponade, and pelvic artery embolization are not without side effects and potential implications for future fertility. The use of topical hemostatic agents has become widespread in gynecologic and obstetric surgery despite a paucity of distinct studies in the field, and may allow providers to increasingly avoid cesarean hysterectomy. A variety of topical hemostatic agents exist along a wide cost continuum, each characterized by specific efficacy, advantages, drawbacks, and often gaps in long-term data to support safety and impact on future fertility. Herein, we comprehensively review these agents and illustrate a nontraditional use of Monsel solution applied directly to the placental bed in a case of focal placenta accreta. This ultimately contributed to successful uterine preservation with no known adverse sequelae. Monsel solution may have a role in establishing hemostasis in the setting of abnormal placentation, and may be a particularly attractive alternative in resource-poor nations.

### PMID 30546511 (2014) — Journal of cardiology cases
TITLE: BioGlue&#xae; coronary embolism during open heart surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jccase.2014.05.007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In cases of iatrogenic coronary embolism during cardiac surgery or percutaneous coronary intervention, small air bubbles or foreign bodies are directly injected, which usually result in serious adverse events if not treated promptly. We herein describe the case of a patient who developed acute myocardial infarction resulting in shock due to BioGlue&#xae; (CryoLife, Atlanta, GA, USA)-induced coronary embolism during the surgical repair of aortic dissection and was treated for retrieval of the material using a thrombectomy catheter. &lt;Learning objective: Coronary embolism caused by surgical adhesives is a rare but potentially life-threatening complication. It is important for surgeons to promptly recognize and treat this serious condition in consultation with cardiologists.&gt;.

### PMID 24908618 (2014) — Cardiovascular revascularization medicine : including molecular interventions
TITLE: Intractable ventricular fibrillation: post ascending aortic dissection repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.carrev.2014.04.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Ascending aortic dissection is a life threatening surgical emergency and carries high peri-operative mortality. Various biological adhesive materials are commonly used in such a surgery to enhance strengthening of separated layers of aortic wall. Despite of extensive use, embolization of the glue material remains a feared complication. Here we are describing a case where BioGlue embolized down the left main stem and resulted in refractory ventricular arrhythmia and hemodynamic instability.

### PMID 25496682 (2014) — Interventional neuroradiology : journal of peritherapeutic neuroradiology, surgical procedures and related neurosciences
TITLE: Curative glubran 2 embolization of cerebral arteriovenous malformations patient selection and initial results.
DOI: 10.15274/INR-2014-10063 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The liquid embolic agents currently used for embolization of cerebral arteriovenous malformations are Onyx and NBCA. Glubran 2, a cyanoacrylate-based synthetic glue, has recently been applied for embolization of cerebral arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). We report the clinical results of selected cerebral AVMs treated with Glubran 2 targeting for curative embolization. Between October 2011 and March 2013, 31 patients with cerebral AVMs were selected for curative embolization with Glubran 2. There were 19 men and 12 women with a mean age of 32 years (range 4-65 years). Initial clinical presentation included hemorrhage in 28 and seizures in three patients. AVM location was frontal in eight patients, parietal in four, occipital in eight temporal in six, cerebellar in two and cerebellar vermis in three patients. Follow-up was performed clinically and with angiography examination at three to six months. Clinical outcomes were evaluated based on the modified Rankin Scale (mRS). A mean of 2.5 (range, 1-12) feeding pedicles were embolized per patient. Complete angiographic obliteration of AVM was achieved in 27 patients. A hemorrhagic complication was observed in one patient, an ischemic complication in one patient and technical complications in four patients. There was no procedure-related disabling neurological deficit or death at discharge. Additional gamma knife radiosurgery was performed in five patients, including one patient with recurrent AVM. All of the patients had favorable clinical outcomes at three to six month follow-up (mRS&#x2264;2). The curative embolization technique with Glubran 2 for selected cerebral AVMs achieved a high initial complete obliteration rate with an acceptable complication frequency.

### PMID 25242751 (2014) — Transplantation proceedings
TITLE: Prevention of fluid effusion in kidney transplantation with the use of hemostatic biomaterials.
DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2014.07.048 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fluid effusion (blood, lymph, or urine) in kidney transplantation may give rise to several complications, directly, such as hematoma, seroma, lymphocele, and/or urinoma, or consequently, such as increased infection risk, longer hospital stay, graft compression--with or without functional impairment--and necessity of further hospitalizations. The aim of this study was to evaluate effectiveness of hemostatic biomaterials in prevention of fluid effusions, especially lymphocele in kidney transplant patients.
METHODS: We selected 40 patients who underwent kidney transplantation from 2009 to 2012 in which we used hemostatic biomaterials, and compared their results with those of other transplant patients from our center in which we did not used these biomaterials. Evaluated parameters were: fluid effusion, graft function, quality and quantity of drainage, blood count, and operative time.
RESULTS: There was no difference in operative time. The incidence of complications on which biomaterials can have a role decreased; particularly, we observed a reduction from 24.21% to 7.5% of fluid effusions (lymphocele). There was no evidence of complications due to biomaterials.
CONCLUSIONS: Hemostasis is important in surgery, and in kidney transplantations lymphostasis also has a significant role. In addition to the traditional hemostatic methods, recently some biomaterials, with the purpose of providing atraumatic hemostasis, were added. In our experience they are easy to use, and their use has proved to be effective for both hemostasis and lymphostasis with consequent reduction of fluid effusions.

### PMID 24428225 (2014) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Sutureless repair for left ventricular free wall rupture after acute myocardial infarction.
DOI: 10.1111/jocs.12286 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report three cases of left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) after acute myocardial infarction, which were repaired using a sutureless technique without cardiopulmonary bypass. At operation, a sheet of fibrin tissue-adhesive collagen fleece (TachoComb) was secured to the hematoma surrounding the tear and the infarcted area under compression by the surgeon's fingers. After complete hemostasis, several sheets of an absorbable gelatin sponge (Gelfoam) were glued onto the collagen fleece in layers. Intra-aortic balloon pumping was electively performed. Concomitant coronary artery bypass grafting was not carried out. All patients survived the operation but recurrence of the rupture occurred on postoperative day 10 in one patient and an LV aneurysm was found four months after repair in another patient. The sutureless technique may be a simple and fast option for treatment of an oozing type LVFWR; however, careful follow-up is mandatory.

### PMID 23754469 (2014) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Prospective clinical trial of gelatin-thrombin matrix as first line treatment of posterior epistaxis.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.24240 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: To evaluate the effectiveness of gelatin-thrombin matrix for first line treatment of posterior epistaxis. Secondarily, we evaluated discomfort during treatment and the cost savings of treatment with gelatin-thrombin matrix compared to posterior packing, endoscopic, or endovascular treatment at our institution.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective pilot, nonblinded, noncontrolled registered clinical trial (NCT01098578).
METHODS: Twenty patients with posterior epistaxis were enrolled into this study. Gelatin-thrombin matrix was used for posterior epistaxis treatment with simultaneous ipsilateral choanal occlusion. Patients were discharged within 2 hours of being successfully treated. A visual analog scale (range 0-10) was used to assess treatment discomfort. Patients were evaluated in clinic 5 and 30 days after treatment to assess for intranasal complications and recurrent epistaxis.
RESULTS: Gelatin-thrombin matrix successfully treated epistaxis in 80% of the patients. The procedure was associated with a mean discomfort of 3.6 (range 0-9.7). The institutional per case cost of treatment of patients with posterior epistaxis with gelatin-thrombin matrix is 80.3%, 87.4%, and 89.4% less than with endoscopic surgery, posterior packing, or embolization, respectively. There were no complications.
CONCLUSION: This pilot study demonstrated that gelatin-thrombin matrix is a safe and both a clinically effective and cost-saving means of treating posterior epistaxis. In this study, its use is associated with a low level of discomfort. This treatment method may improve the quality of care for patients with posterior epistaxis.

### PMID 25316253 (2014) — Journal of orthopaedic surgery and research
TITLE: The efficacy of a thrombin-based hemostatic agent in primary total knee arthroplasty: a meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1186/s13018-014-0090-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is a popular procedure in severe osteoarthritis. But perioperative bleeding remains a problem. Floseal&#xae; is a mixture of thrombin and bovine gelatin which can benefit a lot on reducing intraoperative and postoperative bleeding. However, there is no enough evidence judging its safety and efficiency. So a meta-analysis is conducted by us to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a thrombin-based hemostatic agent compared with conventional methods in TKA.
METHOD: Two independent reviewers selected literatures published before August 2014 from MEDLINE, Embase, and The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials. Other internet databases were also performed to identify trials according to the Cochrane Collaboration guidelines. High-quality randomized controlled trials (RCTs), prospective control trials (PCTs), and case controlled trials (CCTs) were selected. The meta-analysis was undertaken using RevMan 5.1 for Windows.
RESULTS: Three RCTs, one PCT, and one CCT met the inclusion criteria. There were significant differences in hemoglobin decline and calculated total blood loss between the Floseal&#xae; group and control group. There were no significant differences in postoperative drainage volume, rate of transfusion requirement, incidence of wound infection, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), and pulmonary embolism (PE) between treatment and control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The present meta-analysis indicates that a thrombin-based hemostatic agent can reduce hemoglobin decline and calculated total blood loss after TKA and is not related to adverse reactions or complications such as wound infection, DVT, and PE.

### PMID 24635939 (2014) — Clinical neurology and neurosurgery
TITLE: Use of thrombin-based hemostatic matrix during meningioma resection: a potential risk factor for perioperative thromboembolic events.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2014.01.021 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Hemostatic agents are widely used in patients undergoing intracranial tumor resection to facilitate local hemostasis. We hypothesized that systemic activation of the clotting cascade after local application of hemostatic agents may result in unintended thromboembolic events, including deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE). We performed a retrospective analysis to identify potential associations between hemostatic agent use and DVT/PE.
METHODS: A single-institution review of patients undergoing surgical resection of cranial meningiomas was performed. Patient demographics including gender and BMI, procedure duration, estimated blood loss (EBL), tumor pathology, use of hemostatic matrix, and the presence of DVT/PE within 14 days of surgery were collected from the medical record.
RESULTS: A total of 467 patients underwent a craniotomy for meningioma from 2009 to 2012. There were 331 women and 136 men with a mean age of 58 &#xb1; 14 years (range 18-92) and mean BMI of 28 &#xb1; 6. Tumor pathology included 359 grade I, 77 grade II, and 31 grade III tumors. There were 12 patients (2.6%) with thromboembolic events. Age (p=0.66), gender (p=0.33), EBL (p=0.99), and procedure duration (p=0.17) were not associated with an increased incidence of DVT/PE. Use of DVT prophylaxis initiated 72 h after surgery did not significantly alter the incidence of DVT/PE (p=0.20). Body mass index (p=0.04) and tumor grade (p=0.05) were associated with increased incidence of DVT/PE. Patients receiving greater than 10 ml of a hemostatic agent intraoperatively had an increased incidence of DVT/PE (p=0.02). In a multivariate model, both BMI (OR=1.07, 95% CI: 1.00-1.15, p=0.048) and use of more than 10 ml of hemostatic agent (OR=8.03, CI: 1.02-63.40, p=0.048) were found to be significantly associated with the risk of DVT/PE.
CONCLUSION: Hemostatic agents are valuable tools in modern neurosurgery, however their use may be associated with an increased risk of DVT/PE in patients undergoing meningioma resection. This finding provides the impetus for more definitive clinical and laboratory studies to characterize the biology of this association and helps identify patients at increased risk for thromboembolism. This study also affirms the association between high BMI and the risk of thromboembolism. Interestingly the use of prophylactic anticoagulation after surgery did not decrease the incidence of DVT/PE.

### PMID 25509251 (2014) — Acta clinica Croatica
TITLE: Vertebral artery injury in a patient with fractured C4 vertebra.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Vertebral artery injuries due to cervical spine trauma, although rarely described in the literature, are relatively common. While most of them will remain asymptomatic, a small percentage of patients may suffer life threatening complications. We report a case of the right vertebral artery injury in a patient with fracture of C4 vertebra, successfully treated with endovascular approach. A 78-year-old male patient was hospitalized for cervical spine injury caused by falling off the tractor. Radiological assessment revealed fracture of C4 vertebra with proximal two-thirds of C4 body dislocated five millimeters dorsally. Significant swelling of soft prevertebral tissues distally of C2 segment was also present. During emergency surgery using standard anterior approach for cervical spine, excessive bleeding started from the injured right vertebral artery. Bleeding was stopped by tamponade with oxidized regenerated cellulose sheet and C4-C5 anterior fixation; then partial reduction of displacement was done. Fifteen days later, after angiography, endovascular repair of the right vertebral artery was performed using percutaneous stent graft. Follow up computed tomography scan angiography showed valid stent patency without contrast extravasation. In cases of cervical spine trauma, surgeon should always be prepared to manage injury of vertebral artery. Bleeding can primarily be stopped by hemostatic packing, and definitive repair can be successfully achieved by endovascular approach using percutaneous stent graft.

### PMID 25312741 (2014) — BMC urology
TITLE: Retroperitoneoscopic single site renal biopsy surgery: right indications for the right technique.
DOI: 10.1186/1471-2490-14-80 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Laparoendoscopic single-site surgery (LESS) has been developed in an attempt to further reduce the morbidity and scarring associated with laparoscopic surgery. In patients in whom there are indications to perform a laparoscopic renal biopsy, LESS surgery is a valid alternative to mini invasive surgery and is becoming more common. We report our experience on 14 renal biopsy procedures performed in a retroperitoneal LESS.
METHODS: LESS renal biopsy was performed in 14 patients 18 to 80 years old (mean age 58.3 years) during a 36 month period. All procedures were performed by a single operator. The patient was in a standard flank position. The procedure was performed using a 2.5 cm, single incision via a retroperitoneal access at the Petit's triangle. A 5 mm biopsy forceps was used to collect the specimen under direct vision, and haemostasis was obtained with an Argon beam probe and the application of oxidized regenerated cellulose gauze.
RESULTS: Biopsy was performed successfully in all cases. Mean operative time was 52.64 min, blood loss was minimal, and the hospital stay ranged from 12 to 24 hours. None of the patients required narcotics or additional analgesia in the postoperative period. No postoperative complications occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: The LESS technique is safe, reliable (100% success), easy to learn, and offers subjective cosmetic benefits to the patient. Minimal hospitalization requirement following retroperitoneal LESS biopsy is an additional timely advantage over laparoscopic renal biopsy. We think that with the right indications (marked obesity, failure of previous percutaneous biopsy attempts, a solitary kidney and coagulopathy) LESS renal biopsy is a good alternative to laparoscopy. Our next step will be a randomized prospective study of LESS compared with laparoscopy for renal biopsy to support our findings.

### PMID 25085811 (2014) — Journal of biomaterials applications
TITLE: Swelling, sealing, and hemostatic ability of a novel biomaterial: A polyethylene glycol-coated collagen pad.
DOI: 10.1177/0885328214545500 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Trends in the development of hemostatic agents are towards self-adhering pads. This study investigates a novel biomaterial made of a polyethylene glycol-coated collagen pad (PCC). The swelling and adherence of PCC were investigated in vitro, and the hemostatic and sealing ability was investigated in vivo. In vitro, the maximum swell of PCC submerged in human plasma for 24&#x2009;h is 65%. The greatest swell was in thickness, averaging 24% to a mean thickness of 2.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.19&#x2009;mm (mean&#xb1;SD) (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;20). PCC withstood clinically relevant pressures when applied to a collagen casing washed with bile, lymph, urine, saline, and cerebrospinal fluid mixed at 33% and 67% with blood. In vivo, PCC provided complete hemostasis when applied to severe, arterial bleeds of actively ventilated pulmonary parenchyma at 3, 5, 8, and 10&#x2009;min after application in a heparinized porcine pulmonary segmentectomy model. The mean rate of bleeding was 17.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.6&#x2009;ml/min. The lungs were ventilated at 15&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4 breaths per min and an airway pressure of 19&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2&#x2009;cm H2O. PCC had no incidence of hematoma and an 11% incidence of intraoperative air leak (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;36). These data are promising for future clinical application of a new versatile, self-adhering hemostatic sealing pad consisting of a polyethylene glycol-coated collagen.

### PMID 24332553 (2014) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Fibrin patch in a pig model with blunt liver injury under severe hypothermia.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2013.11.007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Rapid control of hemorrhage is one of the key aspects in trauma handling. To cope with bleeding, local hemostatic approaches are useful, along with surgical and systemic homostatic therapy. In this experimental study, we investigated the efficacy of a fibrinogen/thrombin containing collagen patch (TachoSil) in a coagulopathic pig model with blunt liver trauma under severe hypothermia.
METHODS: Eighteen anesthetized pigs underwent hemodilution by exchanging 70% of the blood volume with Ringer Lactate solution and hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 (1:1). Ten minutes after induction of a grade III blunt liver trauma, the animals randomly received treatment with TachoSil (FT-patch, n = 9) or a collagen patch (Tachotop, control group, n = 9). Blood loss, hemodynamics, and coagulation parameters were observed for 2 h. To confirm the consistency of liver trauma, pathologic examination of the liver tissue was performed.
RESULTS: Hypothermia (33.5&#xb0;C &#xb1; 0.5&#xb0;C) and hemodilution led to severe coagulopathy as measured by thromboelastometry and coagulation parameters. After trauma and patch application, thromboelastometry and coagulation parameters in the control group showed further deterioration compared with the stable parameters in the FT-patch group. The total blood loss was significantly reduced in the FT-patch group (FT-patch: 1195 mL; control group: 2495 mL; P &lt; 0.001). Concordantly, the control animals were hemodynamically jeopardized to a higher degree. Microscopy confirmed a similar degree of liver injury.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite severe hypothermia and coagulopathy, TachoSil provided effective hemorrhage control in pigs with blunt liver injury. Therefore, TachoSil demonstrated usefulness as an additional early therapy in cases of uncontrolled bleeding following severe trauma.

### PMID 25842652 (2014) — AANA journal
TITLE: Anaphylactic reaction with avitene: a pediatric case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anaphylaxis is an unanticipated severe allergic reaction that can occur during a surgical procedure. A patient is exposed to myriad foreign substances during surgery, such as anesthetic drugs, blood products, and surgical materials, including a commonly used hemostatic agent called Avitene Microfibrillar Collagen Hemostat. Anaphylaxis is the most severe immune-mediated reaction, and it generally occurs on reexposure to a specific antigen. This case report details a case of an acute anaphylactic reaction in a 10-year-old boy presumed to be from Avitene used during a routine ear, nose, and throat surgery. There will be a discussion of the mechanism and management of anaphylaxis as well as a brief overview of hemostasis and hemostatic agents. Education of anesthesia providers and the surgical team may enable early detection and management of anaphylactic reactions that may improve patient outcomes and save lives.

### PMID 24961688 (2014) — Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE
TITLE: Implantation of inferior vena cava interposition graft in mouse model.
DOI: 10.3791/51632 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: Biodegradable scaffolds seeded with bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMCs) are often used for reconstructive surgery to treat congenital cardiac anomalies. The long-term clinical results showed excellent patency rates, however, with significant incidence of stenosis. To investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms of vascular neotissue formation and prevent stenosis development in tissue engineered vascular grafts (TEVGs), we developed a mouse model of the graft with approximately 1 mm internal diameter. First, the TEVGs were assembled from biodegradable tubular scaffolds fabricated from a polyglycolic acid nonwoven felt mesh coated with &#x3b5;-caprolactone and L-lactide copolymer. The scaffolds were then placed in a lyophilizer, vacuumed for 24 hr, and stored in a desiccator until cell seeding. Second, bone marrow was collected from donor mice and mononuclear cells were isolated by density gradient centrifugation. Third, approximately one million cells were seeded on a scaffold and incubated O/N. Finally, the seeded scaffolds were then implanted as infrarenal vena cava interposition grafts in C57BL/6 mice. The implanted grafts demonstrated excellent patency (&gt;90%) without evidence of thromboembolic complications or aneurysmal formation. This murine model will aid us in understanding and quantifying the cellular and molecular mechanisms of neotissue formation in the TEVG.

### PMID 25159369 (2014) — The journal of trauma and acute care surgery
TITLE: Platelet activation using electric pulse stimulation: growth factor profile and clinical implications.
DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000322 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Autologous platelet gel therapy using platelet-rich plasma has emerged as a promising alternative for chronic wound healing, hemostasis, and wound infection control. A critical step for this therapeutic approach is platelet activation, typically performed using bovine thrombin (BT) and calcium chloride. However, exposure of humans to BT can stimulate antibody formation, potentially resulting in severe hemorrhagic or thrombotic complications. Electric pulse stimulation using nanosecond PEFs (pulse electric fields) is an alternative, nonbiochemical platelet activation method, thereby avoiding exposure to xenogeneic thrombin and associated risks.
METHODS: In this study, we identified specific requirements for a clinically relevant activator instrument by dynamically measuring current, voltage, and electric impedance for platelet-rich plasma samples. From these samples, we investigated the profile of growth factors released from human platelets with electric pulse stimulation versus BT, specifically platelet-derived growth factor, transforming growth factor &#x3b2;, and epidermal growth factor, using commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits.
RESULTS: Electric pulse stimulation triggers growth factor release from platelet &#x3b1;-granules at the same or higher level compared with BT.
CONCLUSION: Electric pulse stimulation is a fast, inexpensive, easy-to-use platelet activation method for autologous platelet gel therapy.

### PMID 24937288 (2014) — Analytical biochemistry
TITLE: A colorimetric sandwich-type assay for sensitive thrombin detection based on enzyme-linked aptamer assay.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ab.2014.05.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: A colorimetric sandwich-type assay based on enzyme-linked aptamer assay has been developed for the fast and sensitive detection of as low as 25 fM of thrombin with high linearity. Aptamer-immobilized glass was used to capture the target analyte, whereas a second aptamer, functionalized with horseradish peroxidase (HRP), was employed for the conventional 3,5,3',5'-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB)-based colorimetric detection. Without the troublesome antibody requirement of the conventional enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), as low as 25 fM of thrombin could be rapidly and reproducibly detected. This assay has superior, or at least equal, recovery and accuracy to that of conventional antibody-based ELISA.

### PMID 24842781 (2014) — American journal of transplantation : official journal of the American Society of Transplantation and the American Society of Transplant Surgeons
TITLE: Control of IBMIR in neonatal porcine islet xenotransplantation in baboons.
DOI: 10.1111/ajt.12722 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The instant blood-mediated inflammatory reaction (IBMIR) is a major obstacle to the engraftment of intraportal pig islet xenografts in primates. Higher expression of the galactose-&#x3b1;1,3-galactose (&#x3b1;Gal) xenoantigen on neonatal islet cell clusters (NICC) than on adult pig islets may provoke a stronger reaction, but this has not been tested in the baboon model. Here, we report that WT pig NICC xenografts triggered profound IBMIR in baboons, with intravascular clotting and graft destruction occurring within hours, which was not prevented by anti-thrombin treatment. In contrast, IBMIR was minimal when recipients were immunosuppressed with a clinically relevant protocol and transplanted with NICC from &#x3b1;Gal-deficient pigs transgenic for the human complement regulators CD55 and CD59. These genetically modified (GM) NICC were less susceptible to humoral injury in vitro than WT NICC, inducing significantly less complement activation and thrombin generation when incubated with baboon platelet-poor plasma. Recipients of GM NICC developed a variable anti-pig antibody response, and examination of the grafts 1 month after transplant revealed significant cell-mediated rejection, although scattered insulin-positive cells were still present. Our results indicate that IBMIR can be attenuated in this model, but long-term graft survival may require more effective immunosuppression or further donor genetic modification.

### PMID 24342536 (2014) — Thrombosis research
TITLE: Significance of platelet and monocyte activation for therapeutic immunoglobulin-induced thromboembolism.
DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2013.11.026 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Thromboembolic events (TEE) in patients receiving infusions of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) products have recently been associated with contaminating factor XIa. We studied whether platelet and monocyte activation could also be involved.
METHODS: Twenty IVIG samples from five manufacturers were tested for the induction of visible whole blood clot formation. A selection of TEE-associated and not associated lots was further analyzed for effects on thromboelastometry, platelet activation and adhesion, as well as monocyte tissue factor surface expression. Pure factor XIa was included for comparison. Western blotting was applied to analyze anti-CD154-reactive proteins in IVIG.
RESULTS: In whole blood, IVIG enhanced macroscopic clotting additively with factor XIa. In monocytes, all IVIG products induced the Fc&#x3b3;RII-dependent tissue factor expression to a similar extent, which was not affected by addition of factor XIa. Testing platelet aggregation, IVIG strengthened the ADP and TRAP-6-elicited response. Furthermore, IVIG increased platelet-monocyte adhesion and annexin V binding to platelet microvesicles, and promoted platelet adhesion to IVIG-coated surfaces. The strongest effects were observed with TEE-associated lots. CD154-related proteins were detected in all IVIG products. CD154-related high molecular weight complexes were particularly found in the TEE-associated IVIG. In platelet aggregation, recombinant soluble CD154 enhanced aggregate formation and stability.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that IVIG modulate platelet and monocyte activation and can thereby affect the hemostatic balance. These effects are either additive to or independent from factor XIa. CD154-related proteins are assumed to be involved in these interactions, the mechanism of which needs to be elucidated in further studies.

### PMID 23695294 (2014) — Surgery today
TITLE: Severe postoperative hemorrhage caused by antibody-mediated coagulation factor deficiencies: report of two cases.
DOI: 10.1007/s00595-013-0584-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Antibody-mediated coagulation factor deficiencies constitute a rare disorder that may develop in elderly patients without any history of a bleeding diathesis. Patients may present with severe and sometimes catastrophic bleeding. We report two cases of postoperative hemorrhage caused by a coagulation factor deficiency. In Case 1, massive intraabdominal bleeding occurred on day 3 after pancreaticoduodenectomy for bile duct cancer, and was caused by an acquired inhibitor of coagulation factor VIII. Hemostasis was achieved and the factor VIII inhibitor titer decreased to zero with activated prothrombin complex concentrates, prednisolone, and cyclophosphamide. In Case 2, intraabdominal bleeding occurred on day 7 after hepatectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma, and was caused by an acquired inhibitor against factors II (prothrombin) and V. This patient was treated with hemostatic agents containing bovine thrombin during surgery and also with prednisolone. We report these cases to highlight that antibody-mediated coagulation factor deficiencies should be considered when an elderly patient suffers sudden postoperative hemorrhage and to stress the importance of prompt diagnosis because of the risk of potentially life-threatening hemorrhage.

### PMID 25010101 (2014) — Spine
TITLE: Fatal intraoperative cardiac arrest after application of surgifoam into a bleeding iliac screw defect.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000000513 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Case report.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the presentation, management, and autopsy findings in a case of a fatal intraoperative cardiac arrest after application of an absorbable hemostatic agent into a bleeding iliac bone screw defect.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: To the authors' knowledge, this represents the first reported complication of intraoperative death associated with Surgifoam (Ethicon) thromboembolization to the heart and lung microcirculation after its application into a bleeding bone defect.
METHODS: A 56-year-old male was undergoing revision fusion surgery for pseudarthrosis after multilevel thoracolumbosacral fusion with pelvic fixation for degenerative scoliosis. Intraoperatively, upon removal of the right iliac screw, heavy venous bleeding was encountered, which was stopped after application of 10 mL of Surgifoam into the screw defect. Approximately 5 minutes later, the patient's end tidal CO2 dropped, and his pulse was lost. Epinephrine was administered and the patient was immediately turned to supine position and cardiopulmonary resuscitation initiated. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed unsuccessfully for 30 minutes at the end of which the patient was pronounced dead.
RESULTS: Autopsy findings revealed angulated particles of hemostatic agent with entrapped red blood cells partially to completely occluding small-to-medium-sized vessels of the heart and lungs. The cause of death was pulmonary and cardiac embolization of foreign material from the surgical screw defect to the vessels of the heart and lungs, significantly compromising respiration and blood flow causing sudden death.
CONCLUSION: Although Surgifoam is an excellent hemostatic agent for use in spinal surgery, it must be used with extreme caution in the setting of heavily bleeding bone defects after pedicle cannulation or removal of instrumentation. In cases when brisk venous bleeding is encountered, signifying potential compromise of an emissary vein, use of other hemostatic agents such as bone wax may be a safer option.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: N/A.

### PMID 24917774 (2013) — Current urology
TITLE: Use of BioGlue Surgical Adhesive in Hypospadias Repair.
DOI: 10.1159/000356265 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To prospectively evaluate the efficacy of albumin glutaraldehyde tissue adhesive (BioGlue) in the surgical treatment of patients with hypospadias.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two groups of 20 patients each who underwent hypospadias repair were included in the study. In the first group we utilized BioGlue as an additional protective layer to the suture line of the neo-urethra, while patients in the second group were operated on utilizing a routine surgical technique.
RESULTS: There were no statistical differences between patients from the 2 groups in terms of surgical complications. Urethrocutaneous fistula was revealed in 4 (20%) patients after repair with BioGlue and in 3 (15%) patients from the control group (p = 0.686), suture line breakdown in 4 (20%) and in 1 (5%) patients (p = 0.478), meatal stenosis in 1 (5%) and in 1 (5%) patient (p = 1). Furthermore more patients in the BioGlue group (n = 12, 60%) demonstrated poor cosmetic results compared to the control group where most patients - 19 (95%) had acceptable cosmetic outcomes (p = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data showed no benefits of BioGlue use in hypospadias repair.

### PMID 23242986 (2013) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Surgical adhesive may cause false positives in integrated positron emission tomography and computed tomography after lung cancer resection.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezs643 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgical adhesives are frequently used after pulmonary resection to prevent or reduce pulmonary air leakages, since leakages may cause complications delaying the removal of chest drainage tubes and prolonging in-hospital stay. In this paper, we present 2 patients who underwent curative-intent pulmonary resection for non-small-cell lung carcinoma, in which the biological adhesive BioGlue(&#xae;) was used. Follow-up fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomographic (FDG-PET/CT) imaging revealed hypermetabolic pulmonary nodular lesions. Subsequent surgical exploration showed that the lesions were foreign body reactions to the bioadhesive. To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine false-positive follow-up FDG-PET/CT scans caused by the use of BioGlue(&#xae;) in pulmonary resection procedures.

### PMID 24316852 (2013) — Acta cirurgica brasileira
TITLE: Adhesion prevention in reabsorbable polyethylene glycol hydrogel (Coseal&#xae;) coated polypropylene mesh in rabbits.
DOI: 10.1590/s0102-86502013001200001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate of postoperative adhesion prevention and inflammatory response to polypropylene mesh, coated with reabsorbable hydrogel of polyethylene glycol (Coseal&#xae;) in contact with small bowel in an experimental model in rabbits.
METHODS: Twenty female rabbits underwent laparotomy to implant two polypropylene meshes, 2 x 1 cm, in the right and left flanks. The right mesh was protected with Coseal&#xae; spray (Group 1) and the left mesh received no treatment after implantation (Group 2). Thirty days after implantation, the rabbits underwent laparoscopy for adhesion analysis; the prosthesis were removed en bloc with the adjacent tissue for microscopic analysis of inflammation. Statistical analysis used the Mann-Whitney test.
RESULTS: There was adhesion formation in five meshes (36%) from Group 1 and in 14 meshes (100%) from Group 2, with statistical significance (p&lt;0.01). There were no differences in the inflammatory response, fibrosis, foreign body reaction, presence of collagen and type of inflammatory cells between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: Polypropylene mesh coated with Coseal&#xae; showed a significantly lower rate of adhesion formation when compared with uncoated meshes, without interfering with inflammatory response.

### PMID 24757459 (2013) — Korean Journal of Spine
TITLE: Postoperative Cervical Cord Compression Induced by Hydrogel Dural Sealant (DuraSeal&#xae;).
DOI: 10.14245/kjs.2013.10.1.44 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a potential complication of cranial and spinal surgery. Postoperative CSF leakage can induce delayed healing, wound infection and meningitis. DuraSeal&#xae; (Covidien, Waltham, MA, USA) is a synthetic product which has been increasingly used to facilitate watertight repair of dural defects after cranial and spinal surgery. Despite some advantages of Duraseal&#xae;, the authors report a patient who developed cord compression following the use of DuraSeal&#xae; in cervical spine surgery in which the expansion of the DuraSeal&#xae; was believed to be the causative factor.

### PMID 23957708 (2013) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealant patch for repair of acute type a aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1111/jocs.12208 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The use of glues to repair disrupted tissue during acute type-A aortic dissection (TAD) surgery may be discontinuous, and cause embolization and cell necrosis. We report a method of fibrin sealant patch (FSP) to reinforce dissected aortic tissue with a collagen double layer coated with fibrinogen/thrombin on either side (TachoSil&#xae;; Takeda, Konstanz, Germany).
METHODS: In 12 patients (seven male, 66.9 &#xb1; 11.7 years) with acute TAD we performed FSP of the intima-media disruption at the proximal and distal anastomosis of the aorta. We analyzed the perioperative course and echocardiographical, radiological, and clinical outcomes up to one year. Additionally, we investigated the adhesive potential of the FSP in vitro.
RESULTS: In vitro, the adhesive strength of the FSP was 60 N/cm(2). In-hospital mortality was 8.3% (n = 1), recovery was satisfactory with no major neurologic events, mean ICU stay was 13.6 &#xb1; 6.0 days, mean hospital stay was 20.7 &#xb1; 4.4 days. A total of 7.0 &#xb1; 2.6 RBC, 3.4 &#xb1; 1.5 platelets, and 8.0 &#xb1; 4.3 FFP were transfused. One-year survival was 83.3%. In 6/6 DeBakey II dissections the intimal tear was completely resected, in 2/6 DeBakey I dissections the false lumen in the descending aorta completely collapsed. No redissections and no relevant aortic valve insufficiencies were seen during follow-up.
CONCLUSION: This analysis shows that FSP using a collagen matrix double layer coated with fibrinogen/thrombin is feasible, safe, and effective in repairing the dissected aortic tissue. It results in continuous reinforcement of aortic tissue and completely avoids the need for conventional glues.

### PMID 23350579 (2013) — Acta orthopaedica
TITLE: No effect of fibrin sealant on drain output or functional recovery following simultaneous bilateral total knee arthroplasty: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
DOI: 10.3109/17453674.2013.769082 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Blood loss after total knee arthroplasty (TKA) may lead to anemia, blood transfusions, and increased total costs. Also, bleeding into the periarticular tissue may cause swelling and a reduction in quadriceps strength, thus impairing early functional recovery. In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, we analyzed the possible effect of fibrin sealant on blood loss and early functional recovery in a fast-track setting.
METHODS: 24 consecutive patients undergoing bilateral simultaneous TKA were included. 10 mL of fibrin sealant (Evicel) was sprayed onto one knee whereas the contralateral knee had saline. Drain output, the primary outcome, was measured from knee drains removed exactly 24 h after surgery. Secondary outcomes (knee swelling, pain, strength of knee extension, and range of movement (ROM)) were evaluated up to 21 days after surgery.
RESULTS: The drain output in knees treated with fibrin sealant and placebo was similar (582 mL and 576 mL, respectively). Likewise, no statistically significant differences were found between groups regarding swelling, pain, strength of knee extension, and ROM.
INTERPRETATION: Fibrin sealant as a local hemostatic in TKA showed no benefit in reducing drain output or in facilitating early functional recovery when used with a tourniquet, tranexamic acid, and a femoral bone plug.

### PMID 23752162 (2013) — Journal of pediatric orthopedics
TITLE: Intraoperative anaphylaxis secondary to intraosseous gelatin administration.
DOI: 10.1097/BPO.0b013e3182857d88 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: FloSeal and SurgiFlo Hemostatic Matrices are commonly used in surgical procedures to promote coagulation and minimize blood loss. They are composed of bovine and porcine gelatin matrix, respectively, that can be injected into pedicles to stop osseous bleeding during pedicle screw insertion.
METHODS: This report details 2 pediatric spinal deformity reconstructive surgery patients who experienced intraoperative cardiovascular events after the intraosseous administration of animal-derived gelatin.
RESULTS: Case #1 is an 11-year-old female with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis who was undergoing routine posterior spinal instrumentation and fusion. During placement of the fourth pedicle screw, the patient developed profound hypotension, tachycardia, and elevated airway pressures requiring intravenous epinephrine and phenylephrine for hemodynamic support. Surgery was aborted. Postoperative work-up demonstrated a positive ImmunoCAP study for bovine gelatin. Surgery was repeated 1 week later, without the use of FloSeal, and no episodes of hemodynamic instability. Case #2 was a 9-year-old female with juvenile idiopathic scoliosis who was undergoing a growing spine construct. As in Case #1, SurgiFlo was placed into 2 pedicle tracts after which there was profound hypotension, tachycardia, and elevated airway pressures. Resuscitative efforts included intravenous atropine and epinephrine with resolution. Surgery was aborted. Surgery was repeated 2 weeks later, without the use of SurgiFlo, with no episodes of hemodynamic instability.
CONCLUSIONS: Given that the patient's symptoms were classic for anaphylaxis, and that the timing of the anaphylaxis immediately followed the administration of FloSeal and SurgiFlo we believe that FloSeal and SurgiFlo were the causes of the reactions. These are the first known reported cases of intraoperative anaphylaxis associated with FloSeal and SurgiFlo. On the basis of our experience, in order to avoid intraoperative cardiovascular events, we obtain preoperative ImmunoCAP testing and eliciting a thorough preoperative history about bovine-derived and porcine-derived gelatin products.

### PMID 23159248 (2013) — Human pathology
TITLE: Fatal thromboembolism to the left pulmonary artery by locally applied hemostatic matrix after surgical removal of spinal schwannoma: a case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.08.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Locally applied hemostatic agents, mostly consisting of gelatinous granules with admixed human or bovine thrombin, are used in various surgical procedures. In our case, a 78-year-old woman underwent neurosurgical removal of an extraforaminal schwannoma of the L5 dorsal root ganglion. During the procedure, the hemostatic matrix consisting of a meshwork of bovine gelatinous granules admixed with human thrombin was locally applied to control diffuse paravertebral bleeding. Eight hours after surgery, the patient developed dyspnea with right heart failure and finally died. At autopsy, we found complete occlusion of the left pulmonary artery with a large thromboembolus. Histologically, that thromboembolus consisted of gelatinous granules with only a thin rim of surrounding, classic parietal thrombus. To our knowledge, this is the first description of fatal pulmonary embolization of a major lung artery with this material. The report depicts a possible life-threatening complication associated with the local application of hemostatic agents.

### PMID 23759739 (2013) — Oncology letters
TITLE: Surgicel&#xae; (oxidized regenerated cellulose) granuloma mimicking local recurrent gastrointestinal stromal tumor: A case report.
DOI: 10.3892/ol.2013.1218 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Unexpected clinical and/or imaging evidence of the recurrence of gastrointestinal stromal tumors soon after surgical resection may be complicated due to certain biological behavioral features of gastrointestinal stromal tumors. However, local hemostatic materials routinely used in abdominal surgery to achieve hemostasis intraoperatively may cause a foreign-body reaction, which appears to be indistinguishable from recurrent tumors in imaging studies. Thus, a second examination may be necessary to settle the true nature of the findings in such cases. If the resection and examination reveals a recurrent tumor, further proper oncological treatment is warranted, whereas if a foreign-body reaction is observed, radical or potentially harmful therapy may be withheld or cancelled. The present study retrospectively analyzes the case of an 83-year-old male patient who presented with a recurrent gastrointestinal stromal tumor four months after surgical resection, which was later identified as an intra-abdominal foreign-body granuloma caused by retained Surgicel&#xae; residue. The present study aimed to demonstrate why foreign-body granuloma induced by local hemostatic materials should be incorporated into the differential diagnosis of recurrent gastrointestinal stromal tumors post-operatively, particularly soon after surgical resection has been performed.

### PMID 23416508 (2013) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Post thoracotomy spinal cord compression in a child. A word of caution.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2013.01.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Oxidised regenerated cellulose is a commonly used haemostatic agent in surgery which, in rare cases, has been held responsible for severe complications.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 6-year-old girl developed flaccid paraplegia following the excision of a large thoracic ganglioneuroblastoma. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed spinal cord compression at the T10-11 level and the patient underwent emergency decompression via the previous thoracotomy. At operation the causative factor was found to be a mass consisted of cellulose used at the original procedure to control local bleeding in the vicinity of the intervertebral foramen.
DISCUSSION: The accessibility of the spinal canal from the thoracic cavity through the opening of the intervertebral foramen may allow migration of material and in this case oxidized regenerated cellulose, commonly used during cardiothoracic procedures, can cause rare but severe complications such as compression of the spinal cord.
CONCLUSION: The value of hemostatic gauze is well established in cardiothoracic surgery. However, surgeon should be cautious with the application of material in the proximity of the intervertebral foramen, especially if this is to leave behind after the completion of the procedure.

### PMID 23344404 (2013) — Obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Oxidized regenerated cellulose imitating pelvic abscess.
DOI: 10.1097/aog.0b013e318276ce3f | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Oxidized regenerated cellulose is a topical hemostatic agent that is used commonly in abdominal and pelvic surgery. Although oxidized regenerated cellulose mimicking an abscess has been reported after different operations, little is known about its side effects after gynecologic surgery.
CASES: Two women were diagnosed with postoperative abscess and intra-abdominal oxidized regenerated cellulose was identified as an abscess or as part of an abscess on computed tomography imaging. Both women recovered after treatment with antibiotics with and without drainage.
CONCLUSION: Oxidized regenerated cellulose may be mistaken for an abscess or as part of an abscess on imaging studies. It is important to reveal information about oxidized regenerated cellulose use to the imaging department.

### PMID 24390955 (2013) — Acta medica Iranica
TITLE: Foreign body granuloma mimicking recurrent intracranial tumor: a very rare clinical entity.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Gelatin sponge, oxidized cellulose and microfibrillar collagen are used to achieve hemostasis during neurosurgical procedures. Hemostatic agents may produce clinically symptomatic, radiologically apparent mass lesions. The differential diagnosis should include the foreign body along with recurrent tumor. We present a case of intracranial hemostatic agents found in a 56-year-old male patient seven years after undergoing a craniotomy for a left posterior parietal convexity meningioma. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested the presence of a recurrent tumor. We emphasize that although it is rare, a granuloma due to a foreign body reaction can result in a false image of tumor recurrence.

### PMID 23377877 (2013) — Acta radiologica (Stockholm, Sweden : 1987)
TITLE: Interventional embolization of giant thoracic tumors before surgical resection.
DOI: 10.1258/ar.2012.120339 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Preoperative embolization of tumors is a well-established procedure that has been successfully applied in various clinical situations. Preoperative embolization can reduce the vascularity of tumors resulting in a clearer operative field, less difficult dissection, decreased blood loss, and, in some cases, a decrease in tumor size. However, few studies have been conducted regarding the preoperative embolization of giant thoracic tumors.
PURPOSE: To examine the effectiveness and safety of interventional embolization of giant thoracic tumors before surgical resection.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 14 consecutive patients with giant thoracic tumors received angiography and the feeding arteries of the tumors were embolized using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) particles and gelatin sponges 1 day before surgical resection. The patient records were retrospectively reviewed and data regarding diagnoses, embolization, and surgical resection were recorded.
RESULTS: Angiography revealed the feeding arteries of the tumors to be characterized by multiple branches and thickened vessel trunks with abnormal distal branches superimposed of the tumor shadow. Embolization was successfully without complications in all patients, and all feeding vessels of each tumor were occluded. Embolization reduced the severity of bleeding during surgery and decreased the difficulty of resection of the tumor. No intraoperative or postoperative complications occurred.
CONCLUSION: Interventional embolization is a safe and efficient method to facilitate the surgical resection of giant thoracic tumors.

### PMID 23228316 (2013) — Current pharmaceutical design
TITLE: Pharmacologic methods to reduce postoperative bleeding in adult cardiac surgery. A mini-review.
DOI: 10.2174/1381612811319220007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Because blood for transfusion is a scarce resource and since allogeneic transfusion may even be harmful, there is a growing awareness among surgeons and anesthesiologists regarding the use of multimodal blood conservation programs in cardiac surgery in order to reduce bleeding, transfusion and re-exploration. Pharmacologic methods should be part of a multimodal blood conservation programs. Three drugs for anti-fibrinolytic prophylaxis have been available for more than two decades: Aprotinin, tranexamic acid and epsilon aminocaproic acid. These drugs can be administered intravenously and topically in the pericardium during cardiac surgery. However, aprotinin marketing was temporarily suspended in 2007/2008 based on results from a randomized study indicating a risk for increased mortality associated with the use of aprotinin. This mini-review on the use of anti-fibrinolytic drugs and other pharmacologic methods to reduce perioperative bleeding in cardiac surgery is provided as aprotinin probably will become increasingly available again in several western countries. A number of randomised and observational studies suggest a minor advantage of aprotinin over the synthetic lysine analogues, which in contrast are cheaper and without the risk of anaphylactic reactions. Other drugs that have been used in order to reduce bleeding in cardiac surgery are recombinant activated factor VIIa, desmopressin and prothrombin complex concentrate, but the value and risks of these drugs in cardiac surgery needs further clarification. Every patient should be evaluated individually according to the risk/benefit ratio of any drug used. Safety issues as well as cost-effective analyses should be in focus in future clinical studies.

### PMID 23476883 (2013) — Case reports in vascular medicine
TITLE: Embolization with Histoacryl Glue of an Anastomotic Pseudoaneurysm following Surgical Repair of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm.
DOI: 10.1155/2013/761384 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a 62-year-old female who had surgical repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm with a bifurcated graft 2 years ago. She presented with a distal anastomotic pseudoaneurysm which was successfully embolized with histoacryl glue. Only one such similar case has been reported in the literature so far (Yamagami et al. (2006)).

### PMID 25755956 (2013) — European journal of pediatric surgery reports
TITLE: Foreign Body Reaction with High Standard Uptake Value Level in 18-FDG PET/CT Mimicking Relapse in an 8-Year-Old Patient Diagnosed with Hodgkin Lymphoma: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1345278 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Combined positron emission tomography and computed tomography (PET/CT) using 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18-FDG) is one of the most effective methods to identify pathological lymph node involvement. We report the case of a child who underwent cervical lymph node biopsy and chemotherapy for Hodgkin disease. Three years after surgery, PET/CT identified an intense localization of 18-FDG in the inferior cervical region. This finding led to a reexcision of the mass. The only finding was a granuloma arising in reaction to a hemostatic sponge.

### PMID 24058917 (2013) — BioMed research international
TITLE: Rapid purification and procoagulant and platelet aggregating activities of Rhombeobin: a thrombin-like/gyroxin-like enzyme from Lachesis muta rhombeata snake venom.
DOI: 10.1155/2013/903292 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: We report a rapid purification method using one-step chromatography of SVSP Rhombeobin (LMR-47) from Lachesis muta rhombeata venom and its procoagulant activities and effects on platelet aggregation. The venom was fractionated by a single chromatographic step in RP-HPLC on a C8 Discovery BIO Wide Pore, showing high degree of molecular homogeneity with molecular mass of 47035.49&#x2009;Da. Rhombeobin showed amidolytic activity upon BA &#x3c1; NA, with a broad optimum pH (7-10) and was stable in solution up to 60&#xb0;C. The amidolytic activity was inhibited by serine proteinase inhibitors and reducing agents, but not chelating agents. Rhombeobin showed high coagulant activity on mice plasma and bovine fibrinogen. The deduced amino acid sequence of Rhombeobin showed homology with other SVSPs, especially with LM-TL (L. m. muta) and Gyroxin (C. d. terrificus). Rhombeobin acts, in vitro, as a strong procoagulant enzyme on mice citrated plasma, shortening the APTT and PT tests in adose-dependent manner. The protein showed, "ex vivo", a strong defibrinogenating effect with 1&#x2009;&#xb5;g/animal. Lower doses activated the intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways and impaired the platelet aggregation induced by ADP. Thus, this is the first report of a venom component that produces a venom-induced consumptive coagulopathy (VICC).

### PMID 23910501 (2013) — Thrombosis research
TITLE: Hypercoagulation following brain death cannot be reversed by the neutralization of systemic tissue factor.
DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2013.07.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cerebral injury and brain death is associated with apparent hypercoagulation and poor organ outcome. This experimental study challenges the hypotheses that i) brain death causes hypercoagulation and microvascular thrombosis and that ii) neutralizing systemic tissue factor (TF) by in vitro addition of a TF inhibitor (recombinant active site-inhibited factor VIIa (ASIS)) can reverse the hypercoagulable profile.
METHODS: Using a validated pig model of intracranial hemorrhage and brain death, 20 pigs were randomized to either control or brain death. The primary endpoints were coagulation parameters measured with whole blood thromboelastometry (ROTEM), thrombin generation and a porcine TF-sensitive plasma clotting time assay. In vitro spiking experiments with ASIS were performed in parallel with the latter two assessments. The kidneys were examined histologically for microvascular thromboses.
RESULTS: Brain death induced hypercoagulation, as demonstrated with ROTEM, thrombin generation, and reduced TF-sensitive plasma clotting time. In vitro inhibition of TF with ASIS did not reverse the hypercoagulation. No microvascular thromboses were found in the kidneys.
CONCLUSION: Brain death causes hypercoagulation; however, inhibition of TF does not reverse the coagulopathy. Thus, TF release does not seem to be the primary cause of this hypercoagulation. Minor changes in the levels of protein C suggest that the protein C pathway may be linked to the observed coagulopathy.

### PMID 22610300 (2013) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Short-term effects of Ankaferd hemostat for renal artery embolization: an experimental study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-012-0419-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Renal artery embolization (RAE) is a minimally invasive therapeutic technique that is utilized in a number of disorders. Ankaferd is a novel hemostatic agent with a new mechanism of action independent of clotting factors. We used Ankaferd for RAE in a sheep model.
METHODS: Seven adult female sheep were included in the study. Selective renal arteriogram using 5-F diagnostic catheter was performed to make sure that each kidney was fed by a single renal artery and the animal had normal renal vasculature. Coaxial 2.7-F microcatheter was advanced to the distal main renal artery. Under fluoroscopic guidance, 2 mL of Ankaferd mixed with 2 mL of nonionic iodinated contrast agent was slowly injected. Fluoroscopy was used to observe the deceleration of flow and stagnation. Control renal angiograms were performed just after embolization. After the procedure, the animals were observed for 1 day and then sacrificed with intravenous sodium thiopental.
RESULTS: The technical success was observed in seven of the seven animals.. After embolization procedure, none of the animals died or experienced a major systemic adverse event. On macroscopic examination of the embolized kidneys, thrombus at the level of main renal artery formed after Ankaferd embolization was more compact compared with the thrombi that was not Ankaferd-associated, which was observed elsewhere. Microscopically, majority of the renal tubular cells (80-90 %) were necrotic, and there was epithelial cell damage in a small portion of the cells (10-20 %).
CONCLUSIONS: RAE was safe and effective in the short-term with Ankaferd in studied animals. Further studies should be conducted to better delineate the embolizing potential of this novel hemostatic agent.

### PMID 23262046 (2012) — The heart surgery forum
TITLE: Blockage of a mechanical aortic valve leaflet with Bioglue: a case report.
DOI: 10.1532/HSF98.20121067 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Mechanical aortic valve dysfunction is a very rare event and is usually due to thrombosis, pannus overgrowth, or both. BioGlue as a cause for such a complication has been reported only occasionally. We describe a case of a 63-year-old woman who underwent operation for symptomatic tight aortic stenosis. After implantation of an aortic valve (AGN-751, size 19; St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) because of a transverse tear of the aortic wall above the annulus occurring during the suturing of the aortotomy, a triangular Vascutek Dacron patch (Vascutek/Terumo, Inchinnan, Scotland, UK) was included. To secure hemostasis, BioGlue (CryoLife, Kennesaw, GA, USA) was applied. A transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) examination performed after signs of ischemia appeared in the electrocardiogram on postoperative day 5 revealed an aortic transvalvular gradient of 74/38 mm Hg and a functional valve area of 1.0 cm2. No coronary lesions were revealed in a coronarography evaluation, but cinefluoroscopy (CF) examination revealed immobility of 1 valve leaflet. The reoperation revealed a thick, rough layer of the glue on the inner side of the patch. This glue had run down to the valve, blocking a mechanical leaflet. Cleaning the valve was not possible, and the valve had to be changed. The subsequent postoperative course was uneventful. The transvalvular gradient was 39/20 mm Hg, and the functional valve area was 1.2 cm2. We believe that the use of BioGlue and other surgical sealants is justified to secure complex suture lines and for maintaining hemostasis in cardiac surgery, but some precautionary rules must be respected. Authors have indicated that the glue enters through the needle holes in such cases, but our findings suggest it can also pass to the Dacron patch itself. CF is superior to TTE and transesophageal echocardiography for analyzing movement of the mechanical valve leaflet, and cardiac catheterization is rarely needed.

### PMID 22872707 (2012) — Journal of clinical pathology
TITLE: Complications of Bioglue postsurgery for aortic dissections and aortic valve replacement.
DOI: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-200809 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIMS: Bioglue is an adhesive used during cardiovascular surgery to improve hemostasis perioperatively and to strengthen and reinforce vascular anastomoses. It has also been used to 'seal' the false lumen in patients presenting with acute aortic dissections. Herein, we examine the complications of Bioglue, which may lead to redo sternotomy in selected patients.
METHODS: A review of pathology records at our institution from 2002 to 2010 found 4 cases of excised aortic tissue and/or aortic valves with previous Bioglue use at initial operation. Excised tissues and valves were examined, looking for the presence of Bioglue, inflammatory cells (acute, chronic, macrophage and giant cells) and micro-organisms. Patient demographics were also reviewed and recorded.
RESULTS: We identified four cases of Bioglue use found at redo surgery, after the formation of pseudoaneurysm (n=3) and aortic stenosis (n=1). Mean interval to redo surgery was 2.28 + 0.32 years (range 2-2.6 years). Pseudoaneurysm formation was thought to be caused by an inflammatory reaction to the Bioglue itself in two cases, while one case found no such reaction. One patient with previous aortic valve replacement had large annular abscesses filled with necrotic debris surrounding the prosthesis and pannus found on the sewing cuff, comprised of Bioglue itself.
CONCLUSIONS: The mechanisms leading to these complications include mechanical strain, inflammation and tissue necrosis. The judicious use of Bioglue when clinically indicated, and close follow-up of these patients with serial imaging, remain an integral part of avoiding future complications.

### PMID 21952743 (2012) — Clinical orthopaedics and related research
TITLE: Cauda equina syndrome after a TLIF resulting from postoperative expansion of a hydrogel dural sealant.
DOI: 10.1007/s11999-011-2071-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: DuraSeal(&#x2122;) (Coviden, Waltham, MA, USA), a hydrogel sealant, is primarily used as an adjunct to a dural repair. Its use has also been described to seal off an annulotomy after a transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion when recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2) is used. This aids in the reduction of postoperative radiculitis caused by rhBMP-2. However, as a result of its hydrophilic properties, DuraSeal(&#x2122;) has the potential to swell, which could lead to compression of the thecal sac.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We report a 57-year-old woman who developed cauda equina after a transforaminal lumbar 47 interbody fusion (TLIF) procedure in which the expansion of the DuraSeal(&#x2122;) was believed to be the causative factor. The patient developed urinary retention, bowel incontinence, and paresthesias in the saddle region on postoperative Day 3. She underwent emergent exploration and decompression of the thecal sac. The gel-like DuraSeal&#x2122; material was causing significant compression of the thecal sac.
LITERATURE REVIEW: Multiple reports have documented that DuraSeal(&#x2122;), used as an adjunct to dural repair, can swell leading to compression of the spinal cord and/or neural elements. Our case demonstrates the use of DuraSeal(&#x2122;) both over a site of a dural repair and over an annulotomy site, through which a TLIF was performed, is associated with the risk of developing postoperative cauda equina syndrome as a result of swelling of the DuraSeal(&#x2122;).
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Those using DuraSeal&#x2122; to seal off the annulotomy after a TLIF procedure performed with rhBMP-2 should use the product with an understanding of the potential postoperative swelling of the product and resulting neurologic sequela, particularly if DuraSeal(&#x2122;) is used concomitantly at the site of dural repair.

### PMID 22633423 (2012) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: A prospective randomized study comparing fibrin sealant to manual compression for the treatment of anastomotic suture-hole bleeding in expanded polytetrafluoroethylene grafts.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2012.01.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The ideal hemostatic agent for treatment of suture-line bleeding at vascular anastomoses has not yet been established. This study evaluated whether the use of a fibrin sealant containing 500 IU/mL thrombin and synthetic aprotinin (FS; marketed in the United States under the name TISSEEL) is beneficial for treatment of challenging suture-line bleeding at vascular anastomoses of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) grafts, including those further complicated by concomitant antiplatelet therapies.
METHODS: Over a 1-year period ending in 2010, ePTFE graft prostheses, including arterio-arterial bypasses and arteriovenous shunts, were placed in 140 patients who experienced suture-line bleeding that required treatment after completion of anastomotic suturing. Across 24 US study sites, 70 patients were randomized and treated with FS and 70 with manual compression (control). The primary end point was the proportion of patients who achieved hemostasis at the study suture line at 4 minutes after start of application of FS or positioning of surgical gauze pads onto the study suture line.
RESULTS: There was a statistically significant difference in the comparison of hemostasis rates at the study suture line at 4 minutes between FS (62.9%) and control (31.4%) patients (P &lt; .0001), which was the primary end point. Similarly, hemostasis rates in the subgroup of patients on antiplatelet therapies were 64.7% (FS group) and 28.2% (control group). When analyzed by bleeding severity, the hemostatic advantage of FS over control at 4 minutes was similar (27.8% absolute improvement for moderate bleeding vs 32.8% for severe bleeding). Logistic regression analysis (accounting for gender, age, intervention type, bleeding severity, blood pressure, heparin coating of ePTFE graft, and antiplatelet therapies) found a statistically significant treatment effect in the odds ratio (OR) of meeting the primary end point between treatment groups (OR, 6.73; P &lt; .0001), as well as statistically significant effects for intervention type (OR, 0.25; P = .0055) and bleeding severity (OR, 2.59; P = .0209). The safety profile of FS was excellent as indicated by the lack of any related serious adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings from this phase 3 study confirmed that FS is safe and its efficacy is superior to manual compression for hemostasis in patients with peripheral vascular ePTFE grafts. The data also suggest that FS promotes hemostasis independently of the patient's own coagulation system, as shown in a representative population of patients with vascular disease under single- or dual-antiplatelet therapies.

### PMID 22219405 (2012) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Adverse effects of fibrin sealants in thoracic surgery: the safety of a new fibrin sealant: multicentre, randomized, controlled, clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezr083 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017427">Clinical Trial, Phase II, Clinical Trial, Phase III, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The safety of fibrin sealants (FS) has been questioned in the light of recent reports of adverse effects. We evaluated the safety of a new FS in a randomized controlled trial (RCT).
METHODS: Multicentre, open-label Phase II/III RCT to evaluate the safety of the new FS. The trial was approved by the Ethic Committee of each three participating Centre. FS includes two components (component 1: fibrinogen; component 2: thrombin), each of them subjected to two viral inactivation procedures. Out of 200 screened patients, 185 eligible patients (49 females, 136 males), aged between 18 and 75 years, undergoing major thoracic surgery were randomized to receive FS (#91 patients) as an adjuvant for air leak control or no treatment (#94 patients, control group). Safety variables were: percentage of subjects with adverse events associated with the therapy; formation of antibodies against bovine aprotinin; vital signs (blood pressure, body temperature, heart and respiratory rate); laboratory parameters.
RESULTS: Overall operative mortality was 3.2% (6/185), 1.1% in the FS group and 5.3% in the control group, respectively. Twenty patients (22%) had adverse events in the FS group and 22 (23.4%) in the control group. Atrial fibrillation (five patients in the FS group and four in the control group) and hyperpyrexia (five and seven patients, respectively, in the two groups) were the most common adverse events. No patient reported thromboembolic events (pulmonary embolism or deep vein thrombosis) during the in hospital stay or within 1 month from discharge. None of the adverse events was considered as treatment related. The formation of bovine aprotinin antibodies was reported in a total of 34 patients (37.4%) in the FS group and was not related to any adverse effect.
CONCLUSIONS: The present RCT did not show any increased risk of adverse events, and of surgical complications, related to the use of the new FS.

### PMID 22560324 (2012) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Comparative study of lung sealants in a porcine ex vivo model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.03.050 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Lung sealants are often used to prevent alveolar air leaks after lung resection surgery. Some sealants have shown to be effective in clinical studies, but extensive comparative evaluation has not yet been conducted. We aimed to evaluate different sealant burst pressures in an ex vivo model mimicking air leakage after lung resection.
METHODS: Fifty-four porcine lungs comprised the study material. Six different sealants were evaluated: Bioglue (V-Tech, Roskilde, Denmark), TachoSil (Nycomed, Roskilde, Denmark), Tisseel (Baxter, Aller&#xf8;d, Denmark), Evicel (OMRIX biopharmaceuticals S.A, Rhode-St-Gen&#xe8;se, Belgium), TissuePatchDural (Vingmed, Roskilde, Denmark), and Pleuraseal (Covidien, Copenhagen, Denmark). After creating a standardized pleural defect, each lung was randomized into 1 of the 6 treatment groups (n= 9). Each lung was ventilated with incremental airway pressure. Air leakage was assessed after each increment. If leakage occurred, the burst pressure was recorded.
RESULTS: The Evicel fibrin sealant and Tisseel fibrin sealant exhibited significantly lower burst pressures compared with the Bioglue, TachoSil, and Pleuraseal (p &lt; 0.05). Bioglue had the highest median burst pressure (55 cm H(2)O) followed by TachoSil (35 cm H(2)O), PleuraSeal (35 cm H(2)O), TissuePatchDural (25 cm H(2)O), Evicel (15 cm H(2)O), and Tisseel (15 cm H(2)O).
CONCLUSIONS: This model has shown to be feasible in determining and comparing the burst pressures of different lung sealants. Further studies are needed to determine responses in living tissue and burst pressure over time in vivo.

### PMID 22219426 (2012) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Fibrinogen/thrombin-based collagen fleece (TachoComb(R)) promotes regeneration in pulmonary arterial injury.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezr128 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To repair unexpected damage of the pulmonary artery (PA) during thoracic surgery, fibrinogen/thrombin-based collagen fleece (TachoComb(&#xae;) [TC]) can be applied as a haemostatic material. The progression of vessel restoration with TC has not been elucidated. In this study, we investigate details of the healing process with TC after PA injury using a canine model.
METHODS: Left thoracotomy was performed on female beagles under general anaesthesia. PA injury was induced and repaired using TC. Repair sites were histologically evaluated 2, 4 and 8 weeks after surgery (n = 3 in each group).
RESULTS: Haemostasis of PA injury was achieved promptly after TC application. After surgery, no bleeding was found in the thoracic cavity, and no repair sites revealed stenosis, thrombi or false aneurism formation. Two weeks after surgery, inflammatory cells had infiltrated around the vascular defect, and vascular endothelium had regenerated on the innermost surface of TC applied to the defect. At Week 4, elastic and smooth muscle fibres had begun to extend into the defect between the endothelial layer and collagen fleece. By Week 8, elastic fibres and smooth muscle had completely regenerated in the medial layer. The adventitial layer had also fully regenerated.
CONCLUSIONS: Haemostasis of injured PA using TC was safe and reliable. TC provided a mechanical scaffold on which vascular regeneration occurred. Three layers reconstructed in the PA defect were identical to those in normal structures.

### PMID 22768159 (2012) — PloS one
TITLE: Intrathecal injection of spironolactone attenuates radicular pain by inhibition of spinal microglia activation in a rat model.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039897 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Microglia might play an important role in nociceptive processing and hyperalgesia by neuroinflammatory process. Mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) expressed on microglia might play a central role in the modulation of microglia activity. However the roles of microglia and MR in radicular pain were not well understood. This study sought to investigate whether selective MR antagonist spironolactone develop antinociceptive effects on radicular pain by inhibition neuroinflammation induced by spinal microglia activation.
RESULTS: Radicular pain was produced by chronic compression of the dorsal root ganglia with SURGIFLO&#x2122;. The expression of microglia, interleukin beta (IL-1&#x3b2;), interleukin 6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-&#x3b1;), NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor (t-NR1), and NR1 subunit phosphorylated at Ser896 (p-NR1) were also markedly up-regulated. Intrathecal injection of spironolactone significantly attenuated pain behaviors as well as the expression of microglia, IL-1&#x3b2;, TNF-&#x3b1;, t-NR1, and p-NR1, whereas the production of IL-6 wasn't affected.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that intrathecal delivery spironolactone has therapeutic effects on radicular pain in rats. Decreasing the activation of glial cells, the production of proinflammatory cytokines and down-regulating the expression and phosphorylation of NMDA receptors in the spinal dorsal horn and dorsal root ganglia are the main mechanisms contributing to its beneficial effects.

### PMID 22472162 (2012) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Oxidized regenerated cellulose granuloma mimicking recurrent mass lesion after laparoscopic nephron sparing surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2012.03.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Achieving hemostasis in laparoscopic nephron sparing surgery (LNSS), a technically demanding procedure, is challenging. Absorbable hemostatic agents, such as oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) are frequently used for hemostasis in laparoscopic nephron sparing surgery. Retention of this material is a very rare situation.
PRESENTATION OF THE CASE: We are presenting a case of ORC granuloma after nephron sparing surgery for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) mimicking recurrent renal mass. A 50-year-old woman diagnosed with upper pole renal mass underwent laparoscopic nephron sparing surgery. Oxidized regenerated cellulose was used to achieve hemostasis for an oozing from the perirenal tissue. Resection confirmed RCC. Imaging at 6th month follow-up revealed a lesion with contrast enhancement at the location of the adrenal gland. Positron emission tomography suggested inflammation or metastasis. Histopathological evaluation of the mass revealed foreign body granuloma.
DISCUSSION: Laparoscopic nephron sparing surgery is becoming a standardized treatment of select renal tumors. Hemostatic agents, such as ORC, are frequently used to minimize complications in LNSS. In case of ORC application, which is completely absorbed in 8 weeks, to or to a location with close proximity to the primary resection site, surgical granuloma formation should be considered. However its use should not be discouraged and biopsy may be considered for definitive diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Oxidized regenerated cellulose granuloma may mimic different entities such as including invasive carcinoma. Thus it is of utmost importance, if ORC was used during LNSS, the location and use of this material should be noted precisely.

### PMID 22249275 (2012) — International urogynecology journal
TITLE: Role of estrogen receptor alpha on vaginal epithelialization of patients with Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome submitted to neovaginoplasty using oxidized regenerated cellulose.
DOI: 10.1007/s00192-011-1604-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION AND HYPOTHESIS: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;) on the neovaginal tissue of patients with Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome submitted to modified Abb&#xe9;-McIndoe neovaginoplasty using oxidized regenerated cellulose.
METHODS: The current study involved eight subjects with MRKH syndrome. Serial samples of the neovagina were obtained after the surgery and immunohistochemical detection of ER&#x3b1; was performed using antibody NCL-L-ER-6F11.
RESULTS: The operation was performed successfully in all subjects without complications. A total of 22 samples of neovaginal tissue were analyzed. The expression of ER&#x3b1; was detected only 6 months after the surgery, when the neovagina acquired characteristics of normal vagina.
CONCLUSION: In our study, the expression of ER&#x3b1; occurred when complete epithelialization of vaginal tissue was observed. Other mechanisms may be involved in the formation of vaginal epithelium in patients with MRKH syndrome.

### PMID 22955407 (2012) — Orthopedics
TITLE: Preoperative embolization significantly decreases intraoperative blood loss during palliative surgery for spinal metastasis.
DOI: 10.3928/01477447-20120822-27 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Several studies have evaluated the efficacy of preoperative embolization in devascularizing tumors. However, no study has measured intraoperative blood loss in a single palliative surgery compared with a control group without preoperative embolization. The purpose of this retrospective study was to evaluate the efficacy of preoperative embolization on intraoperative blood loss in palliative decompression and instrumented surgery using a posterior approach for spinal metastasis. Between 2000 and 2010, forty-six patients underwent palliative decompression and instrumented surgery using a posterior approach for spinal metastasis in the thoracic and lumbar spine. Preoperative embolization was performed in 23 patients (embolization group), and surgery was performed within 3 days after embolization. The embolic materials used were polyvinyl alcohol particles, gelatin sponge, and metallic coils. Twenty-three patients did not undergo embolization (no embolization group). Pain and neurologic symptoms in all 46 patients were relieved postoperatively. Average intraoperative blood loss was 520 mL (range, 140-1380 mL) in the embolization group and 1128 mL (range, 100-3260 mL) in the no embolization group (P&lt;.05). In the embolization group, intraoperative blood loss was not correlated with the degree of tumor vascularization, completeness of embolization, or time between embolization and surgery. Intraoperative blood loss after preoperative embolization was less than half that after no preoperative embolization.

### PMID 23098956 (2012) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Successful application of subcutaneous adipose tissue with fibrin glue in conservative treatment of tracheobronchial rupture.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.03.100 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 84-year-old woman underwent aortic and mitral valve replacement. After weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass, hemorrhage was observed in the endobronchial tube. The bleeding bronchus was isolated to protect the airway using the blocker cuff of a Univent tube (Fuji Systems Corp, Tokyo, Japan). Computed tomography showed a pulmonary pseudoaneurysm in the left upper lobe. She underwent selective pulmonary angiography and embolization of the pseudoaneurysm. Bronchoscopy revealed a 5-mm bronchial rupture at the left upper lobe bronchus. The laceration was filled with adipose tissue and fibrin glue. Bronchoscopy showed a completely reepithelialized membrane, and she was discharged 38 days postoperatively.

### PMID 22891838 (2012) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: Aortic false lumen thrombosis induction by embolotherapy (AFTER) following endovascular repair of aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1583/JEVT-12-3844R.1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To report the use of a technique (AFTER: aortic false lumen thrombosis induction by embolotherapy) to achieve false lumen (FL) thrombosis and aortic remodeling in patients with residual FL patency after initial endovascular repair of aortic dissection.
METHODS: Between January 2003 and January 2010, 31 patients underwent staged total aortic and branch vessel endovascular reconstruction (STABLE) of type A (n&#x200a;=&#x200a;13) and type B (n&#x200a;=&#x200a;18) dissection. Of these, 10 patients (5 men; mean age 61 years) who had undergone repair of 4 acute type A, 3 acute type B, and 3 chronic type B dissections demonstrated re-entry tear(s) and FL patency associated with aortic expansion &#x2265;5 mm or flow into a persistently dilated aortic segment. Catheter-directed embolization using coils, glue, or occlusion balloons was performed via a transfemoral approach to the true lumen at a mean of 7 months (range &lt;1 to 26) after initial repair.
RESULTS: Technical success was achieved in all patients, with no intraoperative complications. Thirty-day morbidity and mortality was nil. Mean follow-up was 63 months (range 13-96). Reversal or stabilization (&lt;5-mm increase) of thoracoabdominal aortic growth occurred in 9 patients. Complete thrombosis of the thoracic and abdominal FL occurred in 2 patients. In 4, FL occlusion and subsequent thrombosis of the upstream thoracic segment was achieved. Four demonstrated partial FL thrombosis in the thoracic and abdominal aorta. One patient with chronic aneurysmal type B dissection died 4 months post-embolization from aortic rupture.
CONCLUSION: The AFTER strategy appears to be a safe and promising adjunctive endovascular approach to treat residual FL patency or aortic enlargement post endovascular repair of aortic dissection. Elimination of FL flow and stabilization of aortic expansion may reduce the risk of late distal aortic complications.

### PMID 22083323 (2012) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Multimedia manuscript. Thoracoscopic management of chylothorax after esophagectomy.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-011-1988-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Chylothorax after esophagectomy is a potentially life-threatening complication, with a reported incidence rate of 1-4%. Two cases of postoperative chylothorax successfully managed thoracoscopically are reported.
METHODS: In case 1, a 61-year-old man presenting with an adenocarcinoma of the lower esophagus underwent laparoscopic transhiatal esophagectomy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The thoracic duct was identified, and no obvious leaks were detected. The thoracic drain was removed on postoperative day (POD) 6, and chest X-rays were normal. The patient was discharged on POD 10. On POD 20, he was readmitted for acute cardiopulmonary distress. Computed tomography scan showed a massive right collection. After insertion of a chest tube, 8 l of chylous fluid were drained. Once hemodynamic stabilization had been established, the patient was scheduled for surgery. In case 2, a 54-year-old woman presenting with esophageal stenosis after caustic injury refractory to balloon dilation and stenting underwent esophagectomy. Mediastinal dissection was difficult due to fibrotic reaction. On POD 2, the patient presented with a massive chylothorax. In both cases, three trocars were inserted in the right pleural cavity. An incomplete lateral injury of the thoracic duct was found in case 1, and a complete transection proximal to the cervical anastomosis next to the left subclavian was found in case 2. Clips and sutures were used first to seal the duct. Fibrin glue was applied to reinforce the closure. A chest tube was left in place.
RESULTS: The operative time was 60 min in case 1 and 55 min in case 2. The chylothorax did not recur, although the postoperative course was longer in case 2 due to associate comorbidities.
CONCLUSIONS: The thoracic duct is exposed to injuries during esophagectomies, especially in cases of cancer and postcaustic injuries, leading to fibrotic reaction of the surrounding tissue. Early and delayed chylothorax can be managed efficiently by a thoracoscopic approach replicating the sealing techniques used in thoracotomy.

### PMID 23233882 (2012) — Archives of plastic surgery
TITLE: The efficacy and safety of platelet-rich plasma and adipose-derived stem cells: an update.
DOI: 10.5999/aps.2012.39.6.585 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: During the past decade, many studies using platelet-rich plasma (PRP) or adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) have been conducted in various medical fields, from cardiovascular research to applications for corneal diseases. Nonetheless, there are several limitations of practical applications of PRP and ASCs. Most reports of PRP are anecdotal and few include controls to determine the specific role of PRP. There is little consensus regarding PRP production and characterization. Some have reported the development of an antibody to bovine thrombin, which was the initiator of platelet activation. In the case of ASCs, good manufacturing practices are needed for the production of clinical-grade human stem cells, and in vitro expansion of ASCs requires approval of the Korea Food and Drug Administration, such that considerable expense and time are required. Additionally, some have reported that ASCs could have a potential risk of transformation to malignant cells. Therefore, the authors tried to investigate the latest research on the efficacy and safety of PRP and ASCs and report on the current state and regulation of these stem cell-based therapies.

### PMID 23108631 (2012) — Pharmacotherapy
TITLE: Safety and immunogenicity of recombinant human thrombin: a pooled analysis of results from 10 clinical trials.
DOI: 10.1002/phar.1128 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: STUDY OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of recombinant human thrombin (rThrombin), an active topical stand-alone hemostatic agent.
DESIGN: Analysis of pooled data from 10 rThrombin clinical trials.
PATIENTS: A total of 644 adult and pediatric patients treated with rThrombin; 609 patients were included in the immunogenicity analysis.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: In all studies, rThrombin was applied during a single surgical procedure (day 1); the procedures consisted of spinal procedures, major hepatic resection, peripheral arterial bypass, arteriovenous graft formation for hemodialysis access, and synchronous burn wound excision and skin grafting. A dosage of 1000&#xa0;IU/ml of rThrombin was administered for more than&#xa0;99% of patients. Adverse events and clinical laboratory values were monitored through day&#xa0;29. Blood samples were obtained for immunogenicity analyses before the procedure and on day&#xa0;29. Adverse events were mild or moderate in severity for the majority of patients; no patients discontinued from an rThrombin study due to adverse events. The most commonly reported adverse events in the 644 patients were incision site pain (305 patients [47.4%]), procedural pain (215 patients [33.4%]), and nausea (170 patients [26.4%]). Five patients (0.8%) died during the studies; all deaths were considered unrelated to rThrombin treatment. Antibodies to the rThrombin product developed in 5 (0.8%, 95% confidence interval 0.4-2.8%) of 609 patients by day 29, approximately 1&#xa0;month after treatment; these antibodies did not neutralize the activity of native human thrombin. The development of antibodies did not appear to differ substantively by type of surgical procedure, amount of rThrombin administered, or patient age.
CONCLUSION: Recombinant human thrombin was well tolerated, and adverse events were consistent with those reported in the postoperative setting in the surgical populations studied. Approximately 1&#xa0;month after treatment, less than&#xa0;1% of the patients had developed antibodies to the rThrombin product, and these antibodies did not neutralize the activity of native human thrombin. These results support the safety of rThrombin when used as a topical aid to hemostasis in numerous surgical settings and for patients of differing ages.

### PMID 23021035 (2012) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: Intraoperative anaphylaxis to gelatin in topical hemostatic agents during anterior spinal fusion: a case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2012.08.425 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: The use of topical hemostatic agents is widespread and has been shown to reduce bleeding during a wide variety of surgical procedures. Nonetheless, as biologically active agents, there is potential for allergic reactions to these products.
PURPOSE: This is a report of intraoperative anaphylaxis to gelatin associated with the use of two topical hemostatic agents.
STUDY DESIGN: Case report. There is no outside funding or potential conflict of interest.
PATIENT SAMPLE: A patient with anaphylaxis during anterior spinal fusion.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Laboratory assays for tryptase, gelatin-specific immunoglobulin E&#xa0;(IgE), and total IgE.
METHODS: A 14-year-old male with myelomeningocele and scoliosis was treated with anterior spinal fusion from T12 to L3. Gelfoam sponges were applied during the preparation of the disc spaces. Approximately 1 hour later, Floseal hemostatic matrix was applied to a briskly bleeding screw hole in the L3 vertebral body, and the patient experienced an abrupt onset of hypotension and ventilatory difficulty. Epinephrine, dexamethasone, and blood products were administered for hemodynamic support while the surgical site was closed. Removal of the drapes revealed a widespread erythematous rash, and the patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit. When stable&#xa0;3 days later, he returned to the operating room for completion of the spinal fusion.
RESULTS: Postoperative laboratory assays were sent that revealed elevated levels of tryptase, total IgE, porcine, and bovine gelatin-specific IgE. The patient was counseled to avoid gelatin-containing products. At 6-month follow-up, his instrumented spine was radiographically fused and he reported no further allergic issues.
CONCLUSIONS: Anaphylaxis may occur because of animal gelatin components of topical hemostatic agents. Previous reports have focused on the thrombin components. Care should be taken in the administration of these products, particularly in the atopic individual.

### PMID 22749595 (2012) — Vaccine
TITLE: Cytotoxin CctA, a major virulence factor of Clostridium chauvoei conferring protective immunity against myonecrosis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.06.050 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to determine the identity of the major toxin of Clostridium chauvoei, an important pathogen of cattle causing black leg and to determine its value as a protective antigen in vaccines against myonecrosis.
METHODS: Genomic sequence analysis was used to determine potential virulence genes of C. chauvoei. Subsequently, the putative toxin candidate gene was cloned and expressed to obtain recombinant toxin. This toxin was investigated for its cytotoxic activity, hemolysis and its potential as a protective antigen in the guinea pig potency assay.
RESULTS: A novel protein toxin, named Clostridium chauvoei toxin A (CctA) that belongs to the family of &#x3b2;-barrel pore forming toxins of the leucocidin superfamily of bacterial toxins was discovered by whole genome sequence analysis. The corresponding gene cctA was found in all strains of C. chauvoei analyzed, isolated from various geographical areas over the globe during the last 50 years, but not in other pathogenic Clostridium species. Native CctA and recombinant rCctA produced in Escherichia coli in the form of a rCctA::NusA fusion protein or thrombin processed rCctA were highly cytotoxic for Embryonic Calf Nasal Epithelial (ECaNEp) cells and had high haemolytic activity against sheep erythrocytes in standard haemolysis assays. Polyclonal anti-rCctA rabbit antibodies fully neutralized the cytotoxic and haemolytic activity, not only of rCctA but also of supernatants from cultures of the various C. chauvoei strains, indicating that CctA is the main cytotoxic and haemolytic substance secreted by C. chauvoei. Using a standard vaccine release procedure, we demonstrated that vaccination of guinea pigs with CctA in the form of a fusion protein with the E. coli heat labile toxin B subunit (rCctA::LTB) as a peptide adjuvant protected the animals against challenge with spores of virulent C. chauvoei.
CONCLUSIONS: CctA is the major virulence factor of C. chauvoei and the main protective antigen in vaccines against blackleg.

### PMID 22726101 (2012) — Haemophilia : the official journal of the World Federation of Hemophilia
TITLE: Treatment of inherited platelet disorders.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2012.02842.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: For patients affected by severe inherited platelet dysfunctions, e.g. Glanzmann thrombasthenia (GT) or Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS), platelet transfusion is frequently needed for controlling spontaneous bleeding, and is always needed when trauma occurs or surgery is performed. For the mild-to-moderate bleeding entities, e.g. storage pool disease, thrombaxane A2 receptor defect, platelet transfusion is usually unnecessary. Transfusion of platelets should be used selectively and sparingly because of the substantial risk of alloimmunization against HLA antigens and/or platelet glycoproteins (GP) &#x3b1;IIb, &#x3b2;(3), or &#x3b1;IIb&#x3b2;(3) in GT, and GPI-IX-V in BSS, which may lead to refractoriness to therapy. To reduce the risk, HLA-matched single donors of platelets should be used. If such donors are unavailable, leucocyte-depleted blood components should be used. Therapy other than platelet transfusion includes: (i) Prevention (vaccination against hepatitis B, avoidance of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, preservation of dental hygiene, correction of iron deficiency and prenatal diagnosis). (ii) Topical measures (compression with gauze soaked with tranexamic acid, fibrin sealants, splints for dental extractions and packing for nose bleeds). (iii) Antifibrinolytic agents that are useful for minor surgery and as adjuncts for other treatment modalities. (iv) Desmopressin that increases plasma levels of von Willebrand factor and factor VIII giving rise to increased platelet adhesiveness and aggregation associated with shortened bleeding time. (v) Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa). GT patients have been treated for bleeding episodes by rFVIIa with partial success. The mechanism by which rFVIIa arrests bleeding is probably related to increased thrombin generation by a tissue factor-independent process, enhanced platelet adhesion and restoration of platelet aggregation. (vi) Female hormones. Excessive bleeding during menarche in patients with GT or BSS can be controlled by high doses of oestrogen followed by high doses of oral oestrogen-progestin. Menorrhagia later in life can be managed by continuous oral contraceptives. Depo-medroxyprogesterone acetate administered every 3 months is an alternative when combined oral contraceptives are contraindicated.

### PMID 22633222 (2012) — Veterinary immunology and immunopathology
TITLE: Proteomic analysis of plasma from Holstein cows testing positive for Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP).
DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2012.05.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Johne's disease (JD) is a widespread and economically important chronic inflammatory disease of the small intestine of ruminants caused by Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP). Although there are several techniques available for diagnosis of JD, their sensitivity is questionable. New proteome profiling methods, such as serum/plasma protein fingerprinting by 2-Dimensional Fluorescence Difference Gel Electrophoresis (2D-DIGE), may therefore be useful for identifying novel protein biomarkers of MAP infection. In this study, plasma samples were collected from 380 Holstein cows and screened for the presence of MAP infection using the M.pt. Johne's antibody Kit (IDEXX). Five negative (MAP-), and 5 strongly positive (MAP+) cows were selected for proteomic analysis. Highly abundant proteins were depleted from the plasma samples using the ProteoMiner technology (Bio-Rad) to enhance the resolution of low abundance proteins. Plasma samples from MAP-, MAP+, and a pooled internal control were labelled with different fluorescent dyes and separated based on their isoelectrical point (IP) and then their molecular weight. Gel images of the fluorescent plasma protein maps were acquired using a Typhoon scanner and analyzed using the DeCyder software. Proteins that were differentially expressed were excised from the gels, trypsin digested, and subjected to MS/MS analysis for identification. Six proteins were identified as being up-regulated at least 2-fold in MAP+ cows including: transferrin, gelsolin isoforms &#x3b1; &amp; &#x3b2; (actin binding protein - ABP), complement subcomponent C1r, complement component C3, amine oxidase - copper containing 3 (AOC3), and coagulation factor II (thrombin) (p&lt;0.05). Two proteins that were down-regulated approximately 2-fold in the MAP+ cows included coagulation factor XIII -B polypeptide (COAFXIII), and fibrinogen &#x3b3; chain (FGG) and its precursor.

### PMID 22452720 (2012) — Journal of the American Chemical Society
TITLE: Quantitation of femtomolar protein levels via direct readout with the electrochemical proximity assay.
DOI: 10.1021/ja3000485 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: We have developed a separation-free, electrochemical assay format with direct readout that is amenable to highly sensitive and selective quantitation of a wide variety of target proteins. Our first generation of the electrochemical proximity assay (ECPA) is composed of two thrombin aptamers which form a cooperative complex only in the presence of target molecules, moving a methylene blue (MB)-conjugated oligonucleotide close to a gold electrode. Without washing steps, electrical current is increased in proportion to the concentration of a specific target protein. By employing a DNA-based experimental model with the aptamer system, we show that addition of a short DNA competitor can reduce background current of the MB peak to baseline levels. As such, the detection limit of aptamer-based ECPA for human thrombin was 50 pM via direct readout. The dual-probe nature of ECPA gave high selectivity and 93% recovery of signal from 2.5 nM thrombin in 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA). To greatly improve the flexibility of ECPA, we then proved the system functional with antibody-oligonucleotide conjugates as probes; the insulin detection limit was 128 fM with a dynamic range of over 4 orders of magnitude in concentration, again with high assay selectivity. ECPA thus allows separation-free, highly sensitive, and highly selective protein detection with a direct electrochemical readout. This method is extremely flexible, capable of detecting a wide variety of protein targets, and is amenable to point-of-care protein measurement, since any target with two aptamers or antibodies could be assayed via direct electrochemical readout.

### PMID 22384109 (2012) — PloS one
TITLE: Aptamers as a sensitive tool to detect subtle modifications in therapeutic proteins.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031948 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Therapeutic proteins are derived from complex expression/production systems, which can result in minor conformational changes due to preferential codon usage in different organisms, post-translational modifications, etc. Subtle conformational differences are often undetectable by bioanalytical methods but can sometimes profoundly impact the safety, efficacy and stability of products. Numerous bioanalytical methods exist to characterize the primary structure of proteins, post translational modifications; protein-substrate/protein/protein interactions and functional bioassays are available for most proteins that are developed as products. There are however few analytical techniques to detect changes in the tertiary structure of proteins suitable for use during drug development and quality control. For example, x-ray crystallography and NMR are impractical for routine use and do not capture the heterogeneity of the product. Conformation-sensitive antibodies can be used to map proteins. However the development of antibodies to represent sufficient epitopes can be challenging. Other limitations of antibodies include limited supply, high costs, heterogeneity and batch to batch variations in titer. Here we provide proof-of-principle that DNA aptamers to thrombin can be used as surrogate antibodies to characterize conformational changes. We show that aptamers can be used in assays using either an ELISA or a label-free platform to characterize different thrombin products. In addition we replicated a heat-treatment procedure that has previously been shown to not affect protein activity but can result in conformational changes that have serious adverse consequences. We demonstrate that a panel of aptamers (but not an antibody) can detect changes in the proteins even when specific activity is unaffected. Our results indicate a novel approach to monitor even small changes in the conformation of proteins which can be used in a routine drug-development and quality control setting. The technique can provide an early warning of structural changes during the manufacturing process that could have consequential outcomes downstream.

### PMID 22345489 (2012) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Cross-reactivity of various thrombin products with anti-rabbit antibodies to bovine, human, and recombinant thrombin.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029611425829 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: JMI-thrombin is used as topical hemostatic agent. While earlier clinically available JMI were reported to produce immunologic responses upon repeated exposure, the improved JMI, Recothrom?, and Evithrom? are claimed to be less immunogenic. Recothrom, despite its reduced immunogenic nature, upon repeated administration may result in the generation of antibodies (Abs) and that may cross react with bovine and human thrombin. Therefore, groups of rabbits were challenged repeatedly with Recothrom, Evithrom, and JMI over a 9-month period. Pre-immune blood and antiserum were collected from each rabbit on different time point. To determine their relative cross reactivity, JMI, Recothrom, and Evithrom were evaluated by western blotting using the rabbit IgG fractions. The results suggest that anti-Recothrom Abs cross-react with Evithrom and JMI in a time dependent fashion. Anti-JMI Abs did not cross-react with Recothrom, and Evithrom. Also, anti-Evithrom did not show any cross-reactivity with Recothrom and JMI at any time.

### PMID 22245545 (2012) — Biologicals : journal of the International Association of Biological Standardization
TITLE: Salmon fibrin glue in rats: antibody studies.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2011.12.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Fibrin sealants and topical thrombin preparations are often used for haemostatic and sealing applications in clinical practice. Some of these preparations contain coagulation factors from bovine sources. To minimize the risk of infection and immunogenicity connected with mammalian blood products, proteins derived from the plasma of farmed Atlantic salmon have been considered as an alternative to these mammalian sources. The purpose of this study is to characterize the immunogenicity of salmon fibrin glue in an animal model focusing on crossreactivity of IgG antibodies to host endogenous counterparts. After two immunizations with salmon fibrin glue, rats developed antibodies of IgG and IgM type to both fibrin glue components. Weak crossreactivity to endogenous fibrinogen and thrombin was seen in a subset of rats after the second application of salmon proteins. Coagulation tests showed that salmon fibrin application has no effect on coagulation profiles in mammalian hosts, consistent with previous reports that found no evidence of significant crossreactivity with host proteins. These studies support the potential suitability of salmon fibrin glue for the development of preparations with clinical impact. Before human use can be considered, however, additional data about safety of this preparation in other animal models, including large animal studies, should be obtained.

### PMID 22790563 (2012) — European spine journal : official publication of the European Spine Society, the European Spinal Deformity Society, and the European Section of the Cervical Spine Research Society
TITLE: The management of vertebral artery injury in anterior cervical spine operation: a systematic review of published cases.
DOI: 10.1007/s00586-012-2423-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Anterior cervical spine operations (ACSO) are generally considered to be safe and effective, but the vertebral artery (VA) is at risk during the procedure. Because the consequences of VA injury can be catastrophic, properly managing a VA injury is very important. However, due to the rarity of these injuries, there is no agreed upon treatment strategy.
METHODS: Studies were identified for inclusion in the review via sensitive searches of electronic databases through 31 December 2011. All cases included in the review were qualitatively analyzed to explore the relationship between type of VA injury management and neurological complications.
RESULTS: Seventeen articles describing 39 cases of VA injury during ACSO were included in this study. Seven patients (17.9 %) had neurological complications followed by VA insufficiency. Two patients (5.1 %) had root damage due to ligation. One case (2.6 %) resulted in intraoperative death due to fatal bleeding. Delayed vascular complications were identified in nine (45.0 %) of the 20 patients that underwent only tamponade or hemostatic agent during the operation. Four patients underwent intraoperative endovascular treatment, and three of these patients had a cerebral infarction. All three patients who underwent clipping also had neurological complications. The five patients treated by direct repair did not have any complications.
CONCLUSION: Our review suggests the management of VA injury should be considered in order listed: (1) performing tamponade with a hemostatic agent, (2) direct repair, (3) postoperative endovascular procedures to prevent delayed complications. If tamponade fails to achieve proper hemostasis, additional procedures as endovascular embolization, clipping and ligation should be considered but carry the risk of neurological complications. Because of the limitations of this review, further studies are recommended with larger sample sizes.

### PMID 21606049 (2011) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Ostial left coronary stenosis following aortic root reconstruction with BioGlue.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2011.273094 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Haemorrhage is a major concern during repair of acute aortic dissection. In such circumstances, glue is often used for tissue reconstruction and also to fortify vascular anastomoses. In this report, we describe a rare case of ostial left main coronary artery stenosis potentially related to previous use of BioGlue.

### PMID 21376613 (2011) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Spontaneous fistulization of a caseous calcification of the mitral annulus: an exceptional cause of stroke.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2011.01.038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present the case of a caseous calcification of the mitral annulus, responsible for two strokes, in a 72-year-old female patient. The brain computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of a calcific embolus. The echocardiography showed a liquidy, pseudotumoral mass combined with numerous calcifications located in the posterior part of the mitral annulus and extending toward the inferior surface of the left ventricle. During surgery, we found a direct communication between the caseous necrosis and the lumen of the left ventricle at the level of its inferior wall. We performed a valve repair procedure and excision of the caseous necrosis, combined with injection of bioglue into the cavity, to avoid recurrence. Six months after the procedure, the patient was in good health, and had no recurrence of stroke with a satisfactory echocardiography. This is the first description of spontaneous fistulization of a caseous necrosis in the lumen of the left ventricle, explaining a new mechanism for cerebral embolism during the course of calcifying diseases of the mitral annulus.

### PMID 21342262 (2011) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Early failure of coronary artery bypass grafts: an albumin cross-linked glutaraldehyde (BioGlue) related complication.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2011.01208.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bioglue which constitutes albumin cross linked with glutaraldehyde (ACLG) produced by Cryolife, Inc, Kennesaw, GA was introduced as a better alternative to GRF glue with less tissue necrosis. We report a case of a 69-year-old male who developed stenosis of his saphenous vein and internal thoracic artery bypass grafts, requiring re-do coronary artery bypass grafting. Both fibrotic narrowing were in close proximity to the site of Bioglue application and appears to be a reaction to the glue. The advent of ACLG has facilitated surgery; however, this case highlights a potential side effect, emphasizing the judicious use of this hemostatic agent in patients.&#x2002;

### PMID 21273252 (2011) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Pulmonary embolism due to biological glue after repair of type A aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2010.261933 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Biological glue is increasingly used in cardiac surgery. We report a case of type A aortic dissection repair that was complicated by subsequent pulmonary embolism due to BioGlue(&#xae;) (Cryolife Inc, Hennesaw, GA, USA). To our knowledge this is the first report of a case with this complication.

### PMID 21807815 (2011) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Late wound healing problems after use of BioGlue for apical hemostasis during transapical aortic valve implantation.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2011.276360 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BioGlue (CryoLife Inc, Kenneswa, GA, USA), a bovine serum albumin-glutaraldehyde tissue sealant, was at times used to seal the myocardial holes of the polypropylene stitches at the apex of the heart during transapical aortic valve implantation (TAVI). We describe three patients who developed late wound healing problems after TAVI that were thought to be caused by BioGlue. The surgical wound revision was performed on the 115th, 41st and 60th days, respectively, after original TAVI procedures. At revision, a 'foreign body' reaction surrounded by healthy well-vascularized tissue was found. All intraoperative cultures were sterile despite evidence of purulent-like material at the time of wound debridement. The wounds healed 'per primam intentionem' and the patients' postoperative course was also completely uneventful.

### PMID 21114528 (2011) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Role of bovine serum albumin-glutaraldehyde glue in the formation of anastomatic pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2010.01162.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Questions exist concerning the safety of bovine serum albumin-glutaraldehyde (BSAG) glue in thoracic aortic surgery, vis-&#xe0;-vis embolization and pseudoaneurysm formation. We examined clinical experience with BSAG glue to determine if such problems were detected.
METHODS: We studied 99 consecutive patients (25 female and 74 male, age range 27 to 86 years) in whom BSAG glue or similar product was used for reinforcement of thoracic aortic suture lines (n = 87 BSAG glue, 12 GRF [French] glue). BSAG glue was used selectively and sparingly for acute aortic dissection or tissue fragility. Cases included 81 ascending/arch procedures, 15 descending/thoracoabdominal procedures, and 3 combined. Clinical outcome and postoperative computed tomography (CT) scans were reviewed. Follow-up ranged from 1 to 90 months (mean: 15.1 months). We also examined the records of 78 controls in which BSAG glue was not used. The two groups were statistically similar except for rate of aneurysm versus dissection and percentage of emergent surgery.
RESULTS: Perioperative survival was 95/99 (96.0%). Six patients (6.0%) required reexploration for bleeding. There were five early postoperative neurological events and no late strokes or peripheral embolic events. CT scan follow-up identified two pseudoansuerysms, both not perianastomic, which were likely unrelated to BSAG glue use. There was no statistically significant difference in the occurrence of pseudoaneurysms between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Isolated problems associated with BSAG glue have been reported. In this relatively large experience, we identified no obvious problems directly related to judicious use of BSAG glue. BSAG glue appears a safe and effective adjunct in thoracic aortic surgery.&#x2002;

### PMID 21806360 (2011) — Journal of neurosurgery. Pediatrics
TITLE: Complications following decompression of Chiari malformation Type I in children: dural graft or sealant?
DOI: 10.3171/2011.5.PEDS10362 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECT: Posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty for Chiari malformation Type I (CM-I) is a common pediatric neurosurgery procedure. Published series report a complication rate ranging from 3% to 40% for this procedure. Historically, many dural substitutes have been used, including bovine grafts, human cadaveric pericardium, synthetic dura, and autologous pericranium. The authors hypothesized that a recently observed increase in complications was dependent on the graft used.
METHODS: Between January 2004 and January 2008, 114 consecutive patients &#x2264; 18 years old underwent primary CM-I decompression using duraplasty. Records were retrospectively reviewed for short- and intermediate-term complications and operative technique, focusing on the choice of duraplasty graft with or without application of a tissue sealant.
RESULTS: The average age of the patients was 8.6 years. The dural graft used was variable: 15 were treated with cadaveric pericardium, 12 with Durepair, and 87 with EnDura. Tisseel was used in 75 patients, DuraSeal in 12, and no tissue sealant was used in 27 patients. The overall complication rate was 21.1%. The most common complications included aseptic meningitis, symptomatic pseudomeningocele, or a CSF leak requiring reoperation. The overall complication rates were as follows: cadaveric pericardium 26.7%, Durepair 41.7%, and EnDura 17.2%; reoperation rates were 13%, 25%, and 8.1%, respectively. Prior to adopting a different graft product, the overall complication rate was 18.1%; following the change the rate increased to 35%. Complication rates for tissue sealants were 14.8% for no sealant, 18.7% for Tisseel, and 50% for DuraSeal. Nine patients were treated with the combination of Durepair and DuraSeal and this subgroup had a 56% complication rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Complication rates after CM-I decompression may be dependent on the dural graft with or without the addition of tissue sealant. The complication rate at the authors' institution approximately doubled following the adoption of a different graft product. Tissue sealants used in combination with a dural substitute to augment a duraplasty may increase the risk of aseptic meningitis and/or CSF leak. The mechanism of the apparent increased inflammation with this combination remains under investigation.

### PMID 21958767 (2011) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Safety and effectiveness of a new fibrin pleural air leak sealant: a multicenter, controlled, prospective, parallel-group, randomized clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.05.104 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the sealing capacity and safety of a new fibrin sealant (FS) to reduce alveolar air leaks (AALs) after pulmonary resections in a randomized controlled clinical trial conducted in 3 Italian centers.
METHODS: The study randomized (1:1) 185 patients with an intraoperative AAL graded 1 to 3 according to the Macchiarini scale: 91 received FS and 94 had standard lung closure. The primary outcomes were the length of postoperative AAL duration and the mean time to chest drain removal. Other end points included the percentage of patients without AAL, the development of serum antibodies against bovine aprotinin, and any adverse event related to FS. Chest drains were removed when fluid output was 100 mL/day or less, with no air leak.
RESULTS: The study groups were comparable with respect to demographic variables and surgical procedures. The FS group showed a statistically significant reduction in duration of postoperative AALs (9.52 vs 35.8 hours; p &lt; 0.005) and in the percentage of patients with AALs at wound closure (81.11% vs 100%; p &lt; 0.001); the difference in time to chest drain removal was not significant. Pleural empyema developed in 1 patient with FS treatment vs in 4 with standard treatment, and antibodies against bovine aprotinin were found in 34 of 91 FS-treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study showed that the new FS is safe and effective in preventing AALs after lung resections and in shortening the duration of postoperative AALs.

### PMID 21802240 (2011) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Knitted nitinol represents a new generation of constrictive external vein graft meshes.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2011.05.023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Constriction of vein grafts with braided external nitinol meshes had previously led to the successful elimination of neointimal tissue formation. We investigated whether pulse compliance, smaller kink-free bending radius, and milder medial atrophy can be achieved by knitting the meshes rather than braiding, without losing the suppressive effect on intimal hyperplasia.
METHODS: Pulse compliance, bending stiffness, and bending radius, as well as longitudinal-radial deformation-coupling and radial compression, were compared in braided and knitted nitinol meshes. Identical to previous studies with braided mesh grafts, a senescent nonhuman primate model (Chacma baboons; bilateral femoral interposition grafts/6 months) mimicking the clinical size mismatch between vein grafts and runoff arteries was used to examine the effect of knitted external meshes on vein grafts: nitinol mesh-constricted (group 1); nitinol mesh-constricted and fibrin sealant (FS) spray-coated for mesh attachment (group 2); untreated control veins (group 3), and FS spray-coated control veins (group 4).
RESULTS: Compared with braided meshes, knitted meshes had 3.8-times higher pulse compliance (3.43 &#xb1; 0.53 vs 0.94 &#xb1; 0.12%/100 mm Hg; P = .00002); 30-times lower bending stiffness (0.015 &#xb1; 0.002 vs 0.462 &#xb1; 0.077 Nmm(2); P = .0006); 9.2-times narrower kink-free bending radius (15.3 &#xb1; 0.4 vs 140.8 &#xb1; 22.4 mm; P = .0006), and 4.3-times lower radial narrowing caused by axial distension (18.0% &#xb1; 1.0% vs 77.0% &#xb1; 3.7%; P = .00001). Compared with mesh-supported grafts, neointimal tissue was 8.5-times thicker in group I (195 &#xb1; 45 &#x3bc;m) vs group III (23.0 &#xb1; 21.0 &#x3bc;m; P &lt; .001) corresponding with a 14.3-times larger neointimal area in group I (4330 &#xb1; 957 &#xd7; 103 &#x3bc;m(2)) vs group III (303 &#xb1; 221&#xd7; 103 &#x3bc;m(2); P &lt; .00004). FS had no significant influence. Medial muscle mass remained at 43.4% in knitted meshes vs the 28.1% previously observed in braided meshes.
CONCLUSION: Combining the suppression of intimal hyperplasia with a more physiologic remodeling process of the media, manifold higher kink-resistance, and lower fraying than in braided meshes makes knitted nitinol an attractive concept in external vein graft protection.

### PMID 21514114 (2011) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Use of fibrin sealant as a hemostatic agent in expanded polytetrafluoroethylene graft placement surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2010.12.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017427">Clinical Trial, Phase II, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The low thrombogenicity, porosity, and limited elasticity of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) vascular grafts, although beneficial, may exacerbate the problem of suture-line bleeding at vascular anastomoses and consequently lead to increased operating times. The overall objective of this prospective, randomized, controlled, subject-blinded, multicenter phase 2 study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a fibrin sealant containing 500 IU/mL thrombin and synthetic aprotinin (FS; marketed in the United States under the name TISSEEL) for hemostasis in subjects undergoing vascular surgery and receiving prosthetic ePTFE vascular grafts.
METHODS: FS was compared with manual compression with surgical gauze pads, a standard of care for hemostasis in vascular surgery. Two FS polymerization/setting times (60 and 120 seconds) were investigated to evaluate influence on the efficacy results. Patients undergoing ePTFE graft placement surgery (N = 73) who experienced bleeding that required treatment after surgical hemostasis were randomized to be treated with FS with clamps opened at 60 seconds (FS-60; N = 26), with FS with clamps opened at 120 seconds (FS-120; N = 24), or with manual compression with surgical gauze pads (control; N = 23). The proportion of subjects achieving hemostasis at 4 minutes (primary endpoint) as well as at 6 and 10 minutes (secondary endpoints) in the three treatment groups was analyzed using logistic regression analysis, taking into account gender, age, type of intervention, severity of bleeding, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, heparin coating of the ePTFE graft, and platelet inhibitors.
RESULTS: There were substantial differences in the proportion of subjects who achieved hemostasis at the study suture line at 4 minutes from treatment application between FS-120 (62.5%) and control (34.8%) groups (a 79.6% relative improvement). Logistic regression analyses found a statistically significant treatment effect at the 10% level in the odds ratio (OR) of achieving hemostasis at 4 minutes between the FS-120 and control groups (OR = 3.98, p = 0.0991). Furthermore, it has been shown that the perioperative administration of platelet inhibitors significantly influences (OR = 3.89, p = 0.0607) hemostasis rates at the primary endpoint. No statistically significant treatment effects were found for the other factors. Logistic regression analyses performed on the secondary endpoints demonstrated a significant treatment effect of achieving hemostasis at 6 minutes (OR = 9.92, p = 0.0225) and at 10 minutes (OR = 6.70, p = 0.0708) between the FS-120 and control groups. Statistically significant effects in the logistic regression analyses were found at the 10% level in the OR of achieving hemostasis at 6 and 10 minutes, respectively, for the following factors: FS-120 versus control group (OR = 9.92; p = 0.0225 and OR = 6.70; p = 0.0708, respectively), type of intervention (OR = 0.3; p = 0.0775 and OR = 0.25; p = 0.0402, respectively), and heparin coating of the ePTFE prosthesis (OR = 4.83; p&#xa0;= 0.0413 and OR = 3.65; p = 0.0911, respectively). FS was safe and well-tolerated, as indicated by the lack of any related serious adverse events.
CONCLUSION: The findings from this phase 2 study support the strong safety profile of FS and suggest that it is an efficacious hemostatic agent in ePTFE graft placement surgery, as well as a useful tool in peripheral vascular surgery applications.

### PMID 21888851 (2011) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Aseptic necrosis of the capitulum of the humerus (Panner's disease) treated by solid chondrograft implantation].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors present the case of aseptic necrosis of the humeral capitulum in a top female gymnast. She was referred to our department with the diagnosis of aseptic necrosis already made and after repeated arthroscopic treatment of the elbow including removal of a loose body in another institution. Exercise-related pain and swelling of the elbow became permanent and did not allow her to pursue her sports activities. After thorough examination, the treatment by implantation of autologous cultured chondrocytes, as a solid chondrograft, was chosen. At the first stage of arthroscopic surgery, a loose body was removed and a sample of healthy cartilage from an articular region not subject to strain was collected. The sample was sent to the Tissue Bank for cultivation and chondrocyte formation into a solid chondrograft, a procedure taking 4 to 5 weeks. At the second stage, the chondrograft was implanted into the lesion site and fixed with tissue glue (Tissucol). The arm was immobilised in a plaster cast for 4 weeks. The patient was followed up clinically and examined with magnetic resonance imaging at 6 month after implantation. The examination showed full graft integration and the arm's return to full mobility without pain at exercise. Even with this rare lesion site within the elbow joint, the implantation of a solid chondrograft proved to be a method achieving very good outcomes.

### PMID 20130874 (2011) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Cutaneous bronchobiliary fistula treated with Tissucol sealant.
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-010-9807-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchobiliary fistula is a rare and is an uncommon but severe complication of hydatid disease of the liver. Treatment has traditionally been surgical resection, but embolization and stent placement have been described. The invasive method seems to be a key component of patient treatment. We describe a case of a 58-year-old woman who, 25 years before, had undergone surgery for a hydatid cyst. A total cystectomy without previous puncture or parasite extraction was carried out. The lower aspect of the cyst was found to be completely perforated over the biliary duct. During the postoperative course, the patient had subphrenic right-sided pleural effusion and biliary fistula that subsided with medical treatment. Afterward, the patient came to the outpatient area of our hospital complaining of leakage of purulent exudate through the cutaneous opening, pain located on the right hypochondrium radiating to the right hemithorax, malaise, fever, chronic cough, and occasional vomiting of bile. Fistulography revealed an anfractuous cavity communicating with a residual cystic cavity on the right hepatic lobe. We observed communication with the intrahepatic canaliculi. Computed tomographic scan revealed a fistulous tract on the anterior liver border through the abdominal wall. There were no posttreatment complications. The patient is asymptomatic.

### PMID 21942978 (2011) — Drugs
TITLE: Fibrin sealant (evicel&#xae; [quixil&#xae;/crosseal&#x2122;]): a review of its use as supportive treatment for haemostasis in surgery.
DOI: 10.2165/11207700-000000000-00000 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Evicel&#xae; is a fibrin sealant consisting of two components, human clottable protein (predominantly human fibrinogen) and human thrombin. It is indicated as supportive treatment in patients undergoing surgery when control of bleeding by standard surgical techniques is ineffective or impractical. Evicel&#xae; is a new formulation of the previously available fibrin sealant Quixil&#xae; (in the EU) or Crosseal&#x2122; (in the US). Evicel&#xae; differs from Quixil&#xae;/Crosseal&#x2122; in that its fibrinogen component does not contain the antifibrinolytic agent tranexamic acid, which is potentially neurotoxic, resulting in Quixil&#xae;/Crosseal&#x2122; being contraindicated for use in neurosurgery. The removal of tranexamic acid did not affect the haemostatic efficacy or longevity of Evicel&#xae; fibrin clots and allowed the sealant to be granted an expanded indication. Evicel&#xae; and Quixil&#xae;/Crosseal&#x2122; are easy to use and, since they do not contain synthetic or bovine aprotinin, have a reduced potential for hypersensitivity reactions. This article reviews the pharmacological properties, clinical efficacy and tolerability of Evicel&#xae; and its previous formulation as supportive treatment for haemostasis in surgery. In clinical studies, Evicel&#xae; and Quixil&#xae;/Crosseal&#x2122; were generally well tolerated and effective haemostatic agents for adjunctive use in various types of surgeries when conventional methods were impractical or ineffective in controlling bleeding. Two pivotal, randomized studies showed that Evicel&#xae; was significantly more effective than manual compression in patients undergoing vascular surgery, and significantly more effective than Surgicel&#xae; in patients undergoing retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal surgery, as assessed by the proportion of patients achieving haemostasis. In another similarly designed pivotal study in patients undergoing liver resection, Crosseal&#x2122; was significantly more effective than standard haemostatic agents (e.g. Surgicel&#xae;), as assessed by the mean time to haemostasis. The incidences of treatment-emergent adverse events in these studies were generally similar between the Evicel&#xae; or Crosseal&#x2122; groups and the comparator groups. Quixil&#xae; was also generally well tolerated and an effective haemostatic agent in endonasal surgeries, and tonsillectomies and/or adenoidectomies, with some benefit of treatment with Evicel&#xae; or Quixil&#xae; also observed in orthopaedic surgeries. Although additional comparative studies with other haemostatic agents would help to definitively position Evicel&#xae; with respect to these agents, current evidence suggests that Evicel&#xae; is useful in surgeries for improving haemostasis where standard surgical techniques are insufficient.

### PMID 21389896 (2011) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: "Double-stick tape" technique for transposition of an offending vessel in microvascular decompression: technical case report.
DOI: 10.1227/NEU.0b013e318217141c | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND IMPORTANCE: Severe hemifacial spasm caused by compression by a tortuous vertebral artery (VA) often is encountered and is difficult to treat. We describe a patient with hemifacial spasm caused by compression of the facial nerve by a tortuous VA. A simple and effective transposition approach, a "double-stick tape" technique, to the offending artery using a fibrin tissue-adhesive collagen fleece product (TachoComb) is reported.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A 65-year-old woman presented with an 8-year history of right-sided facial spasms, including the orbicularis oculi and orbicularis oris muscles. MRI revealed a tortuous right VA indented into the pontomedullary junction. The right anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) also contacted the proximal portion of the facial nerve. Surgical exploration with standard retrosigmoid craniotomy was performed. The offending VA was dissected away from the pontomedullary junction toward the cranial base. A small piece of TachoComb, with fibrin glue applied on the non-coated side of the fleece to make a "double-stick tape," was then placed on the ventral surface of the VA. Until the glue hardened, the VA was held away from the brainstem onto the dura of the petrous pyramid. After this procedure, AICA transposition was performed. The patient's symptoms were completely resolved immediately after surgery, and she remained asymptomatic at her 1 year follow-up visit.
CONCLUSION: The advantage of our "double-stick tape" technique is the simplicity of the procedure. The present technique is a feasible alternative for the treatment of hemifacial spasm caused by a tortuous VA.

### PMID 22287330 (2011) — International forum of allergy &amp; rhinology
TITLE: The efficacy of hemostatic techniques in the sheep model of carotid artery injury.
DOI: 10.1002/alr.20033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The most dramatic complication in endonasal surgery is inadvertent injury to the internal carotid artery (ICA) with massive bleeding. Nasal packing is the favored technique for control; however, this often causes complete carotid occlusion or carotid stenosis, contributing to the morbidity and mortality of the patient. The aim of this study is to compare the efficacy of endoscopically applied hemostatic techniques that maintain vascular flow in an animal model of carotid artery injury.
METHODS: A total of 20 sheep underwent ICA dissection/isolation followed by the placement of the artery within a modified "sinus model otorhino neuro trainer" (SIMONT) model. A standardized 4-mm carotid artery injury was created endoscopically. Randomization of sheep to receive 1 of 5 hemostatic techniques was performed (Floseal, oxidized regenerated cellulose, Chitosan gel, muscle patch, or the U-Clip anastomotic device). Specific outcome measures were time to hemostasis, duration of time mean arterial pressure (MAP) was &gt;55 mmHg, blood loss, and survival time.
RESULTS: Muscle patch hemostasis and the U-Clip anastomotic device were significantly more effective at achieving primary hemostasis rapidly, reducing total blood loss, and increasing survival time and time MAP was &gt;55 mmHg more than Floseal, oxidized regenerated cellulose, and Chitosan gel (p &lt; 0.05). Additionally, all muscle patch-treated and U-Clip device-treated sheep achieved primary hemostasis and reached the endpoint of observation, while maintaining vascular patency. Floseal and oxidized regenerated cellulose failed to achieve hemostasis in any animal, with all animals exsanguinating prematurely.
CONCLUSION: In the sheep model of endoscopic ICA injury, the muscle patch and U-Clip anastomotic device significantly improved survival, reduced blood loss, and achieved primary hemostasis while maintaining vascular patency.

### PMID 22278791 (2011) — Minimally invasive neurosurgery : MIN
TITLE: Massive swelling of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar&#x2122; hemostat after spinal surgery. Case report and a review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1284394 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Oxidized regenerated cellulose is commonly used in many surgical fields as a hemostatic agent. Complications related to swelling or compression after application of small portions of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar&#x2122; have not yet been described.
PATIENTS: We report on a 65-year-old woman who was operated for a high-grade spinal stenosis at the L2-L3 level. Small portions of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar&#x2122; were used to control bleeding from the epidural venous plexus. The immediate postoperative course was uneventful. However, one day after surgery, the patient complained about progressive worsening pain at the operated level. A non-contrast lumbar CT scan showed no evidence of a postoperative hematoma or other complication. MR imaging showed a horseshoe-shaped mass compressing the dural sac at the operated level from posterior and both sides. Because we suspected a postoperative hematoma, the patient was re-operated. No hemorrhage was seen but instead we found large, swollen firm pieces of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar&#x2122; compressing the dural sac. These pieces were removed.
RESULT: Postoperatively no neurological deficit or pain was present. Histological examination of the removed mass of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar&#x2122; revealed only the presence of blood, fibrin and an amorphous eosinophilic content. There was no sign of any inflammation.
CONCLUSION: On the basis of this experience, we advise caution with the use of hemostatic agents during spinal surgery and - if used - strongly advise the removal of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar&#x2122; after the hemostasis has been achieved to avoid the development of complications due to a mass effect.

### PMID 21600502 (2011) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Microporous Polysaccharide Hemospheres (MPH) for cerebral hemostasis: a preliminary report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2010.10.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To report preliminary experience in using Microporous Polysaccharide Hemospheres (MPH; Medafor, Inc, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) for cerebral and dural sinus hemostasis.
METHODS: Absorbable hemospheres for hemostasis were used in 10 patients (6 men, 4 women, mean age 56.2 years) undergoing cerebral procedures. The indication was corticosubcortical cerebral hemostasis after resection of meningiomas (n = 5) and gliomas (n = 5). In one case, absorbable hemospheres were applied for generalized oozing over the superior sagittal sinus. The surgical technique, time to bleeding control, and associated complications were recorded.
RESULTS: Effective hemostasis, defined as cessation of oozing bleeding, was achieved no later than 2 minutes after topical agent application in all patients except two, in whom the hemostatic application was repeated. Mean follow-up was 12 months. No patient developed allergic reactions or systemic complications in association with hemostatic absorbable hemospheres. There was no case of cerebral hematoma, swelling, or infection after surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary study, the direct application of absorbable hemospheres helped to control superficial cerebral bleeding, reducing the use of bipolar coagulation and shortening surgical time. Although use of absorbable hemospheres seems to be safe and effective, further investigations and prospective studies with longer follow-up are strongly recommended to arrive at final conclusions.

### PMID 21869584 (2011) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Transarterial embolization with use of lipiodol and gelatin sponge for active nasal bleeding from hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis in the pituitary gland.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.51.592 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 58-year-old man presented with a very rare case of pituitary metastasis from hepatocellular carcinoma with active nasal bleeding which was treated by transarterial embolization using ethiodized oil (Lipiodol) and gelatin sponge. After treatment, nasal bleeding ceased and tumor size decreased. The prognosis for patients with pituitary metastases is very poor, so aggressive treatment is recommended to alleviate symptoms. This minimally invasive approach may be a reasonable therapeutic option for pituitary metastases.

### PMID 21502651 (2011) — Annals of internal medicine
TITLE: Systematic review: benefits and harms of in-hospital use of recombinant factor VIIa for off-label indications.
DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-154-8-201104190-00004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S., Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S., Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa), a hemostatic agent approved for hemophilia, is increasingly used for off-label indications.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the benefits and harms of rFVIIa use for 5 off-label, in-hospital indications: intracranial hemorrhage, cardiac surgery, trauma, liver transplantation, and prostatectomy.
DATA SOURCES: Ten databases (including PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library) queried from inception through December 2010. Articles published in English were analyzed.
STUDY SELECTION: Two reviewers independently screened titles and abstracts to identify clinical use of rFVIIa for the selected indications and identified all randomized, controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies for full-text review.
DATA EXTRACTION: Two reviewers independently assessed study characteristics and rated study quality and indication-wide strength of evidence.
DATA SYNTHESIS: 16 RCTs, 26 comparative observational studies, and 22 noncomparative observational studies met inclusion criteria. Identified comparators were limited to placebo (RCTs) or usual care (observational studies). For intracranial hemorrhage, mortality was not improved with rFVIIa use across a range of doses. Arterial thromboembolism was increased with medium-dose rFVIIa use (risk difference [RD], 0.03 [95% CI, 0.01 to 0.06]) and high-dose rFVIIa use (RD, 0.06 [CI, 0.01 to 0.11]). For adult cardiac surgery, there was no mortality difference, but there was an increased risk for thromboembolism (RD, 0.05 [CI, 0.01 to 0.10]) with rFVIIa. For body trauma, there were no differences in mortality or thromboembolism, but there was a reduced risk for the acute respiratory distress syndrome (RD, -0.05 [CI, -0.02 to -0.08]). Mortality was higher in observational studies than in RCTs.
LIMITATIONS: The amount and strength of evidence were low for most outcomes and indications. Publication bias could not be excluded.
CONCLUSION: Limited available evidence for 5 off-label indications suggests no mortality reduction with rFVIIa use. For some indications, it increases thromboembolism.

### PMID 21533522 (2011) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Biologic hernia implants in experimental intraperitoneal onlay mesh plasty repair: the impact of proprietary collagen processing methods and fibrin sealant application on tissue integration.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-011-1700-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Biologic implants have been recommended for reinforcement in routine and challenging hernia repair. However, experimental and clinical studies have reported adverse effects (e.g., slow implant integration and pronounced foreign body reaction). To evaluate the impact of different material processing methods (cross-linking vs. non-cross-linking of collagen) and implant design, four different biologic hernia implants were compared directly in experimental intraperitoneal onlay mesh plasty (IPOM). Tissue integration, shrinkage, and foreign body reaction were primary outcome parameters.
METHODS: In this study, 48 Sprague-Dawley rats were randomized to four treatment groups. Open IPOM repair was performed. One peritoneal defect per animal was covered with 2 &#xd7; 2 cm patches of cross-linked or non-cross-linked implants including CollaMend (n = 12), Peripatch (n = 12), Surgisis (n = 12), and Tutomesh (n = 12). In half of the animals, fibrin sealant was applied for additional fixation and to cover sutures. The observation period was 60 days. The primary outcome parameters were implant integration, shrinkage, and foreign body reaction. Macroscopic and histologic assessments were performed.
RESULTS: The integration of implants was insufficient in all the groups. The implants could be detached easily from the underlying tissue, and the penetration of fibroblasts and vessels was limited to the perforations. Foreign body reaction was pronounced with CollaMend and Surgisis, leading to persistent granulomatous inflammation. Shrinkage was excessive with Surgisis, whereas Tutomesh and Peripatch yielded sufficient anti-adhesion and elicited no foreign body reaction.
CONCLUSION: At 2 months, cross-linked and non-cross-linked biologic hernia implants were poorly integrated. Cross-linking led to a more pronounced foreign body reaction. Less inflammatory response may reduce local complications, but did not enhance implant integration in this study.

### PMID 22008340 (2011) — Journal of pediatric surgery
TITLE: Recombinant human thrombin: safety and immunogenicity in pediatric burn wound excision.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2011.05.022 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017429">Clinical Trial, Phase IV, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Previous studies of recombinant human thrombin (rThrombin) enrolled adult and adolescent patients. This phase 4, open-label, single-group study was conducted in pediatric patients undergoing synchronous burn wound excision and skin grafting to provide information regarding the safety and immunogenicity of rThrombin (primary and secondary endpoints) in this population.
METHODS: Topical rThrombin was applied as a hemostatic aid during a surgical procedure (day 1). Adverse events and clinical laboratory abnormalities were recorded during the study. Immunogenicity samples were collected on days 1 and 29 (study end). Study results were summarized with descriptive statistics.
RESULTS: Thirty patients enrolled and 28 completed the study. Mean age was 6.9 years (range, 0.9-17.8 years); 40.0% of patients were girls. Flame and scald were the most common burn types (33.3% each, n = 10/30). Mean graft size was 3.6% total body surface area. Procedural pain (50.0% patients), pruritus (43.3%), and anemia (30.0%) were the most commonly reported adverse events. All adverse events and clinical laboratory abnormalities were considered unrelated to treatment. No patients developed anti-rThrombin product antibodies at day 29.
CONCLUSIONS: In pediatric patients undergoing burn wound excision and skin grafting, rThrombin was well tolerated and did not lead to the formation of anti-rThrombin product antibodies.

### PMID 21958507 (2011) — Journal of the American College of Surgeons
TITLE: Immunogenicity and safety of re-exposure to recombinant human thrombin in surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2011.08.019 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017429">Clinical Trial, Phase IV, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This Phase 4, open-label study evaluated the immunogenicity and safety of a second exposure to recombinant human thrombin (rThrombin) in adult patients with previous exposure to rThrombin.
STUDY DESIGN: Topical rThrombin was applied as a hemostatic aid during a surgical procedure (day 1). Adverse events and clinical laboratory abnormalities were monitored to day 29 (study end). Immunogenicity samples were collected on days 1 and 29. Thirty-one patients were treated at 9 study sites; 30 patients completed the study.
RESULTS: Mean age was 59.5 years; 61.3% of patients were male. Study operations types included spinal (n = 23 of 31; 74.2%), arterial reconstruction or peripheral arterial bypass (n = 4; 12.9%), arteriovenous vascular access procedure (n = 3; 9.7%), and other (n = 1; 3.2%). A median of 10 mL rThrombin (1,000 IU/mL; range 5 to 60 mL) was prepared per patient. Median elapsed time since previous rThrombin exposure was 1.3 years (range 19 days to 3.3 years). Recombinant human thrombin was not observed to be immunogenic; no patients (n = 0 of 30, 0%; 95% CI 0.0%, 11.6%) became positive for anti-rThrombin product antibodies at day 29, approximately 1 month after the second exposure to rThrombin. The most commonly reported adverse events were procedural pain (n = 23 of 31, 74.2%), constipation (n = 8, 25.8%), and nausea (n = 8, 25.8%) All adverse events and clinical laboratory abnormalities were considered unrelated to treatment. For the majority of patients, maximal severity of any adverse event was mild or moderate.
CONCLUSIONS: The immunogenicity and safety results of this Phase 4 rThrombin trial suggest that patients with known previous exposure may be safely re-exposed to topical rThrombin.

### PMID 21782025 (2011) — Protein expression and purification
TITLE: Improved isolation and purification of functional human Fas receptor extracellular domain using baculovirus-silkworm expression system.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2011.07.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: To achieve an efficient isolation of human Fas receptor extracellular domain (hFasRECD), a fusion protein of hFasRECD with human IgG1 heavy chain Fc domain containing thrombin cleavage sequence at the junction site was overexpressed using baculovirus-silkworm larvae expression system. The hFasRECD part was separated from the fusion protein by the effective cleavage of the recognition site with bovine thrombin. Protein G column treatment of the reaction mixture and the subsequent cation-exchange chromatography provided purified hFasRECD with a final yield of 13.5mg from 25.0 ml silkworm hemolymph. The functional activity of the product was examined by size-exclusion chromatography analysis. The isolated hFasRECD less strongly interacted with human Fas ligand extracellular domain (hFasLECD) than the Fc domain-bridged counterpart, showing the contribution of antibody-like avidity in the latter case. The purified glycosylated hFasRECD presented several discrete bands in the disulphide-bridge non-reducing SDS-PAGE analysis, and virtually all of the components were considered to participate in the binding to hFasLECD. The attached glycans were susceptible to PNGase F digestion, but mostly resistant to Endo Hf digestion under denaturing conditions. One of the components exhibited a higher susceptibility to PNGase F digestion under non-denaturing conditions.

### PMID 21654294 (2011) — Surgical laparoscopy, endoscopy &amp; percutaneous techniques
TITLE: Use of fibrin-based sealants and gelatin-matrix hemostats in laparoscopic liver surgery.
DOI: 10.1097/SLE.0b013e31821db688 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: During surgery, liver tissue is particularly prone to bleeding which can be difficult to control, especially in patients with liver disease-associated coagulopathy. Topical sealants and hemostats can enhance clot formation and wound healing, and can be useful for controlling or preventing troublesome bleeding during surgical interventions where conventional methods of hemostasis are inadequate.
METHODS: An extensive customized literature search was conducted using medical reference databases to identify publications related to the use of potential agents in laparoscopic liver surgery. Citations from these articles were also used. Details of the authors' own experience in this area is also included.
RESULTS: Routine use of fibrin-based sealants in open liver surgery now seems to be widespread. Data from several large prospective randomized controlled clinical trials have indicated that application of fibrin-based sealants to the cut liver surface during hepatectomy does provide some benefit in terms of a shorter time to hemostasis and a reduction in postoperative drainage fluid, even when compared with argon beam coagulation. Another trial found no additional benefit of fibrin sealants when applied after coagulation of the cut liver surface. A prospective, uncontrolled study found that application of the flowable gelatin matrix-based hemostat Floseal provided rapid effective control of mild-to-severe bleeding during surgical removal of primary or metastatic liver tumors, even in those with cirrhosis. Some of these topical hemostatic agents are already being used on a routine basis by many surgeons performing laparoscopic liver surgery. Although there are no randomized clinical trials, there are several anecdotal or case reports of their effective use during laparoscopic liver surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of current evidence of using hemostats and sealants in open liver surgery, there is potential of developing these strategies in laparoscopic liver surgery.

### PMID 21633752 (2011) — Nanoscale
TITLE: Enhanced electrochemiluminescence quenching of CdS:Mn nanocrystals by CdTe QDs-doped silica nanoparticles for ultrasensitive detection of thrombin.
DOI: 10.1039/c1nr10175g | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: This work reports an aptasensor for ultrasensitive detection of thrombin based on remarkably efficient energy-transfer induced electrochemiluminescence (ECL) quenching from CdS:Mn nanocrystals (NCs) film to CdTe QDs-doped silica nanoparticles (CdTe/SiO(2) NPs). CdTe/SiO(2) NPs were synthesized via the St&#xf6;ber method and showed black bodies' strong absorption in a wide spectral range without excitonic emission, which made them excellent ECL quenchers. Within the effective distance of energy scavenging, the ECL quenching efficiency was dependent on the number of CdTe QDs doped into the silica NPs. Using ca. 200 CdTe QDs doped silica NPs on average of 40 nm in diameter as ECL quenching labels, attomolar detection of thrombin was successfully realized. The protein detection involves a competition binding event, based on thrombin replacing CdTe/SiO(2) NPs labeled probing DNA which is hybridized with capturing aptamer immobilized on a CdS:Mn NCs film modified glassy carbon electrode surface by specific aptamer-protein affinity interactions. It results in the displacement of ECL quenching labels from CdS:Mn NCs film and concomitant ECL signal recovery. Owing to the high-content CdTe QDs in silica NP, the increment of ECL intensity (&#x394;I(ECL)) and the concentration of thrombin showed a double logarithmic linear correlation in the range of 5.0 aM&#x223c;5.0 fM with a detection limit of 1aM. And, the aptasensor hardly responded to antibody, bovine serum albumin (BSA), haemoglobin (Hb) and lysozyme, showing good detection selectivity for thrombin. This long-distance energy scavenging could have a promising application perspective in the detection of biological recognition events on a molecular level.

### PMID 21596694 (2011) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Immune responses associated with perioperative exposure and reexposure to topical bovine thrombin do not impair hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029611405187 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Topical bovine thrombin has been associated with immune responses and anecdotal reports of coagulopathy. This open-label study assessed the impact on clinical hemostasis of human antibodies to bovine thrombin (aBT) or factor V/Va (aBV/Va) in response to topical bovine thrombin (THROMBIN-JMI) in patients both with and without preexisting anti-bovine antibodies. Noninferiority analysis assessed primary endpoint for mean shift from baseline activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) at 48 hours postsurgery; secondary endpoints included changes from baseline antibodies/titers and coagulation parameters through 8 weeks postsurgery. A total of 550 patients underwent surgery with THROMBIN-JMI utilized at investigator's discretion. Adjusted mean aPTT change in (+)aBT/(+)THROMBIN-JMI cohort was greater than (-)aBT/(-)THROMBIN-JMI cohort; 4.67-second upper confidence bound exceeded 4.5-second margin (based on assumed mean aPTT of 30 seconds) and noninferiority was not met. Post hoc analysis indicated noninferiority would have been met had noninferiority margin been set prior at relative 15% of actual baseline aPTT. Antibodies/titers were unchanged by THROMBIN-JMI exposure 48 hours postsurgery and unrelated to postsurgical changes in coagulation. Thus, THROMBIN-JMI exposure in patients with/without preexisting aBT or aBV/Va does not alter hemostasis.

### PMID 21401902 (2011) — International journal of laboratory hematology
TITLE: The phenotypic and genetic assessment of antithrombin deficiency.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1751-553X.2011.01307.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Antithrombin (AT) deficiency is associated with an increased risk of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism which are major causes of morbidity and death. The incidence of deficiency in healthy populations has been reported to vary from 1/600 to 1/5000, with the variation being due to the different populations studied and detection methods used. When reduced activity levels are identified it is important to measure the AT antigen levels to differentiate type I from type II disorders, as type II defects have varying thrombotic risk.
METHODS: Functional AT assays detect the ability of AT to inactivate thrombin or factor Xa, and AT antigen assays detect the quantity of AT in plasma. In functional assays, reducing the incubation time of sample with enzyme/heparin reagent may increase sensitivity to type II defects. An excess of antigen over activity level suggests the presence of functionally defective AT, which can be characterized further by assaying AT in the absence of heparin, electrophoresis to investigate the ability of heparin to bind to AT, and gene sequencing.
RESULTS: Many patients with AT deficiency have a type II defect and these defects may not be detected by all routine diagnostic assays. Assays using human thrombin may lack specificity and assays that use factor Xa may fail to detect the common variant, AT Cambridge II, which can be detected by assays using bovine thrombin, especially if activity is compared to antigen by ratio. Factor Xa based assays may be particularly sensitive to certain heparin binding defects, and sensitivity of assays to both heparin binding and reactive site defects can be improved by shortening the incubation time with enzyme.
CONCLUSION: uAT activity assays are essential for the detection of AT deficiency because type II defects are relatively common in patients with heritable deficiency. No one functional assay can be assumed to detect all forms of AT deficiency, and assays can sometimes be improved by reducing reaction time of AT with thrombin or factor Xa.

### PMID 21228719 (2011) — Journal of pediatric hematology/oncology
TITLE: Immune-mediated coagulopathy associated with topical bovine thrombin: review of the pediatric literature.
DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e3181ff0e43 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Postoperative bleeding may occur from a number of etiologies. An uncommon cause of postoperative bleeding is immune-mediated coagulopathy resulting from reexposure to a topical hemostat containing bovine thrombin. Some patients may develop antibodies to bovine thrombin (and other bovine coagulation proteins present in the product) which cross-react with human coagulation proteins, resulting in a coagulopathy, and occasionally, in serious bleeding and death. Most of the clinical information on this coagulopathy is in the adult medical literature. This article reviews the literature on pediatric cases with this coagulopathy and summarizes clinical outcomes and effective therapies.

### PMID 21156843 (2011) — Blood
TITLE: A membrane-interactive surface on the factor VIII C1 domain cooperates with the C2 domain for cofactor function.
DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-301663 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: Factor VIII binds to phosphatidylserine (PS)-containing membranes through its tandem, lectin-homology, C1 and C2 domains. However, the details of C1 domain membrane binding have not been delineated. We prepared 4 factor VIII C1 mutations localized to a hypothesized membrane-interactive surface (Arg2090Ala/Gln2091Ala, Lys2092Ala/Phe2093Ala, Gln2042Ala/Tyr2043Ala, and Arg2159Ala). Membrane binding and cofactor activity were measured using membranes with 15% PS, mimicking platelets stimulated by thrombin plus collagen, and 4% PS, mimicking platelets stimulated by thrombin. All mutants had at least 10-fold reduced affinities for membranes of 4% PS, and 3 mutants also had decreased apparent affinity for factor X. Monoclonal antibodies against the C2 domain produced different relative impairment of mutants compared with wild-type factor VIII. Monoclonal antibody ESH4 decreased the V(max) for all mutants but only the apparent membrane affinity for wild-type factor VIII. Monoclonal antibody BO2C11 decreased the V(max) of wild-type factor VIII by 90% but decreased the activity of 3 mutants more than 98%. These results identify a membrane-binding face of the factor VIII C1 domain, indicate an influence of the C1 domain on factor VIII binding to factor X, and indicate that cooperation between the C1 and C2 domains is necessary for full activity of the factor Xase complex.

### PMID 21078614 (2011) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: A multicenter pilot study to estimate the prevalence of bovine and human coagulation antibodies in the general US population.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029610384109 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: Antibodies to bovine and human coagulation proteins have been reported to develop in some patients receiving perioperative exposure to topical bovine thrombin. To estimate the prevalence of antihuman and antibovine thrombin and factor V antibodies in the general population, this multicenter pilot study in 278 participants was undertaken. Of the participants, 88% had no detectable antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Cumulatively 22 (7.9%) of 278 of the participants were positive for at least 1 of the antibovine antibodies and only 11 (4%) of 278 were positive for human thrombin antibodies. No participants had antihuman factor V/Va antibodies. Antibodies were found in 21% of participants with no history of surgery, transfusion, or pregnancy. In participants without a surgical history, thus a low likelihood of bovine thrombin exposure, 7.9% (9 of 114) had antibovine antibodies and 3.5% (4 of 114) had human antithrombin antibodies, suggesting that antibodies may arise from contact with antigenic sources other than bovine-derived thrombin.

### PMID 21078609 (2011) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Safety and efficacy of thrombin-JMI: a multidisciplinary expert group consensus.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029610385674 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Consensus Statement
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The use of bovine thrombin has been an effective approach to aiding hemostasis during surgery for over 60 years. Its use has a reported association with the development of antibodies to coagulation factors with limited evidence to the clinical significance.
METHODS: The Collaborative Delphi survey methodology was used to develop a consensus on specified topic areas from a panel of 12 surgeons/scientists who have had experience with topical thrombins; it consisted of 2 rounds of a Web-based survey and a final live discussion.
RESULTS: Some key issues that reached consensus included: bovine, human plasma-derived and recombinant human thrombin are equally effective hemostatic agents with similar adverse event rates, and immunogenicity to a topical protein rarely translate into adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a risk of immunogenicity is associated with all topical thrombins, no conclusive clinical evidence is available that these antibodies have any significant effect on short- and long-term clinical consequences.

### PMID 20638758 (2011) — La Revue de medecine interne
TITLE: [Acquired factor V deficiency: a rare bleeding disorder with variable clinical presentations].
DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2010.06.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Acquired anti-factor V (FV) antibodies are uncommon and the majority of reported cases are idiopathic or associated with pregnancy, malignancy, autoimmune diseases or the use of bovine thrombin preparations. Clinical presentation is highly variable, ranging from asymptomatic to life-threatening bleeding and the optimal treatment is not clearly established. We here report two patients with different clinical presentations. The first patient presented with an acute severe rectal bleeding related to acquired FV deficiency and recurrent colon cancer while the second patient was asymptomatic with a FV inhibitor detected during a routine blood testing. We discuss treatment modalities that are not consensual.

### PMID 21384319 (2011) — Endoscopy
TITLE: Long-term randomized controlled trial of a novel nanopowder hemostatic agent (TC-325) for control of severe arterial upper gastrointestinal bleeding in a porcine model.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1256125 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIM: Endoscopic therapy of brisk upper gastrointestinal bleeding remains challenging. A proprietary nanopowder (TC-325) has been proven to be effective in high pressure bleeding from external wounds. The efficacy and safety of TC-325 were assessed in a survival gastrointestinal bleeding animal model.
METHOD: 10 animals were randomized to treatment or sham. All animals received intravenous antibiotics, H2-blockers and heparin (activated clotting time 2 &#xd7; normal). In a sterile laparotomy the gastroepiploic vessels were dissected, inserted through a 1-cm gastrotomy, and freely exposed in the gastric lumen, and the exposed vessel lacerated by needle knife. The treatment group received TC-325 by a modified delivery catheter while the sham group received no endoscopic treatment. Time to hemostasis, and mortality at 60 minutes, 24 hours, 48 hours, and 7 days were noted. Necropsy was performed in all animals.
RESULTS: Spurting arterial bleeding was achieved in all animals. No control animal showed hemostasis within the first hour compared with 100 % (5 / 5) in the treatment arm (mean 13.8 minutes, P &lt; 0.0079). Durable hemostasis was achieved with no evidence of rebleeding after 1 and 24 hours in 80 % (4 / 5) of the treated animals compared with none in the control group ( P &lt; 0.0098). None of the control animals survived more than 6 hours. Necropsy at 1 week in treated animals revealed healed gastrotomy without foreign body granuloma or embolization to the lung or brain.
CONCLUSION: TC-325 is safe and highly effective in achieving hemostasis in an anticoagulated severe arterial gastrointestinal bleeding animal model.

### PMID 19093107 (2010) — European biophysics journal : EBJ
TITLE: Multi-scale calculation and global-fit analysis of hydrodynamic properties of biological macromolecules: determination of the overall conformation of antibody IgG molecules.
DOI: 10.1007/s00249-008-0388-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Validation Study
ABSTRACT: We present a scheme, based on existing and newly developed computational tools, for the determination of the overall conformation of biological macromolecules composed by domains or subunits, using from such structural determination easily available solution properties. In a multi-scale approach, atomic-level structures are used to provide simple shapes for the subunits, which are put together in a coarse grained model, with a few parameters that determine the overall shape of the macromolecule. Computer programs, like those in the HYDRO suite that evaluate the properties of either atomic or coarse-grained models. In this paper we present a new scheme for a global fit of multiple properties, implemented in a new computer program, HYDROFIT, which interfaces with the programs of the HYDRO suite to find an optimum, best-fitting structure in a robust but simple way. The determination of the overall structure of the native antibody IgG3, bearing a long hinge, and that of the hingeless mutant m15 is presented to test and confirm the validity of this simple, systematic and efficient scheme.

### PMID 21110274 (2010) — The Thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon
TITLE: Foreign material reaction to BioGlue&#xae; as a possible cause of cardiac tamponade.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1250148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe the case of a 65-year-old female patient who underwent aortic valve reconstruction for aortic valve stenosis. During the operation, repair of a left ventricular laceration produced by a left ventricular vent was necessary. BioGlue&#xae; (CryoLife, Atlanta, GA, USA) and pledgeted sutures were used for repair. Pericardial effusion with signs of cardiac tamponade developed five months later. The patient was treated successfully by the removal of all foreign material and part of the BioGlue&#xae;. Microbiological findings were sterile. Histology showed a chronic granulomatous inflammatory response suggesting a foreign material reaction to BioGlue&#xae; as the cause of the effusion. Though all visible material was removed, the risk of pericardial effusion still persists as part of the BioGlue&#xae; remained within the ventricular wall.

### PMID 20395249 (2010) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Transcatheter aortic valves inadequately relieve stenosis in small degenerated bioprostheses.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2009.225144 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Transcatheter aortic valves (TAVs) are a promising treatment for high risk surgical patients suffering from degeneration of previously implanted bioprostheses (valve-in-valve therapy). However, unlike native stenosed aortic valves which have accommodated Edwards SAPIEN transcatheter valves after valvuloplasty, rigid bioprostheses may prevent full TAV stent expansion and disrupt leaflet function. We hypothesized that current 23 mm TAVs would not completely relieve severe stenosis in small bioprosthetic valves. The objective of this study was to study the hemodynamics of TAVs in degenerated bioprostheses.
METHODS: Twelve TAVs designed to mimic the 23 mm SAPIEN valve were created. Using a pulse duplicator, hemodynamics of valve-in-valve implantation were measured within 19, 21, and 23 mm Carpentier-Edwards PERIMOUNT degenerated bioprostheses (n=6 each). Bioprosthetic degeneration was simulated using BioGlue to achieve a mean pressure gradient of 50 mmHg.
RESULTS: TAVs significantly reduced the mean pressure gradient (50.9+/-4.7-9.1+/-4.1 mmHg, P&lt;0.001) and total energy loss (870.3+/-157.4-307.8+/-87.3 mJ, P&lt;0.001) in 23 mm degenerated bioprostheses. In 21 mm bioprostheses, the pressure gradient (52.3+/-7.0-19.5+/-5.0 mmHg, P&lt;0.001) and energy loss (785.5+/-128.1-477.8+/-123.2 mJ, P=0.007) were reduced significantly. However, no significant changes in the pressure gradient (57.1+/-4.3-46.5+/-9.3 mmHg, P=0.086) or energy loss (839.3+/-49.3-960.5+/-158.1 mJ, P=0.144) were obtained after TAVI implantation in 19 mm bioprostheses. Incomplete stent expansion resulted in leaflet distortion and central regurgitation when implanted in 19 and 21 mm bioprostheses.
CONCLUSIONS: The bioprosthetic annulus and stent posts offered a suitable landing zone for TAVs. However, oversized transcatheter valves were constrained by the rigid bioprostheses resulting in inadequate resolution of bioprosthetic stenosis. Hemodynamics of valve-in-valve intervention was worse than comparable size surgical valve replacements, particularly in 19 and 21 mm valves. Small degenerated bioprostheses require modification of current TAV design to yield acceptable hemodynamics.

### PMID 19902233 (2010) — Histochemistry and cell biology
TITLE: Tissue reaction to three different types of tissue glues in an experimental aorta dissection model: a quantitative approach.
DOI: 10.1007/s00418-009-0656-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Tissue glues are used during surgical treatment of acute aorta dissection although some glues release toxic products and thus alter the histological structure of the vessel wall. The aim of our study was to use a porcine experimental model of infrarenal aorta dissection to compare histological changes of the vessel wall 1, 6 and 12 months after application of BioGlue, Gelatin-resorcin-formaldehyde (GRF) glue and Tissucol. For quantification, stereological methods were used. All types of glue caused stenosis, GRF most and Tissucol least severely. With increasing postoperative survival time, stenosis was again reduced. Elastine length density decreased with increasing survival time in Control as well as in all Experimental groups. The immunohistochemical phenotype of vascular smooth muscle cells was similar in Tissucol and Control samples. In GRF samples, actin, desmin and vimentin expression changed most severely. Similarly, number and distribution of vasa vasorum in the aortic wall was altered most severely in GRF samples. They tended to return to normal with increasing postoperative survival time, but at a slow rate in the GRF samples. It can be concluded that GRF causes the most severe histopathological changes within the treated aorta, which could be a reason for late failures of dissection surgery. However, glue handling and adhesive properties have to be taken into account, too, when certain glue is chosen for surgical intervention. Increased inflammation and vascularisation might even stabilise the aortic wall. Long-term experimental studies would be helpful to assess healing processes after initial disorganisation of the aortic wall structure.

### PMID 20042944 (2010) — Spine
TITLE: Postoperative cervical cord compression induced by hydrogel (DuraSeal): a possible complication.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181b9fc45 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective case report.
OBJECTIVE: To raise the issue of DuraSeal for dural tear repair; to raise the issue of the potential for fatal consequences, if not considered to be an issue around and after surgery; and to illustrate this with a case.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Cerebrospinal fluid leak is a potential complication of spinal, and posterior fossa surgery. Leakage may be caused by inadvertent dural tears during decompressive laminectomy or extradural spinal approaches, for spinal surgery. We present the case of a complication as a result of repair for dural tear with hydrogel.
METHODS: History, focused neurologic examination with pre- and postoperative magnetic resonance scan images.
RESULTS: C5-C6 anterior cervical discectomy, and fusion with a standard commercial PEEK space cage. Intraoperatively there was a small cerebrospinal leak when excising the posterior longitudinal ligament. Surgicel and DuraSeal were used to seal this. The patient developed a quadriparesis after surgery which was a result of expansion of the hydrogel seen on MRI and at re-exploration.
CONCLUSION: Hydrogel is now described for the second time to cause potentially fatal expansion.

### PMID 20233004 (2010) — Journal of investigative surgery : the official journal of the Academy of Surgical Research
TITLE: A comparison of a cyanoacrylate [corrected] glue (Glubran) vs. fibrin sealant (Tisseel) in experimental models of partial pulmonary resection and lung incision [corrected] in rabbits.
DOI: 10.3109/08941930903469383 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Bronchopleural fistulas (BPF) and air leaks (AL) present major complications after pulmonary resection. Various tissue sealants have been proposed for their prevention, e.g., fibrin sealant (FS) and cyanoacrylate glues (CA). Contrary to the safety record of FS, substantial side effects such as foreign body reaction and impaired tissue integration have been reported for CA. This study compares the sealing efficacy and biocompatibility as well as side effects of FS and CA in experimental partial pulmonary resection and lung incision in rabbits.
METHODS: 26 New Zealand white rabbits (3 kg) were randomized to one of the three groups: partial pulmonary resection (A, acute model; n = 7 FS/ 7CA), lung incision [2 (B; n = 3 FS/ 3 CA)], and 14-day observation period (C; n = 3 FS/ 3 CA). In all groups (A, B, and C), FS was considered as control and CA as treatment. Surgery was carried out in general anaesthesia and mechanical ventilation. For partial lung resection a median thoracotomy was performed and the apex of the left median lobe was resected and the parenchymal surface covered with 0.09 ml of FS and CA. The thoracic cavity was filled with ringer solution after 5 minutes. The inspiratory minute volume (IMV) was increased by 0.02 l after every 4th inspiration. In groups B and C, a left lateral thoracotomy was performed in the 4th intercostal space and the left median lobe was incised with a scalpel. The incision was covered with 0.5 ml of FS or CA. At autopsy (B and C) the operation site was assessed macroscopically. Histology was performed in all animals.
RESULTS: In terms of sealing purposes, FS and CA yielded comparable results in all groups. CA elicited a substantial increase of tissue temperature in the acute phase immediately after application (A). After 14 days CA residues were found, whereas FS was completely degraded. Histology showed a pronounced inflammatory response to CA but not to FS. We conclude that although the effect of airtight sealing was equally satisfying, our results emphasize that FS is preferable to CA for the prevention of BPF and AL due to superior biocompatibility and degradability. Longterm effects of CA residues on pulmonary tissue require further experimental testing.

### PMID 22553582 (2010) — International journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Comparison of fibrin glue and suture technique in pterygium surgery performed with limbal autograft.
DOI: 10.3980/j.issn.2222-3959.2010.04.09 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: To compare the efficiency and safety of fibrin glue to suture technique in pterygium surgery performed with limbal autograft.
METHODS: A prospective randomised clinical trial was carried out in 58 eyes of 58 patients operated for primary nasal pterygium. Autologous conjunctival graft taken from the superotemporal limbus was used to cover the sclera after pterygium excision. In 29 eyes, the transplant was attached to the sclera with a fibrin tissue adhesive (Beriplast P) and in 29 eyes with 8-0 Virgin silk sutures. The Mann-Whitney U test was used for statistical analysis. Postoperative patient discomfort (pain, stinging, watering) and biomicroscopic findings (hyperemia, edema) were graded. Patients were followed up at least for six months.
RESULTS: Subconjunctival hemorrhage occured under the graft in one patient in group 1. In seven cases of group 2, sutures were removed at the 15(th) day because of granulomatous tissue reaction. Patient symptoms were significantly less and biomicroscopic findings were better in group 1. Pterygium recurrence was seen in one case of group 1, and 2 cases of group 2. Average surgery cost was higher (P&lt;0.05) and surgery time was shorter (P&lt;0.05) in fibrin group.
CONCLUSION: Using fibrin glue for graft fixation in pterygium surgery causes significantly less postoperative pain and shortens surgery time significantly.

### PMID 19900744 (2010) — European journal of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive biology
TITLE: Hydrogel protection: a novel approach to reduce bowel inflammation in experimental gastroschisis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2009.10.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: In gastroschisis there is herniation of the fetal bowel into the amniotic cavity that results in severe intestinal dysfunction. In order to reduce bowel exposure to amniotic fluid we used a hydrogel of N-isopropylacrylamide copolymerized with acrylic acid (P(NIPAAm-co-AAc)) to coat the herniated bowel through the use of a fibrin adhesive (Beriplast).
STUDY DESIGN: Gastroschisis was created in fetuses of 31 pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats by evisceration of the bowel through a right paramedian incision in the abdominal wall on day 18.5 of pregnancy. The fetuses were separated in four groups of 12 fetuses: control (C), gastroschisis (G), gastroschisis+fibrin adhesive (GA) and gastroschisis+fibrin adhesive+dry hydrogel (GAH). Animals were harvested at day 21.5 of pregnancy and the hydrogel was removed. Fetuses and bowels were weighed and morphometric analysis was performed. Isoelectric focusing of the amniotic fluid determined its electrical charge. We evaluated the hydrogel swelling ratio (Q) in the amniotic fluid. Histological analysis and scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) of the bowel and hydrogel were performed. Our primary outcome was bowel intactness after hydrogel removal and our secondary outcome was the effectiveness of the hydrogel in protecting the bowel against amniotic fluid and its components. Differences among the groups were tested by the ANOVA and Tukey-Kramer post-test method and the statistical significance accepted was for p values &lt;0.05.
RESULTS: The mass of swollen hydrogel was 34 times the mass of dry hydrogel. Isoelectric focusing of the amniotic fluid showed that most of its proteins are negatively charged as the hydrogel. SEM showed that removal of the hydrogel did not damage bowel serosa. Bowel weight, diameter and wall thickness were similar between groups C and GAH but bowel diameter and wall thickness was significantly reduced in C and GAH compared to G and GA (p&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSION: The P(NIPAAm-co-AAc) hydrogel does not harm the bowel and provides a safe effective protection with reduction of bowel damage in gastroschisis.

### PMID 20387581 (2010) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Operative neurosurgery: personal view and historical backgrounds. 6. Positioning, instruments].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Important points of positioning and instruments at the time of performing microneurosurgery according to the traditional Zuerich school style were presented based on the experience of ca. 1,000 surgeries/year for around 13.5 years. Most of the instruments and equipment had been taken over from the time of Prof. Ya&#x15f;argil. Positioning: Three positions, supine, knee-elbow and siting position were almost all the positions, which we have used and special mention was directed to the sitting position. Around 1/3 of our surgeries were done in the sitting position. Its indication includes lesions not only in the posterior fossa, but in the parieto-occipital region and in the cervico-thoracal region down to the Th5. Good fixation of the head with Mayfield 3-pin-fixation apparatus with the use of one pin mostly around the medial root of the mastoid process (thickness of the bone and small amount of soft tissue) is of cardinal importance and prevention of excessive flexion (with the one-finger breadth between the chin and its underlying neck), so that strangulation of the tracheal tube and the jugular venous system can be avoided and also the below mentioned jugular compression maneuver can be done effectively. Basic knowledge of prevention of air embolism was pointed out: knowledge of usual anatomical entrance sites of the air (emissary veins, diploic veins, veins entering into the venous sinuses, venous plexus around the craniocervical junction etc.), detection of the air entrance sites by jugular compression and their sealing with tissue adhesives Tissucol. Endotidal CO2 value should be above 4.0 kPk. Importance of reclination of the position in case of further falling down of the CO2 value was emphasized. Special mention was made about the patent foramen ovale as a risk of air embolism. Advantages of the sitting position in the performance of supracerebellar infratentorial/transtentorial SCIT/SCTT approach and transvertebralis dural ring approach TVDRA were emphasized and the use of linear incision was stressed at the time of performance of all these surgeries including the posterior circulation revascularization, occipital artery-posterior cerebral artery/superior cerebellar artery OA-PCA/SCA bypass and occipital artery-posterior inferior cerebellar artery OA-PICA bypass. As for the operating microscope, importance of the eyepiece-lens assembly with mouthpiece was emphasized. Appropriate selection of this system enables surgery of long duration in a comfortable and non-tiring condition in terms of the arm length of the surgeon and his immediate reaction especially at the time of intraoperative premature rupture of an aneurysm or of minute delicate focusing at the time of microvascular suturing without withdrawal of one or both hands from the operative field for handling the operating microscope. An arm rest enables secure, effective, precise and tireless performance of microsurgery in every operating position, so that the use of height an adjustable oil pressure driven arm rest was presented along with a simply height adjustable and easily movable chair. As for the bipolar coagulator pincette, the followings were discussed: more than three different lengths of byonett forceps, each of three different tip-sizes, with isolated tips, dosis and method of coagulation. Practically no need of monopolar coagulation was pointed out. Suction tube also should have different length and size according to the depth and situations. Its vacuum power should be regulated also in accordance with changing situation in every stage of surgery. The vacuum power is regulated at surgeon's request by scrub nurses or circulating nurses, so that the surgeon can concentrate only on the precise maneuver of the tip of the suction tube. For the same reason, foot pedals for the bipolar coagulator, drilling and trepanation should be stepped by other than the surgeon, so that he can concentrate on the tip the of instrument for precise maneuvering. As tissue destruction apparatus, we prefer to use CUSA to laser, as the former enables preservation of blood vessels at the time of tissue destruction and suction by appropriate power application. Besides these, the followings items were discussed: scissors (blunt tips), Lyla retractor (variously tapered tips and fixation or holding at the other peripheral end), drilling (turning direction adjustable, cutting and diamond burr) etc.

### PMID 19877186 (2010) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Tissue-engineered allograft tracheal cartilage using fibrin/hyaluronan composite gel and its in vivo implantation.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.20652 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Treatment and management of tracheal defects remain challenging in head and neck surgery. Various reconstruction techniques have been used, with no consensus on the best approach. The purpose of this study was to explore a novel strategy to fabricate tissue-engineered trachea by using fibrin/hyaluronic acid (HA) composite gel and evaluate the feasibility of creating tracheal cartilage.
STUDY DESIGN: A preliminary animal experiment.
METHODS: Chondrocytes from rabbit cartilage were expanded and seeded into a culture dish at high density to form mechanically stable allograft tracheal cartilage using fibrin/HA composite gel. After a longitudinal cervical skin incision, the trachea was exposed and a rectangular defect (1 x 0.5 cm) was created on the cervical trachea by scalpel on six rabbits. Tissue-engineered cartilage using fibrin/HA composite was trimmed and fixed to defect boundaries with Tissucol (Baxter International, Deerfield, IL). Postoperatively, the site was evaluated endoscopically, histologically, radiologically, and functionally.
RESULTS: Postoperatively, rigid telescopic examination showed that the implanted scaffolds in all cases were completely covered with regenerated mucosa without granulation or stenosis. Histologic data showed ciliated epithelium regenerated at the operated site from 2 months postoperatively. Ciliary beat frequency of ciliated epithelium on implants was very similar to normal respiratory mucosa. Computed tomography images revealed fine luminal contour of the regenerated site. However, allograft cartilage implanted was found to be partially preserved on the postoperative specimen.
CONCLUSIONS: The tracheal luminal contour and functional epithelial regeneration without graft rejection and inflammation were observed after repair of a tracheal resection using allogeneic implants with chondrocytes cultured with fibrin/HA.

### PMID 20730858 (2010) — The British journal of surgery
TITLE: Randomized clinical trial of tranexamic acid-free fibrin sealant during vascular surgical procedures.
DOI: 10.1002/bjs.7235 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the safety and haemostatic effectiveness of a fibrin sealant (EVICEL(&#x2122;) Fibrin Sealant (Human)) during vascular surgery.
METHODS: This prospective randomized controlled trial compared the haemostatic effectiveness of fibrin sealant (75 patients) or manual compression (72) in polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) arterial anastomoses. The primary endpoint was the absence of bleeding at the anastomosis at 4 min after randomization. Secondary endpoints included haemostasis at 7 and 10 min, treatment failures and the incidence of complications potentially related to bleeding. Adverse events were recorded.
RESULTS: A higher percentage of patients who received fibrin sealant versus manual compression achieved haemostasis at 4 min (85 versus 39 per cent respectively; odds ratio 11&#xb7;34, 95 per cent confidence interval 4&#xb7;67 to 27&#xb7;52; P &lt; 0&#xb7;001). Similarly, a higher percentage of patients who received fibrin sealant achieved haemostasis at 7 and 10 min (both P &lt; 0&#xb7;001). The incidence of treatment failure was lower in the fibrin sealant group (P &lt; 0&#xb7;001). The rate of complications potentially related to bleeding was similar (P = 0&#xb7;426). Some 64 per cent of patients who received fibrin sealant experienced at least one adverse event, compared with 71 per cent who received manual compression.
CONCLUSION: This fibrin sealant was safe, and significantly shortened the time to haemostasis in vascular procedures using PTFE.
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT00154141 (http://www.clinicaltrials.gov).

### PMID 20664302 (2010) — Pediatric neurosurgery
TITLE: Foreign body granuloma mimicking upper cervical spinal mass after dural repair with Tachocomb [correction of Tachocomp]: a case report.
DOI: 10.1159/000319397 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The common indications of dura mater repair are injuries caused by trauma, neoplasms, surgical complications and congenital spinal dysraphism such as meningomyelocele or encephalocele. Dural grafting is done to recreate the dural barrier and avoid the possible postoperative complications. Autografts derived from periosteum, fascia, muscle and fat. The disadvantages of autografts are their small size and esthetic complaints. To overcome the disadvantages synthetic materials might be used in duroplasty. Here we present a 3-year-old girl who developed muscle weakness in the upper and lower extremities caused by foreign body granuloma mimicking malignancy in the cervical spinal cord after dural repair done via Tachocomb.

### PMID 20386279 (2010) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Comparison between TachoComb and TachoSil for surgical hemostasis in arterial bleeding: an animal experimental study.
DOI: 10.1097/TA.0b013e3181b1388c | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: TachoComb has frequently been used for the treatment of both venous and arterial bleeding. However, anaphylactic reactions have been reported after repeated use of hemostatic agents containing aprotinin such as TachoComb. Because aprotinin is also associated with risk of renal failure, manufacturing of a new product--TachoSil--which lacks aprotinin seems a logic evolvement. Furthermore, thrombin on the TachoSil material has been changed from bovine in TachoComb to human origin. These changes in the biochemical composition could lead to changes in the hemostatic performance. Therefore, we aimed to disclose any difference in hemostatic efficacy of the two products.
METHODS: Twelve 70-kg pigs had controlled insults to the thoracic aorta with and without heparin administration. The iatrogenic lesion was randomly covered with either TachoComb or TachoSil and the time to hemostasis was measured.
RESULTS: Time to hemostasis when using TachoSil compared with TachoComb was increased 14% (-13% to 48%) with heparin and 10% (-26% to 66%) without heparin (mean +/- 95% confidence interval; p &gt; 0.05 in both). Time to hemostasis with heparin administration increased significantly in both treatments: TachoComb 80% (26%-156%) (p = 0.001) and TachoSil 75% (18%-158%) (p = 0.005).
CONCLUSION: We found neither statistical nor clinical evidence that TachoComb should have better hemostatic properties than does TachoSil in arterial bleeding. Both TachoSil and TachoComb can be used with heparin administration, but significant prolongation of the time to hemostasis is to be expected for both products. TachoSil should be preferred to TachoComb due to the potential lower risk of side effects when using the former.

### PMID 20399053 (2010) — Journal des maladies vasculaires
TITLE: [Giant venous malformation of the tongue: the value of Surgiflo].
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmv.2010.03.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cavernous hemangiomas are rare congenital venous malformations having propensity for the head and neck. These venous malformations, especially the large and intraoral ones, may cause severe symptoms requiring aggressive treatment. Today, the main treatment is based on sclerotherapy, associated or no with surgery. We report on a patient presenting an enormous venous malformation of the face and tongue, which was treated successfully in our department by embolization, sclerotherapy and maxillo-facial surgery, with a special focus on Surgiflo in our technique.

### PMID 20212423 (2010) — Minerva chirurgica
TITLE: Use of FloSeal in the endovascular treatment of voluminous aneurysm of a lower gluteus artery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We suggest an alternative endovascular treatment for gluteal artery aneurysm using Floseal a matrix of bovine gel and thrombin component. A 70-year-old woman, presented with claudicatio of the lower left limb after 150 m walking and pain at the sciatic nerve irradiation. A pulsating and painful mass was present in the lower gluteal region. No history for previous trauma, nor for orthopedic surgery. The suspect of aneurysm of the left gluteal artery was confirmed by Color Doppler Ultrasound and by computed tomography (CT) showing a fusiform aneurysm in the lower gluteus artery. In order to rule out infective cause, blood coltures were taken. Compression of the sciatic nerve was confirmed by electromyography study. Patient was treated by endovascular treatment. We performed angiography, with a selective study of the lower left gluteus artery, and embolization of the aneurysm by an injection of FloSeal (hemostatic) and fibered platinum coil. At the discharge, we observed absence of pulsation in gluteus region and the complete resolution of clinical symptom. The Color Doppler Ultrasound scan showed a complete occlusion of the aneurysm. This case appears quite peculiar, for the absence of any pelvic trauma, orthopedic operations or previous penetrating lesions, responsible of vascular lesions as reported in literature. The large aneurysm dimensions made the embolization procedure quite difficult, and brought us to use FloSeal. The treatment we proposed may be useful in the treatment of peripheral aneurysms of great dimension, and may be an alternative to the more traditional ones.

### PMID 20963698 (2010) — Turkish neurosurgery
TITLE: Radiological and histopathological comparison of microporous polysaccharide hemospheres and oxidized regenerated cellulose in the rabbit brain: a study of efficacy and safety.
DOI: 10.5137/1019-5149.JTN.3300-10.2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: Topical hemostatic agents are widely used in brain surgery but they have some disadvantages such as foreign body reaction, being a focus for infection and causing artifacts in radiological examinations. The purpose of this study is to compare the effectiveness and safety of microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPH) with a well known agent, oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC), histopathologically and radiologically.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Standard brain lesions (4x1mm) were created in 24 hemispheres in 12 New-Zealand rabbits. Animals were divided into three groups; control, ORC and MPH. Twenty-four hours later, all rabbits magnetic resonance brain imaging. After imaging, the animals were sacrificed and the brains were removed for histopathological analysis.
RESULTS: Histopathological analysis showed no significant difference between the groups. Radiological examination showed no significant difference between the MPH and ORC groups in terms of edema but the edema in control group was significantly prominent than MPH and ORC groups (p &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSION: A new agent (MPH) provides safe and effective hemostasis in the brain in this study. The most important advantage of microporous polysaccharide hemospheres is their rapid clearance from the surgical field and therefore having the potential of causing less imaging artifacts.

### PMID 20823648 (2010) — Internal medicine (Tokyo, Japan)
TITLE: Foreign body granulomatous change from absorbable gelatin sponge and microcoil embolization after a guidewire-induced perforation in the distal coronary artery.
DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.49.3750 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report an autopsy case of treatment by absorbable gelatin sponge and microcoil embolization after perforation of the distal coronary artery by guidewire. Histological examination revealed a foreign body granuloma in the coronary artery with embolization. Foreign body reaction to absorbable gelatin sponge seemed to be stronger than that to the microcoil.

### PMID 20014298 (2010) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
TITLE: Micro and nano-scale in vitro 3D culture system for cardiac stem cells.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.32676 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Despite the success to prevent or limit cardiovascular diseases, the restoration of the function of a damaged heart remains a formidable challenge. Cardiac stem cells (CSCs), with the capacity to differentiate into cardiomyocytes, hold great potential as a source of cells for regenerative medicine. A major challenge facing the clinical application of differentiated CSCs, however, is theability to generate sufficient numbers of cells with the desired phenotype. We previously established cell lines of CSCs using a c-kit antibody from adult rat hearts for use in regenerative medicine. C-kit -positive cardiac cells are well recognized as CSCs and have the potential to differentiate into cardiomyocytes. Here, before implant these cells in vivo, we first developed three-dimensional culture system (3D) using micro- and nano-scaled material. Sheets of poly(glycolic acid) (PGA) were fabricated by electrospinning. Composites of collagen-PGA were prepared that contained 0, 1.5, 3 or 6 mg of electrospun PGA nanofibers. The nanofibers were added as a sheet that formed a layer within the collagen sponge. The sponges were freeze-dried and then dehydrothermally crosslinked. A scanning electron microscopy (SEM)-based analysis of the surface of the sponges demonstrated a uniform collagenous structure regardless of the amount of PGA nanofibres included. The PGA nanofibers significantly enhanced the compressive strength of the collagen sponge. More CSCs attached to the collagen sponge incorporating 6 mg of PGA nanofibers than the sponge without PGA nanofibers. The attachment and proliferation of CSCs in the 3D culture was enhanced by incubation in a bioreactor perfusion system compared with 3D static and two-dimensional (2D; i.e. tissue culture plates) culture systems. The use of micro- and nano-scale materials in the fabrication of composites together with a 3D culture system is a very promising way to promote the culture of stem cells. (c) 2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res, 2010.

### PMID 21140353 (2010) — The International journal of artificial organs
TITLE: Study of mechanical properties of engineered cartilage in an in vivo culture for design of a biodegradable scaffold.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: An engineered trachea with an absorbable scaffold should be used to augment the repair of a stenotic tracheal section in infants and children because this type of engineered airway structure can grow as the child grows. Our strategy for relief of tracheal stenosis is tracheoplasty by engineered cartilage implantation in accordance with the concept of costal cartilage grafting to enlarge the lumen. This study investigated the mechanical properties of regenerative cartilage with a biodegradable scaffold, Neoveil&#xae;, to aid in design of a composite scaffold that maintained semi-rigid properties until cartilage could be generated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: New Zealand White rabbit (n=3) chondrocytes were isolated from auricular cartilage with collagenase type 2 digestion. Then 10x10(6)/cm3 chondrocytes in atelocollagen solution were seeded onto polyglycolic acid (PGA) mesh. A total of 36 constructs, 12 from each rabbit, were implanted into athymic mice (3 constructs/mouse). Constructs were retrieved after 8 weeks and evaluated by measurements of mechanical and biochemical properties as well as histological examination. Thirty-six PGA mesh sheets of the same size but without cells were implanted in control mice.
RESULTS: After 6 weeks of implantation, staining of sections with Safranin O revealed cartilage accumulation. Glycosaminoglycan was gradually produced from chondrocytes in the engineered constructs, correlating with the duration of implantation. Mechanical parameters had the same values as those for rabbit tracheal cartilage 8 weeks after implantation.
CONCLUSIONS: Biodegradable Neoveil&#xae; had good biocompatibility and was able to support extracellular matrix formation in engineered cartilage in an animal model.

### PMID 21073754 (2010) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Demonstration of the histopathological and immunohistochemical effects of a novel hemostatic agent, Ankaferd Blood Stopper, on vascular tissue in a rat aortic bleeding model.
DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-5-110 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Ankaferd Blood Stopper&#xae; (ABS) is a folkloric medicinal plant extract used as a hemostatic agent in traditional Turkish medicine. This experimental study investigated the histopathological and immunohistochemical effects of ABS on vascular tissue in a rat model of aortic bleeding.
METHODS: Four groups of 11 Wistar albino rats were used. The abdominal aortas of the rats were wounded; an ABS-soaked tampon was applied to rats in Groups 1 and 3, and a plain gauze tampon was applied to rats in Groups 2 and 4 until the bleeding stopped. The bleeding time was recorded. Immediately following sacrificing, the arteriotomy sites from Groups 1 and 2 were removed. The abdominal incisions in Groups 3 and 4 were closed following hemostasis. On Day 7 of the study, Group 3 and 4 rats were sacrificed and the abdominal aorta arteriotomy sites were removed for histopathological and immunohistochemical evaluation.
RESULTS: The mean bleeding time in 15 animals in Groups 2 and 4 was 4.9 &#xb1; 0.6 s, and in 22 animals in Groups 1 and 3 was 3.1 &#xb1; 0.6 s. Distal aortic occlusion was not observed on either Day 1 or 7 in any group. Significantly more widespread and dense endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) staining was observed in Group 1 animals than Group 2. On Days 1 and 7 after application of ABS, histopathological changes, consisting of necrosis, inflammation, and endothelial cell loss, in the rat abdominal aortas did not differ between Groups 1 and 2. The basophilic discoloration in the ABS group on the operation day was a result of a foreign body reaction and hemosiderin-loaded histiocyte accumulation, which occurred on Day 7.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, hemostasis was successfully achieved with ABS in rat abdominal aortas. No histopathological change was found in the rat abdominal aortas between the ABS and control groups on Days 1 and 7. Further studies on the long-term effects of foreign body reactions and hemosiderin-loaded histiocyte accumulation are required.

### PMID 21068612 (2010) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Clot-inducing minerals versus plasma protein dressing for topical treatment of external bleeding in the presence of coagulopathy.
DOI: 10.1097/TA.0b013e3181fa0f21 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Previous studies identified WoundStat (WS, smectite) and Combat Gauze (CG, kaolin-coated gauze) as the most effective available agents for controlling arterial bleeding with potential utility in casualty care. Tissue sealant properties of WS suggested its potential advantage over clot-promoting CG for treating coagulopathic bleeding. This study compared the efficacy of CG and WS with a fibrinogen-based (FAST) dressing to control bleeding in coagulopathic animals.
METHODS: Coagulopathy was induced in pigs (n = 55, 35 kg) by &#x223c;50% isovolemic hemodilution and hypothermia (core temperature, 33&#xb0;C &#xb1; 0.5&#xb0;C). A 6-mm arteriotomy was made in the femoral artery and free bleeding allowed for 30 seconds. A test agent (n = 13-15 per group) or control product (gauze, GZ, n = 12) was applied to the wounds and compressed with a Kerlix gauze for 2 minutes. Fluid resuscitation was given, titrated to a mean arterial pressure of 65 mm Hg. Animals were observed for 180 minutes or until death. Angiography using the computed tomography method was performed on survivors, and local tissues were collected for histology.
RESULTS: No differences were seen in baseline measures. Coagulopathy, confirmed by a 31% increase in prothrombin time and a 28% reduction in clotting strength (maximum amplitude, thrombelastography assay), was similar in all groups before injury. The average pretreatment blood loss was 11.9 mL/kg &#xb1; 0.4 mL/kg with no difference among groups. Posttreatment blood loss, however, was significantly different (p = 0.015) ranging from 18.2 mL/kg &#xb1; 8.8 mL/kg (FAST) to 63.3 mL/kg &#xb1; 10.2 mL/kg (GZ controls). Stable hemostasis was achieved in 10 of 13 (FAST), 5 of 15 (CG), 2 of 15 (WS), and 1 of 12 (GZ) animals in each group, resulting in significantly different survival rates (8-77%; p = 0.001). The average survival times were 145 (FAST), 119 (CG), 75 (WS), and 74 (GZ) minutes for different groups (p &lt; 0.002). The outcomes with the FAST dressing were significantly better than with WS or GZ in this coagulopathic bleeding model. Essentially, no difference was found between WS and GZ control. Computed tomography images showed limited blood flow only through the vessels treated with FAST dressings. Histologic observations of the vessels indicated minimal damage with FAST and CG and greater injury with WS with some residues present on the tissues.
CONCLUSION: The tissue sealant property of WS is apparently mediated by clot formation in the wound; therefore, it was ineffective under coagulopathic conditions. CG was partially effective in maintaining blood pressure up to 1 hour after application. FAST dressing showed the highest efficacy because of the exogenous delivery of concentrated fibrinogen and thrombin to the wound, which bypasses coagulopathy and secures hemostasis.

### PMID 20980172 (2010) — Journal of the American College of Surgeons
TITLE: Persistence of antibodies to the topical hemostat bovine thrombin.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2010.07.023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Immunoassays that detect antibovine thrombin product antibodies are not widely available. However, knowing whether these antibodies are present preoperatively would be useful because re-exposure to bovine thrombin-containing products is contraindicated in patients with pre-existing antiproduct antibodies due to the risk of developing immune-mediated coagulopathies. In these exploratory analyses, we characterized one aspect of immune sensitization, the persistence of circulating antibodies after exposure to bovine thrombin product.
STUDY DESIGN: Elapsed time since a historical surgical procedure with documented or highly likely use of bovine thrombin product was determined for 204 patients enrolled in a recently completed trial. After study completion, baseline samples were assayed for antibovine thrombin product antibodies using validated immunoassays. Antibody data were sorted by time elapsed since the historical procedure. The proportion of patients with antibovine thrombin product antibodies and 95% confidence interval (CI) were determined for each 1-year period, providing an estimate for antibody persistence.
RESULTS: Antibovine thrombin product antibodies were detected in 20.7% of patients (23 of 111; 95% CI 14.2%, 29.2%) with &#x2264;1 year since the historical surgical procedure; 6.8% of patients (3 of 44; 95% CI 1.68%, 18.9%) with 1 to &lt;2 years; 16.1% of patients (5 of 31; 95% CI 6.62%, 33.1%) with 2 to &lt;3 years; and 5.6% of patients (1 of 18; 95% CI 0.00%, 27.6%) with &#x2265;3 years since the historical procedure.
CONCLUSIONS: The proportion of patients with antibovine thrombin product antibodies ranged from 5.6% to 20.7% across the multiyear postoperative window. Clinicians should be aware that antibodies to bovine thrombin products may persist for years after exposure.

### PMID 20979176 (2010) — Pediatric blood &amp; cancer
TITLE: Development of antibodies to human thrombin and factor V in a pediatric patient exposed to topical bovine thrombin.
DOI: 10.1002/pbc.22699 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Bovine topical thrombin is commonly used for local hemostasis in pediatric surgery. Acquired inhibitors to coagulation factors, particularly to factor V and bovine thrombin, have been infrequently reported in the pediatric population. We report a 3-year-old male who developed a coagulopathy and clinical bleeding after cardiothoracic surgery, during which bovine topical thrombin was used for local hemostasis. Laboratory tests revealed elevated prothrombin, partial thromboplastin, and thrombin times, and a low factor V activity level. He was found to have both human-thrombin and factor V inhibitors, among the first reported cases of these combined inhibitors secondary to bovine topical thrombin. He was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin and steroids with a rapid and durable response.

### PMID 20699260 (2010) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Cross-reactivity of rabbit anti-bovine prothrombin/thrombin IgGs with bovine factor V/Va-related antigens.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029610375423 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The purpose of this study was to determine whether rabbit anti-bovine prothrombin/thrombin immunoglobulin Gs (IgGs) would cross-react with bovine factor V/Va-related antigens. Bovine prothrombin, crude thrombin, as well as 2 purified versions of thrombin, that is, thrombin 4A (the previous version of Thrombin-JMI marketed prior to 2008) and 4B (the currently marketed version of Thrombin-JMI), were administrated to individual groups of rabbits on days 0, 21, 42, 91, 123, and 151 using standard immunologic methods. Blood was drawn from each rabbit on days 30, 50, 105, 137, and 165 and the pooled antisera from individual groups were purified to obtain the IgGs using protein G affinity columns. By probing bovine factor V/Va samples, the possible cross-reactivity of each IgG collected at different time points (from day 30 to day 165) was explored using Western blotting techniques. The results indicated that rabbit anti-bovine prothrombin and crude thrombin IgGs could cross-react strongly with bovine factor V/Va in an immunization time-dependent manner. However, antibodies generated in thrombin 4A-treated rabbits presented much weaker cross-reactivity with bovine factor V/Va. Furthermore, no cross-reactivity with bovine factor V/Va-related antigens was observed when the anti-bovine thrombin 4B IgG collected at any time point was used. The results suggest that thrombin 4B preparation contains the least bovine factor V/Va contaminants among the bovine prothrombin/thrombin preparations studied and the amount of bovine factor V/Va contaminants in bovine thrombin 4B is too small to elicit the generation of antibodies against bovine factor V/Va in rabbits.

### PMID 20670435 (2010) — Journal of medical case reports
TITLE: Acquired hemophilia as the cause of life-threatening hemorrhage in a 94-year-old man: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/1752-1947-4-231 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Acquired factor VIII deficiency is a rare entity that can lead to severe and life-threatening bleeding. We describe a case of severe bleeding from the tongue secondary to acquired hemophilia and discuss treatment options, including aminocaproic acid and recombinant factor VIII, which have not been widely reported in the literature for the management of such patients.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 94-year-old Caucasian man presented to our institution with diffuse bruising and extensive bleeding from the tongue secondary to mechanical trauma. He had no prior history of bleeding and his medical history was unremarkable except for dementia and hypertension. Coagulation studies revealed a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time and a mixing study was consistent with the presence of an inhibitor. Quantitative assays revealed a reduced level of factor VIII activity (1%) and the presence of a factor VIII inhibitor, measured at seven Bethesda units, in the serum. Oral prednisone therapy (60mg/day) was given. He also received intravenous aminocaproic acid and human concentrate of factor VIII (Humate-P) and topical anti-thrombolytic agents (100 units of topical thrombin cream). His hospital course was prolonged because of persistent bleeding and the development of profuse melena. He required eight units of packed red blood cells for transfusion. Hospitalization was also complicated by bradycardia of unclear etiology, which started after infusion of aminocaproic acid. His activated partial thromboplastin time gradually normalized. He was discharged to a rehabilitation facility three weeks later with improving symptoms, stable hematocrit and resolving bruises.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians should suspect a diagnosis of acquired hemophilia in older patients with unexplained persistent and profound bleeding from uncommon soft tissues, including the tongue. Use of factor VIII (Humate-P) and aminocaproic acid can be useful in this coagulopathy but clinicians should be aware of possible life-threatening side effects in older patients, including bradycardia.

### PMID 20632245 (2010) — Seminars in thrombosis and hemostasis
TITLE: Topical recombinant human thrombin in surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1255441 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: The achievement of hemostasis is paramount, and good operative practice is crucial to all surgical procedures. Intraoperative hemostasis is usually achieved through suture ligation for larger vessels and electrocautery of smaller vessels; certain cases, however, are not amenable to these techniques, especially when there is diffuse raw surface bleeding. When operative hemorrhage exists despite appropriate preventive actions and good surgical technique, additional methods for controlling intra- and perioperative hemorrhage should be considered, and may include the use of topical thrombin. Recombinant human thrombin (rhThrombin) was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2008, with the expectation of overcoming the disadvantages of previously available topical thrombin preparations. The efficacy of rhThrombin has been demonstrated in three randomized controlled trials and found to be effective for achieving hemostasis within 10 minutes of administration for mild to moderate diffuse raw surface bleeding. rhThrombin is equally as effective as bovine thrombin, with a significantly lower risk of immunogenicity. Similar economic parameters, efficacy, and safety profiles between rhThrombin and other available thrombin preparations may support its use over other bovine- and plasma-derived human thrombin products and carry limited to no risk of viral transmission or development of antithrombin antibodies.

### PMID 20547555 (2010) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Cross-reactivity of rabbit anti-bovine thrombin IgGs with human alpha-thrombin and a recombinant version of human thrombin (Recothrom).
DOI: 10.1177/1076029610363587 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: It has been reported that patients exposed to topical bovine thrombin preparations may develop antibodies against bovine thrombin, factr V or various other proteins found in these preparations. Such antibodies can cross-react with human endogenous coagulation proteins and may lead to alterations in the coagulation laboratory parameters, hypersensitivity reactions, and severe bleeding or thrombosis. The underlying mechanisms for the coagulopathy are not fully understood yet. To better understand the cross-reactivity of anti-bovine thrombin antibodies with human corresponding coagulation proteins, bovine crude thrombin, and its purified versions, thrombin 4A (the old version of Thrombin-JMI before year 2008) and thrombin 4B (the current version of Thrombin-JMI on market), were used to generate relevant anti-bovine thrombin immunoglobulin G (IgGs) in rabbits. Using Western blotting, the cross-reactivity of each IgG with human alpha-thrombin and a recombinant version of human thrombin (Recothrom) was investigated. The results indicated that no cross-reactivity with either human alpha-thrombin or Recothrom was observed with both anti-bovine crude thrombin IgGs and thrombin 4B IgGs. However, anti-bovine thrombin 4A IgGs showed apparent cross-reactivity with human alpha-thrombin and Recothrom in a protein amount-dependent manner. Furthermore, the results revealed that the cross-reactivity of anti-bovine thrombin 4A IgGs with human alpha-thrombin and Recothrom was immunization time-dependent. The minimum concentration of 4A IgG required to exhibit cross-reactivity with human alpha-thrombin and Recothrom varied considerably among individual rabbits. These results indicate that rabbit anti-bovine thrombin IgGs can cross-react with human alpha-thrombin and Recothrom, suggesting that human antibodies against bovine thrombin may also cross-react with human recombinant thrombin. Thus, the patients who were previously exposed to bovine thrombin may also develop antibodies which can cross-react with human recombinant thrombin.

### PMID 20375277 (2010) — American journal of physiology. Cell physiology
TITLE: Low anticoagulant heparin targets multiple sites of inflammation, suppresses heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, and inhibits interaction of RAGE with its ligands.
DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00009.2010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017426">Clinical Trial, Phase I, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: While heparin has been used almost exclusively as a blood anticoagulant, important literature demonstrates that it also has broad anti-inflammatory activity. Herein, using low anti-coagulant 2-O,3-O-desulfated heparin (ODSH), we demonstrate that most of the anti-inflammatory pharmacology of heparin is unrelated to anticoagulant activity. ODSH has low affinity for anti-thrombin III, low anti-Xa, and anti-IIa anticoagulant activities and does not activate Hageman factor (factor XII). Unlike heparin, ODSH does not interact with heparin-platelet factor-4 antibodies present in patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and even suppresses platelet activation in the presence of activating concentrations of heparin. Like heparin, ODSH inhibits complement activation, binding to the leukocyte adhesion molecule P-selectin, and the leukocyte cationic granular proteins azurocidin, human leukocyte elastase, and cathepsin G. In addition, ODSH and heparin disrupt Mac-1 (CD11b/CD18)-mediated leukocyte adhesion to the receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE) and inhibit ligation of RAGE by its many proinflammatory ligands, including the advanced glycation end-product carboxymethyl lysine-bovine serum albumin, the nuclear protein high mobility group box protein-1 (HMGB-1), and S100 calgranulins. In mice, ODSH is more effective than heparin in reducing selectin-mediated lung metastasis from melanoma and inhibits RAGE-mediated airway inflammation from intratracheal HMGB-1. In humans, 50% inhibitory concentrations of ODSH for these anti-inflammatory activities can be achieved in the blood without anticoagulation. These results demonstrate that the anticoagulant activity of heparin is distinct from its anti-inflammatory actions and indicate that 2-O and 3-O sulfate groups can be removed to reduce anticoagulant activity of heparin without impairing its anti-inflammatory pharmacology.

### PMID 20182366 (2010) — Journal of burn care &amp; research : official publication of the American Burn Association
TITLE: Acquired factor V deficiency associated with exposure to bovine thrombin in a burn patient.
DOI: 10.1097/BCR.0b013e3181d0f5b4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic products containing thrombin are commonly used in burn surgery to facilitate focal hemostasis and graft adherence. Until recently, thrombin was available only from a bovine source, which has been documented to produce antibodies to endogenous clotting factors and to induce coagulation defects and severe bleeding complications. This report documents the first case of factor V deficiency and profound coagulopathy in a burn patient after intraoperative exposure to bovine thrombin. A 38-year-old woman was admitted after a 75% total body surface area burn. The patient underwent repeated excision and grafting during which an epinephrine solution that contained bovine thrombin was used to facilitate hemostasis. During the fourth and subsequent operative procedures, the patient developed profound coagulopathy as evidenced by excessive bleeding and abnormal laboratory coagulation parameters, requiring the administration of supplemental clotting factors through fresh frozen plasma and cryoprecipitate. Hematology work-up revealed a factor V deficiency. Subsequent procedures in which bovine thrombin was avoided were uneventful. The use of topical bovine thrombin in patients who have been previously exposed results in an increased risk of perioperative coagulopathy and clinically significant bleeding complications. Thus, the use of bovine-thrombin-containing products should be avoided in burn patients with prior exposure to bovine thrombin.

### PMID 20124931 (2010) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Role of coagulation factors in cerebral venous sinus and cerebral microvascular thrombosis.
DOI: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000365745.49583.FD | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to define the relative contributions of three major pro- and anti-coagulation pathways (heparin-antithrombin, protein C, and tissue factor (TF)) in the thrombogenic responses that occur in large and small vessels of the brain.
METHODS: Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis was induced by topical application of FeCl3 on the superior sagittal sinus, while photoactivation of fluorescein was used to induce thrombus formation in cerebral microvessels. Heparin, activated protein C (APC), and antibodies to either APC or TF were used to assess thrombogenesis in wild-type mice. Mutant mice that overexpress the endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR-tg) or with TF deficiency in Tie2-expressing endothelial cells (LTFE) were also used.
RESULTS: Thrombus formation in the superior sagittal sinus of wild-type mice was attenuated by heparin and in EPCR-tg mice, while treatment with the APC antibodies enhanced thrombogenesis. Arteriolar thrombosis was largely unresponsive to the interventions studied. However, in cerebral venules, thrombosis was inhibited by heparin and in EPCR-tg mice. TF antibody treatment also inhibited venular thrombosis, with a similar attenuation noted in LTFE mice.
CONCLUSION: Thrombin promotes while the APC pathway blunts thrombus formation in an experimental model of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. TF involvement is more evident in cerebral microvascular thrombogenesis, with endothelial cell-associated TF mediating this response in venules, but not arterioles.

### PMID 20113940 (2010) — Journal of the American College of Surgeons
TITLE: Safety and immunogenicity observations pooled from eight clinical trials of recombinant human thrombin.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2009.09.042 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: We evaluated safety and immunogenicity observations pooled from 8 clinical trials of recombinant human thrombin (rThrombin), an active topical hemostatic agent.
STUDY DESIGN: Recombinant thrombin was applied with an absorbable gelatin sponge or spray applicator during a surgical procedure (day 1). Adverse events and laboratory parameters were monitored until study end (day 29). Immunogenicity was evaluated after study completion on plasma samples collected at baseline and on day 29.
RESULTS: Studies included 583 rThrombin-treated patients (median age, 59 years; 54% men). Surgical procedures included: spinal, 33% of patients; hepatic resection, 14%; peripheral arterial bypass, 23%; arteriovenous graft formation for hemodialysis access, 18%; and skin graft after burn wound excision, 12%. Adverse events reported for &gt;or= 10% patients included incision site pain, procedural pain, nausea, constipation, pyrexia, anemia, insomnia, vomiting, and pruritus. Five of 552 patients developed antibodies to rThrombin (0.9%; 95% CI, 0.3 to 2.1; day 29); antibodies did not neutralize the biologic activity of native human thrombin. At baseline, 12 patients had pre-existing, antibodies recognizing rThrombin (12 of 552; 2.2%; 95% CI, 1.1 to 3.8); these patients had no previous exposure to rThrombin and their antibody titer did not increase &gt;or= 1.0 unit (&gt;or= 10-fold) at day 29.
CONCLUSIONS: Results from 8 clinical trials collectively demonstrated that rThrombin is well tolerated in numerous surgical settings when used as a topical adjunct to hemostasis. Adverse events and changes in laboratory parameters were consistent with commonly reported postoperative events. Less than 1% of patients developed antibodies to rThrombin; the antibodies did not neutralize native human thrombin.

### PMID 22282693 (2010) — Journal of blood medicine
TITLE: Thrombin use in surgery: an evidence-based review of its clinical use.
DOI: 10.2147/JBM.S6622 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Retracted Publication
ABSTRACT: When surgical ligation of bleeding fails, or is not possible, surgeons rely on a number of hemostatic aids, including thrombin. This review discusses the history, pharmacology and clinical application of thrombin as a surgical hemostat. The initial thrombin was bovine in origin, but its use has been complicated by the formation of antibodies that cross-react with human coagulation factors. This has been associated with life-threatening bleeding and in some circumstances anaphylaxis and death. Human thrombin, isolated from pooled plasma of donors, was developed in an effort to minimize these risks, but its downsides are its limited availability and the potential for transmitting blood-borne pathogens. Recently a recombinant thrombin has been developed, and approved for use by the FDA. It has the advantage of being minimally antigenic and devoid of the risk of viral transmission. Thrombin is often used in conjunction with other hemostatic aids, including absorbable agents such as Gelfoam, and with fibrinogen in fibrin glues. The last part of this review will discuss these agents in detail, and review their clinical applications.

### PMID 20014051 (2010) — Pharmacoepidemiology and drug safety
TITLE: Topical bovine thrombin: a 21-year review of topical bovine thrombin spontaneous case safety reports submitted to FDA's Adverse Event Reporting System.
DOI: 10.1002/pds.1874 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To review topical bovine thrombin spontaneous adverse event (AE) reports that were forwarded to the US Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Adverse Event Reporting System (AERS) between January 1986 and December 2006.
METHODS: Forty-one spontaneous AE reports were summarized for reported AE profile and chronological reporting patterns. Each AE report was adjudicated by a hematologist for the topical bovine thrombin product that was given and the AE(s) that were reported. AEs were grouped as allergic, coagulopathy/bleeding, and all other AEs combined. Grouped AE serial analyses were carried out using successive 3-year time increments between 1986 (the year an AE report was first noted for a bovine thrombin product) and 2006 (the first full year that was available at the time of initiation of the data summary).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome measures were every 3-year trend lines for all-AE reports, all reporters, and topical bovine thrombin brand mentions for 2 AE groups of interest (allergic events and coagulopathy/bleeding events).
RESULTS: The all-AE spontaneous reporter trend showed a downward appearance for AE reporting activity that started in 1995-1998 and continued through 2004-2006. The all-AE reports trend showed two potential safety signals that could be identified serially: (1) a prominent 1989-1991 peak that was attributable to allergic events (in particular, anaphylaxis), and (2) a small 1995-2000 broad peak that was attributable in part to coagulopathy/bleeding events. Allergic events were predominantly reported with products approved prior to 1995, were not temporally associated with prior medical literature case reports, and continued to be forwarded to the FDA at low levels up to the end of this study in 2006. Coagulopathy/bleeding events were reported only with products approved prior to 1995, were temporally associated with medical literature case reports, and were not forwarded to the FDA after 2000.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, spontaneous AE reporting for topical bovine thrombin occurs at very low levels, and appears to have been decreasing since 1995. The serial reporting patterns for topical bovine thrombin are best explained as a strong safety signal for allergic events with ongoing, low level reporting, and a weak safety signal for coagulopathy/bleeding events that ceased on or before 2000. Although this descriptive trend analysis cannot measure associations or causation, the coagulopathy/bleeding signal may have been prompted by multiple, antecedent published case reports. The subsequent diminishment of signal attributed to thrombin likewise may coincide with lack of such reporting in larger follow-up clinical trials or, alternatively, in the introduction and growing market share of thrombin brands of greater purity. Currently marketed topical bovine thrombin formulations are rarely volunteered as possible causes of adverse events.

### PMID 19959490 (2010) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Comparative studies on the topical administration of mucopolysaccharide and heparin ointments in nonhuman primates.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029609345688 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Mucopolysaccharide polysulfate (MPS) represents a mammalian-derived sulfated polysaccharide. Because the origin and structure of heparins is similar to MPS, this study was conducted to compare 2 ointment formulations containing MPS or heparin with a placebo ointment on tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) released in nonhuman primates (Macaca mulatta). A primate colony composed of 18 animals, housed at Loyola University Medical Center, was used in compliance with an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)-approved protocol. Mucopolysaccharide polysulfate (4.5%), heparin (4.5%), and a placebo ointment were topically applied to individual groups of primates in a crossover study for periods of up to 2 weeks. Blood samples were drawn on days 1, 2, 5, 7, and 10. The anticoagulant effects (activated partial thromboplastin time [APTT], Heptest, thrombin time [TT]), TFPI antigen and functional levels, thrombin activatable fibrinolytic inhibitor (TAFI), and antiheparin platelet factor 4 antibodies (AHPF4 abs) were measured in citrated plasma. All data were compiled as mean +/- 1 standard deviation and compared in groups. Topical administration of both the MPS and heparin ointments resulted in no measurable anticoagulant effects in the primate model; however, MPS produced a concentration-dependent release of TFPI antigen and a functional activity that was stronger than the effects observed with heparin. A decrease in TAFI activation was also observed in the MPS-treated primates. In addition, in the heparin-treated group, a slight increase in AHPF4 abs was observed. In conclusion, MPS showed a stronger release of TFPI than heparin that was not associated with a strong anticoagulant effect. Moreover, MPS downregulated TAFI, resulting in an enhanced fibrinolytic effect.

### PMID 19589547 (2010) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Bovine thrombin safety reporting: an example of study design and publication bias.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.09.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Bovine thrombin, a popular hemostat and sealant since 1945, has recently been subjected to clinical trial testing due to reformulations in 1998. We sought to compare adverse event rates of early observational studies with those of later interventional trials.
METHODS: A MEDLINE-based literature search in publications that report safety in bovine thrombin exposed surgical patients was extracted and reviewed.
RESULTS: In 38 studies, about half were case reports and 31.5% were interventional trials. In case reports, 41% of authors reported severe coagulopathic adverse events. In contrast, whereas blood complications were common in large trials, no association of harm was established for bovine thrombin product exposure and/or immunization.
CONCLUSIONS: In this review, later clinical trials failed to reproduce the common and severe coagulopathy predicted by earlier observational studies in bovine exposed patients. This example illustrates that perceptions of safety can change as a function of study design, even for a widely adopted, well established biologic such as thrombin. Caution must be exercised in interpreting evidence from observational studies alone.

### PMID 19484773 (2010) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
TITLE: Characterization of the biological effect of fish fibrin glue in experiments on rats: immunological and coagulation studies.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.32505 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glues (FG) of human or bovine origin are widely used for haemostasis and wound healing. In addition FGs are studied in many biomedical areas like cell therapy or tissue engineering. As any mammalian plasma products FG-s pose risk of transmission of bacteria, viruses, or prions and may compromise patient homeostasis. In this study, we examined coagulation parameters and immunological status of rats treated with salmon-derived FG. We evaluated the changes in thrombin time, prothrombin activity, and presence of antibodies on 46 Wistar rats. This study shows that salmon-derived FG, injected intraperitoneally, does not cause coagulation disturbances in the peripheral blood. After a first challenge with salmon-derived FG there were low but detectable amounts of antibodies revealed by ELISA and immunoblot. After a second administration there was substantial elevation of antibodies to FG components and other copurifying plasma proteins. Antibody reactivity to human Factor Va, revealed in three animals, was not associated with FG application. Taken together, blood immunological and coagulation parameters support the suitability of salmon-derived FG in the development of fibrin sealants for medical use.

### PMID 19932250 (2009) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Valve-in-valve implantation using a novel supravalvular transcatheter aortic valve: proof of concept.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2009.08.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Transcatheter valve implantation within degenerated bioprostheses is a potentially promising treatment for high-risk surgical patients. Clinical experience is limited; however, we have shown in vitro that currently available transcatheter aortic valve sizes did not provide acceptable hemodynamics in small bioprostheses. The objective of this study was to develop a new transcatheter valve that would provide good hemodynamics within degenerated bioprostheses.
METHODS: Supravalvular transcatheter valves were created using a Dacron covered stainless steel stent at the base and trileaflet pericardial leaflets in an open stent above the bioprosthesis. The transcatheter valves were implanted within 19-, 21-, and 23-mm Carpentier-Edwards Perimount bioprostheses with simulated degeneration using BioGlue to achieve a mean pressure gradient of 50 mm Hg. Hemodynamics of valve-in-valve implantation were studied in a pulse duplicator.
RESULTS: Supravalvular transcatheter valves successfully relieved bioprosthetic stenosis. Acceptable hemodynamics were achieved with a significant reduction in mean pressure gradient of 54.0 +/- 3.5 to 9.2 +/- 6.3 mm Hg in 23-mm bioprostheses (p &lt; 0.001), from 49.3 +/- 3.1 to 14.4 +/- 4.7 mmHg (p &lt; 0.001) in 21 mm, and from 53.9 +/- 3.8 to 28.3 +/- 9.8 mm Hg (p = 0.013) in 19-mm bioprostheses. Effective orifice area after valve-in-valve implantation increased significantly and was comparable to rereplacement with the same size bioprosthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Valve-in-valve implantation was performed using a novel supravalvular transcatheter valve, which successfully relieved bioprosthetic stenosis. The hemodynamics were comparable with standard surgical valve replacement. Further studies are required to assess device safety and efficacy in patients.

### PMID 19239687 (2009) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: "Acute pseudo-pericardial tamponade": the compression of the thoracal inferior vena cava--a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-4-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe a case of 68-year-old woman which was admitted to our hospital for mitral valve replacement (MVR), in whom acute compression of the vena cava inferior developed after repair of lacerated atrio-caval junction with hemostatic tissue sealant, biologic glue (BioGlue, Cryolife, inc, Kennesaw, Ga). Removal of the BioGlue relieved the unexpected problem.

### PMID 19214084 (2009) — Spine
TITLE: Cauda equina compression by hydrogel dural sealant after a laminotomy and discectomy: case report.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0b013e31818d5427 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: The authors present a case of cauda equina compression after laminotomy and discectomy where incidental durotomy was managed with the application of hydrogel sealant. The patient reported return of radicular symptoms on the first postoperative day, and deterioration to early cauda equina syndrome after bending on the sixth day.
OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate that in addition to its recognized volume expansion properties, that the product has the ability to migrate and produce symptoms remote from where it was inserted.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: The physical properties of DuraSeal (Confluent Surgical, Waltham, MA), a hydrogel dural sealant, make it an effective adjunct to dural closure. Its volume expansion has been associated with neural compression after posterior fossa decompression. We have found no reported migration of this product.
METHODS: Sequential postoperative imaging shows swelling and migration of the hydrogel into spinal canal with resultant compression. Exploration on postoperative day 10 revealed sealant causing cauda equina compression proximal to the site of the durotomy.
CONCLUSION: The authors recommend that in addition to caution regarding its potential mass effect, that cognizance be taken of the product's potential to migrate and result in symptoms at a distant site.

### PMID 19668958 (2009) — Arquivos brasileiros de oftalmologia
TITLE: [Use of fibrin glue in ocular surgery].
DOI: 10.1590/s0004-27492009000300006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the use of fibrin glue and its complications in different ophthalmic surgeries.
METHODS: A retrospective and non-comparative case series study. 161 eyes were evaluated. The mean age was 51.8 years. Fibrin glue (Beriplast--Aventis Behring, Germany) was used in all patients for tissue adherence or incisional closure.
RESULTS: Main preoperatives diseases were pterygium (76 patients), superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis (4 patients), limbal tumor (4 patients), conjunctivochalasis (21 patients), bullous keratopathy (31 patients), limbal stem cell deficiency (7 patients), alkali injury (6 patients), Stevens-Johnson syndrome (2 patients), cataract (5 patients) and glaucoma (5 patients). Complications occurred in 28 patients (17.4%). Detachment of the fixed tissue and granulomatous foreign body reaction were the main complications. Detachment occurred in 10 cases (5.6%) (7 in amniotic membrane transplantation in bullous keratopathy, 2 in autologous conjunctival grafting for pterygium surgery, 1 in autologous limbal transplantation in a Stevens-Johnson syndrome). Granulomatous foreign body reaction was described in 9 patients (5.6%) (5 in amniotic membrane transplantation due to acute alkali injury, 1 in autologous limbal graft due to chronic burn injury, and 3 in autologous conjunctival transplant due to pterygium surgery). All the complications described occurred in the first week after surgery.
CONCLUSION: Despite the limitations related to the retrospective and non-comparative setting, this study suggests that the use of fibrin glue seems to be safe and effective for tissue fixation or incisional closure presenting low rates of complications in ocular surface and anterior segment surgeries.

### PMID 19404570 (2009) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Management strategies of intercavernous sinus bleeding during transsphenoidal surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-009-0356-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Transsphenoidal surgery has been well established as an effective primary treatment for tumours of the sellar region. During the dural opening, the prominent intercavernous sinus poses limitations for this approach and may contribute to incomplete tumour resections.
METHOD: Based on our experience from 940 cases of conventional transsphenoidal surgery, we have developed a stepwise protocol for achieving bleeding control in 72 cases (7.7%) that had prominent anterior intercavernous sinus.
FINDINGS: A custom-made 45-degree right- or left-angled bipolar coagulator (38 cases) or Landolt bipolar coagulator (29 cases; Aesculp, Tuttlingen, Germany) was inserted into the small dural opening, and both of the dural layers were coagulated together so that the potential space between the endoosteal layer and meningeal layer could be sealed, and the dural opening could be extended. When the anterior portion of the medial wall of the cavernous sinus was accidentally opened, we then placed a small piece of oxidised regenerated cellulose (Surgicel; Johnson &amp; Johnson, North Yorkshire, UK) at the opening of the medial wall of the cavernous sinus and coagulated both dural layers together starting from the sellar floor side with a custom-made 45-degree angled bipolar coagulator. For the relatively large opening of the cavernous sinus, a microfibrillar collagen haemostat (Avitene; MedChem Products, Woburn, MA) or fleece-coated fibrin glue (TachoComb; Nycomed Austria, Linz, Austria) patch was applied over the opened cavernous sinus with gentle compression and was found to be effective in most cases. Rarely, direct suture of the opened medial wall of the cavernous sinus was necessary in five cases.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a stepwise approach to overcome unusual bleedings from the prominent intercavernous sinus during conventional transsphenoidal surgery. Our surgical experience reveals that these methods can be very effective for the control of sinus bleeding.

### PMID 19027513 (2009) — American journal of otolaryngology
TITLE: A gelatin-thrombin matrix for hemostasis after endoscopic sinus surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2007.11.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Adequate hemostasis is necessary after endoscopic sinus surgery. This study evaluated the clinical performance of Surgiflo hemostatic matrix (Johnson&amp;Johnson Wound Management, a division of Ethicon Inc, Somerville, NJ) with Thrombin-JMI (distributed by Jones Pharma Inc, Bristol, VA, a wholly owned subsidiary of King Pharmaceuticals, Bristol, TN) in achieving hemostasis in patients undergoing endoscopic sinus surgery. Surgiflo hemostatic matrix is a sterile, absorbable porcine gelatin intended to aid with hemostasis when applied to a bleeding surface.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This multicenter, prospective, single-arm study evaluated the success in achieving hemostasis within 10 minutes of product application in patients undergoing elective primary or revision endoscopic sinus surgery for chronic sinusitis with a bleeding surface requiring hemostasis. Patient satisfaction and postoperative healing were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Thirty patients were enrolled, including 17 males and 13 females (average age, 48.2 +/- 15.1 years), with 54 operated sides. Twenty-nine patients achieved hemostasis within 10 minutes of product application (96.7% success rate; 1-sided 95% confidence interval, 85.1%-100%). The median total time to hemostasis including manual compression was 61 seconds. No complications, such as synechiae, adhesion, or infection, were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Surgiflo hemostatic matrix with Thrombin-JMI was clinically effective in controlling bleeding in 96.7% of patients. Further randomized controlled trials are indicated.

### PMID 19660222 (2009) — JSLS : Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons
TITLE: Caseating granulomata caused by hemostatic agent posing as metastatic leiomyosarcoma.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: As the number of minimally invasive and laparoscopic procedures increases, hemostatic agents are becoming more popular as a means of achieving rapid hemostasis.
CASE REPORT: The patient is a 61-year-old woman who underwent a laparoscopic supracervical hysterectomy. FloSeal Hemostatic Matrix (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield Illinois) was used at the conclusion of the procedure.
RESULTS: Pathology unexpectedly revealed high-grade leiomyosarcoma of the uterus. The patient then presented to our facility for consultation and was scheduled for robotic trachelectomy and lymphadenectomy. Laparoscopy revealed nodular lesions throughout the abdomen and pelvis. Biopsies were performed and the case aborted. Final pathology however showed caseating foreign body giant cell granulomata in all specimens. No malignancy was found. The patient then underwent exploratory laparotomy, trachelectomy, and a staging procedure. All pathology specimens and pelvic washings were negative for malignancy.
CONCLUSIONS: Use of gelatin-thrombin hemostatic agents may elicit a foreign body reaction leading to large giant cell granulomata. In this case, the presence of these granulomata mimicked metastatic disease.

### PMID 19504407 (2009) — Laryngo- rhino- otologie
TITLE: [Nasal packing after FESS--time is over?].
DOI: 10.1055/s-0029-1220765 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: National and international tendencies to avoid nasal packing after FESS are closed related to the surgical surgery (atraumatic endoscopic surgery, avoidance of resection of turbinates, meticulose coagulation). At the end of each operation a benefit-risk-analysis should be performed, whether nasal packing is indicated and which one. In endonasal surgery only those conventional nasal packing materials should be used - if necessary - which have a smooth surface and minimize mucosal damage, potential worsening of wound healing and negative impact on patient comfort. So called hemostatic/resorbable materials are a first step to these direction. But they are critical, because these materials cause increased synechiae and sometimes foreign body reactions because of incorporation into the mucosa. Occlusion of the nose via simple taping of the nasal entrance is a simple and very effective method to create a moist environment to optimize endonasal wound healing or management of a dry nose.

### PMID 18495543 (2009) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: Increased postoperative cervical myelopathy and cord compression resulting from the use of Gelfoam.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2008.03.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: The immunogenicity of Gelfoam (Pharmacia and Upjohn, Kalamazoo, MI) or microfibrillar collagen, applied during laminectomy, may promote postoperative swelling and significant neural compression.
PURPOSE: To document how Gelfoam contributes to marked cord/root compression on unenhanced/enhanced postoperative magnetic resonance (MR) scans.
STUDY DESIGN/SETTING: This is a case report from the United States.
PATIENT SAMPLE: A case report.
OUTCOME MEASURE: The patient's neurological status was assessed using Nurick Grades.
METHODS: A 73-year-old female with moderate myeloradiculopathy (Nurick Grade III) and MR/computed tomography (CT)-documented cord compression underwent a C6/C7 laminectomy (undercutting of C5-T1) with Gelfoam applied to the laminectomy site, followed by a C2-T2 fusion for instability (iliac autograft, Beta TriCalcium Phosphate).
RESULTS: The patient improved for the first postoperative week (Nurick Grade 0-I), but deteriorated over the successive second and third postoperative weeks (Nurick Grade III). When the 3-week postoperative MR study documented marked dorsolateral cord compression at the laminectomy site, likely attributed to a postoperative seroma/hematoma, a second operation was performed. At surgery, no significant seroma/hematoma was found. Rather, markedly engorged Gelfoam densely adherent to and compressing the underlying dura was encountered; this was meticulously removed under the operating microscope using a small nerve hook. Postoperatively, the patient immediately improved. As the intraoperative culture revealed Acinetobacter baumannii, she required 6 weeks of intravenous Ertapenem (1-betamethyl-carbapenem). The MR scan performed on the third postoperative week revealed no residual cord compromise.
CONCLUSIONS: Delayed postoperative deterioration in a 73-year-old female was attributed to reactive swelling/engorgement of Gelfoam at the C6-C7 laminectomy site.

### PMID 19491761 (2009) — Khirurgiia
TITLE: [The use of oxygenated regenerated cellulose for hemostasis in cardiac surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Efficacy of the oxygenated regenerated cellulose Surgicel Nu-Knit as a hemostatic agent by coronary shunting operation was evaluated. 84 patients were included in the study. Surgicel was locally used in 32 of patients after sternotomy and during wound closure. Intraoperative blood loss in the group of interest was higher than in the control group: 1215,4+/-146,3 ml (14,9+/-3,1 ml/kg) vs. 1066,6+/-106,8 ml (11,5+/-3,3 ml/kg). Surgicel Nu-Knit for the sternum bleeding permitted a good hemostatic effect without wax use. Thereby total blood loss, in spite of intraoperative coagulopathy, did not differ from blood loss amount using common hemostatic techniques.

### PMID 19451849 (2009) — Pediatric critical care medicine : a journal of the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the World Federation of Pediatric Intensive and Critical Care Societies
TITLE: Defining the role of recombinant activated factor VII in pediatric cardiac surgery: where should we go from here?
DOI: 10.1097/PCC.0b013e3181a642d5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Postoperative hemorrhage is a recognized complication of pediatric cardiac surgery. Both the immature coagulation system and increased susceptibility to hemodilution increase the likelihood of pediatric patients developing coagulopathy when compared with adult counterparts. Treatment options remain limited. Recombinant factor VII (rFVIIa) is a hemostatic agent increasingly used to reduce hemorrhage in other surgical settings, the role of which is unclear in this population. This article systematically reviews the published literature on the use of rFVIIa in pediatric cardiac surgery.
DATA SOURCES AND STUDY SELECTION: A systematic literature search identified reports of rFVIIa administration in pediatric patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Where possible, individual patient-specific data were extracted and pooled statistical analysis was performed.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: Twenty-nine articles reporting on the administration of rFVIIa to 169 patients were identified. rFVIIa has been administered to patients with predefined congenital abnormalities of hemostasis to arrest hemorrhage refractory to other interventions and prophylactically in the hope of reducing blood loss. Treatment regimens vary widely, in terms of both first and cumulative dose. Data on chest tube blood loss and two markers of coagulation were pooled and analyzed, and significant improvements were demonstrated. Mortality was 4.4% for the entire cohort but 20% of patients on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation suffered significant thromboembolic complications.
CONCLUSIONS: rFVIIa has an increasingly accepted role in the management of patients with congenital coagulopathies undergoing major surgery. However, randomized trials are required to define the role of rFVIIa as an adjunct to control major hemorrhage in the pediatric cardiac surgical population. Any future work must focus not only on benefits but also on patient safety, particularly, risk of morbid thromboembolic complication.

### PMID 20183534 (2009) — Journal of toxicology and environmental health. Part B, Critical reviews
TITLE: A new fibrin sealant from Crotalus durissus terrificus venom: applications in medicine.
DOI: 10.1080/10937400903442514 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Fibrin sealant, a widely available tissue adhesive, has been used since 1940 in a variety of clinical applications. Commercially available fibrin sealant products are synthesized from bovine thrombin and human fibrinogen, which may transmit infectious diseases, and recipients may also develop antibodies against bovine thrombin. Bearing these disadvantages in mind, a new fibrin sealant was developed in 1989 by a group of researchers from the Center for the Study of Venoms and Venomous Animals, in Sao Paulo State, Brazil. The main purpose was to produce an adhesive fibrin without using human blood, to avoid transmitting infectious diseases. The components of this novel sealant were extracted from large animals and a serine proteinase extracted from Crotalus durissus terrificus snake venom. The applicability of this sealant was tested in animals and humans with beneficial results. The new fibrin sealant can be a useful tool clinically due to its flexibility and diversity of applications. This sealant is a biological and biodegradable product that (1) does not produce adverse reactions, (1) contains no human blood, (3) has a good adhesive capacity, (4) gives no transmission of infectious diseases, and (5) may be used as an adjuvant in conventional suture procedures. The effectiveness of this new fibrin sealant is reviewed and its development and employment are described.

### PMID 19762781 (2009) — Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology
TITLE: Matrix metalloproteinase-10 is upregulated by thrombin in endothelial cells and increased in patients with enhanced thrombin generation.
DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.194589 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Thrombin is a multifunctional serine protease that promotes vascular proinflammatory responses whose effect on endothelial MMP-10 expression has not previously been evaluated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Thrombin induced endothelial MMP-10 mRNA and protein levels, through a protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1)-dependent mechanism, in a dose- and time-dependent manner. This effect was mimicked by a PAR-1 agonist peptide (TRAP-1) and antagonized by an anti-PAR-1 blocking antibody. MMP-10 induction was dependent on extracellular regulated kinase1/2 (ERK1/2) and c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathways. By serial deletion analysis, site-directed mutagenesis and electrophoretic mobility shift assay an AP-1 site in the proximal region of MMP-10 promoter was found to be critical for thrombin-induced MMP-10 transcriptional activity. Thrombin and TRAP-1 upregulated MMP-10 in murine endothelial cells in culture and in vivo in mouse aorta. This effect of thrombin was not observed in PAR-1-deficient mice. Interestingly, circulating MMP-10 levels (P&lt;0.01) were augmented in patients with endothelial activation associated with high (disseminated intravascular coagulation) and moderate (previous acute myocardial infarction) systemic thrombin generation.
CONCLUSIONS: Thrombin induces MMP-10 through a PAR-1-dependent mechanism mediated by ERK1/2, JNK, and AP-1 activation. Endothelial MMP-10 upregulation could be regarded as a new proinflammatory effect of thrombin whose pathological consequences in thrombin-related disorders and plaque stability deserve further investigation.

### PMID 19754221 (2009) — BioDrugs : clinical immunotherapeutics, biopharmaceuticals and gene therapy
TITLE: Recombinant human thrombin: in surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.2165/11202650-000000000-00000 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Recombinant human thrombin (rhThrombin) is a serine protease coagulant, manufactured in vitro using recombinant DNA technology, which shares an identical amino acid sequence and similar structure with the native human protein. It is indicated for topical use as an aid to hemostasis in patients undergoing surgery. Topical rhThrombin 1000 U/mL was no less effective than bovine thrombin (bThrombin) 1000 U/mL as a hemostatic agent in a randomized, double-blind, multicenter, phase III trial in patients undergoing various surgical procedures (n = 401). Hemostasis, achieved within 10 minutes, occurred in 95.4% of rhThrombin versus 95.1% of bThrombin recipients (primary endpoint) in the overall surgical cohort. Moreover, hemostasis occurred rapidly, with more than 70% of recipients of rhThrombin or bThrombin achieving hemostasis within 3 minutes. In a post hoc, subgroup analysis of this phase III trial, rhThrombin was also effective in patients undergoing vascular surgery, with hemostasis occurring within 10 minutes at &gt;90% of all vascular anastomotic sites. Significantly fewer patients undergoing various surgical procedures were seropositive for antibodies against rhThrombin than bThrombin 1 month after topical hemostatic treatment in the phase III trial. In a noncomparative, multicenter, phase IIIb trial (n = 200), 1 month after vascular or spinal surgery where topical rhThrombin was used as a hemostat, the incidence of patients with evidence of anti-rhThrombin antibody formation was zero and did not differ between those classified as seropositive or seronegative for pre-existing anti-bThrombin antibodies at baseline (primary endpoint). rhThrombin was generally well tolerated during the treatment and 1-month follow-up periods in adult surgical patients, with a tolerability profile similar to that of bThrombin.

### PMID 19719970 (2009) — Chinese medical journal
TITLE: Lactadherin and procoagulant activities of red blood cells in cyclosporine induced thrombosis.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The side effects of cyclosporine therapy include thromboembolic complications. However, the mechanisms underlying the hypercoagulable state induced by cyclosporine are not fully understood. Cyclosporine binds to red blood cells (RBCs) with a high affinity in circulation and alters the membranes of RBCs. Therefore, we propose that such alterations in RBCs membranes play a role in cyclosporine-induced coagulopathy and this disorder may be rectified by lactadherin, a phosphatidylserine binding protein.
METHODS: RBCs from healthy adults were treated with various concentrations of cyclosporine. Procoagulant activity of the RBC membrane was measured by the single stage recalcification time and confirmed by detection of tenase and thrombin assembly through enzymatic assays. Inhibition assays of coagulation were carried out in the presence of lactadherin, annexin V or antitissue factor. Phosphatidylserine exposure was detected by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy through binding with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled lactadherin as well as FITC annexin V.
RESULTS: RBCs treated with cyclosporine demonstrated increased procoagulant activity. Cyclosporine treatment markedly shortened the clotting time of RBCs ((305 +/- 10) seconds vs (366 +/- 15) seconds) and increased the generation of intrinsic factor Xase ((7.68 +/- 0.99) nmol/L vs (2.86 +/- 0.11) nmol/L) and thrombin ((15.83 +/- 1.37) nmol/L vs (4.88 +/- 0.13) nmol/L). Flow cytometry and confocal microscopy indicated that cyclosporine treatment induced an increased expression of phosphatidylserine on the RBC membrane. Lactadherin was more sensitive in detecting phosphatidylserine exposure of the RBC membrane than annexin V. The modulating effect of procoagulant activity was concomitant with and dependent on phosphatidylserine exposure. Blocking of phosphatidylserine with lactadherin effectively inhibited over 90% of FXa generation and prothrombinase activity and prolonged coagulation time.
CONCLUSIONS: Procoagulant properties of RBCs membranes resulting from phosphatidylserine exposure may play an important role in cyclosporine-induced thrombosis. Lactadherin can be used as a sensitive probe for phosphatidylserine detection. Its high affinity for phosphatidylserine may provide a new approach for the treatment of cyclosporine induced thrombogenic properties.

### PMID 19651065 (2009) — Journal of the American College of Surgeons
TITLE: A phase 3b, open-label, single-group immunogenicity and safety study of topical recombinant thrombin in surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2009.03.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The immunogenicity and safety of recombinant human thrombin (rThrombin) were evaluated in this phase 3b, open-label, single-group, multisite study of 209 adult vascular and spinal operation patients at high risk for preexisting anti-bovine thrombin product antibodies.
STUDY DESIGN: Patients received rThrombin applied as a topical hemostat during a surgical procedure (day 1). Immunogenicity samples were collected at baseline and approximately 1 month after operation (day 29) and were analyzed after study participation.
RESULTS: Mean patient age was 61.5 years; median number of previous surgical procedures was 5.0 (range, 1 to 25). Operation types included spinal (n = 89 of 209 [43%]), arterial reconstruction (including peripheral arterial bypass; n = 75 of 209 [36%]), and arteriovenous vascular access procedures (n = 45 of 209 [22%]). All patients had confirmed or highly likely previous bovine thrombin exposure; at baseline, 15.6% of patients (n = 32 of 205) had preexisting anti-bovine thrombin antibodies. Of 200 patients with complete immunogenicity evaluations, 31 had preexisting anti-bovine thrombin antibodies (15.5%), and 4 had preexisting anti-rThrombin product antibodies (2.0%). None of the 200 patients became antibody positive for rThrombin antibodies on day 29 (seroconversion or &gt; or = 10-fold increase in titer). Adverse events and laboratory results were consistent with a surgical population with substantial comorbidities. Patients with preexisting antibodies to bovine thrombin were older (p = 0.04) and had undergone more surgical procedures previously (p &lt; 0.001) than patients without preexisting antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study confirm the low immunogenicity of rThrombin and suggest that rThrombin can be used safely as an aid to hemostasis in patients with or without preexisting anti-bovine thrombin antibodies. A sizeable proportion of this vascular and spinal operation patient population (15.6%) had preexisting anti-bovine thrombin antibodies; these patients are at risk for immune responses after reexposure to bovine thrombin.

### PMID 19572062 (2009) — Thrombosis and haemostasis
TITLE: Recent developments in topical thrombins.
DOI: 10.1160/TH09-01-0034 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Managing blood loss is part of the surgeon's responsibility during surgical procedures, and a variety of therapeutic strategies are available to help accomplish this. Topical haemostatic agents are among the agents used to control surgical bleeding and locally arrest blood flow. Bovine thrombin is a commonly used topical haemostatic agent; however, its use has been associated with potential risks, including well-documented cases of antibody-mediated coagulopathy. This coagulopathy develops as a consequence of antibody formation directed against bovine thrombin, other bovine coagulation proteins, and their human orthologs. The fact that a coagulopathy can result in association with the use of bovine plasma-derived thrombin preparations prompted the FDA to require pharmaceutical companies to place a black-box warning in their prescribing information for products containing bovine plasma-derived thrombin. Recently, human plasma-derived thrombin and recombinant human thrombin have been approved by the FDA with the expectation that they will be less immunogenic than the bovine-derived product. In clinical studies, purified human plasma-derived thrombin and recombinant thrombin have demonstrated equivalent efficacy and safety, with improved immunogenicity profiles compared with bovine-derived thrombin agents. Well-designed and adequately powered clinical trials should be conducted to indicate whether human thrombin products would improve the risk-benefit and cost-benefit profiles for surgeries complicated by excessive bleeding.

### PMID 19558281 (2009) — Pharmacotherapy
TITLE: Thrombin products: economic impact of immune-mediated coagulopathies and practical formulary considerations.
DOI: 10.1592/phco.29.pt2.18S | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Thrombin has demonstrated utility in aiding surgical hemostasis since its introduction more than 60 years ago. It is used across a wide variety of surgical procedures by virtually every specialty. Only recently have new equally effective and safe products entered the market, causing decision makers to evaluate formulary selection among products with otherwise modest differences. This evaluation includes identifying costs beyond those of acquisition and storage, as well as indirect factors such as monitoring or specialized distribution requirements. One factor to consider specifically in selection of topical thrombin products is the potential for patients to develop an immune-mediated coagulopathy (IMC) after exposure to bovine-derived thrombin. Costs due to adverse drug events fall into the category of indirect costs and, in some instances, can be substantial if bleeding due to IMC occurs.

### PMID 19558280 (2009) — Pharmacotherapy
TITLE: Immune-mediated coagulopathy: a case report.
DOI: 10.1592/phco.29.pt2.13S | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgical hemostasis may be achieved by using a number of physical, chemical, or biologic methods. One such method is with topical thrombin; however, one member of that class of drugs, bovine-derived thrombin, is associated with potentially serious consequences such as development of immune-mediated coagulopathy. This case report describes a 61-year-old man with peripheral artery disease who presented with a nonhealing ulcer between his toes. Previous exposure to bovine thrombin was unknown but was considered likely because of his extensive surgical history that included procedures in which topical thrombin is commonly used. The patient was admitted and underwent lower extremity revascularization during which he received his first documented exposure to bovine-derived thrombin. By postoperative day 9, he developed a 2.7-cm retroperitoneal hematoma that had progressed to 9.6 cm by postoperative day 13. Evacuation of the hematoma was performed, during which the patient received his second known exposure to topical bovine thrombin. Based on a plasma mixing study on postoperative day 25, presence of factor V and thrombin inhibitors was suspected. A hematology consultation determined that the patient had developed an immune-mediated coagulopathy manifested as exaggerated laboratory coagulation values that continued even after discontinuation of oral anticoagulation, treatment with multiple transfusions of fresh frozen plasma, and intravenous vitamin K administration. The patient was discharged, after no further bleeding episodes had occurred, on postoperative day 29. Although determining previous exposure to bovine-derived thrombin or presence of antibodies can be difficult, a surgeon's index of suspicion should be raised in patients experiencing coagulopathy if they have previously undergone vascular, cardiac, or spinal procedures in which they were most likely exposed to topical thrombin.

### PMID 19545437 (2009) — Patient safety in surgery
TITLE: Collagen fleece-bound fibrin sealant is not associated with an increased risk of thromboembolic events or major bleeding after its use for haemostasis in surgery: a prospective multicentre surveillance study.
DOI: 10.1186/1754-9493-3-13 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical haemostatic agents are used to help achieve haemostasis during surgery when standard surgical techniques are insufficient. The objective of this study was to confirm the safety profile of an equine collagen patch coated with human fibrinogen and human thrombin with particular focus on the occurrence of thromboembolic events (TEEs), major bleeding and immunological events.
METHODS: This was a non-interventional, multicentre, prospective, surveillance study in which a collagen fleece-bound fibrin sealant was prescribed in accordance with its marketing authorisation. The decision to use the sealant was based solely on current surgical practice. All patients that received the sealant and provided informed consent were included. TEEs (any coagula-based occlusion in a vessel or the heart identified by symptomatic clinical signs and/or verified by paraclinical examination), major bleeding (any bleeding that required intervention), and immunological events (hypersensitivity including anaphylaxis) that occurred during surgery, post-operative hospital stay or 6 months of follow-up were reported as adverse events. The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients experiencing a confirmed TEE.
RESULTS: A total of 3098 patients were recruited at 227 centres in 12 European countries. The most frequent types of surgery were hepatic (33%), gastrointestinal (16%) and urological (14%) and the main indication for surgery was for primary (35%) or secondary (20%) malignancy. Forty-six patients (1.5%, 95% CI 1.1-2.0%) had at least one TEE during the study. The most commonly reported TEEs were pulmonary embolism or post-procedural pulmonary embolism (n = 18) and deep vein thrombosis (n = 9). There were 64 major bleedings in 62 patients and 9 immunological events in 8 patients.
CONCLUSION: Collagen fleece-bound fibrin sealant does not appear to be associated with an increased risk of TEEs, major bleeding or immunological events in patients undergoing surgery.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov number: NCT00285623.

### PMID 19463180 (2009) — Patient safety in surgery
TITLE: Building an immune-mediated coagulopathy consensus: early recognition and evaluation to enhance post-surgical patient safety.
DOI: 10.1186/1754-9493-3-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostats, fibrin sealants, and surgical adhesives are regularly used in a variety of surgical procedures involving multiple disciplines. Generally, these adjuncts to surgical hemostasis are valuable means for improving wound visualization, reducing blood loss or adding tissue adherence; however, some of these agents are responsible for under-recognized adverse reactions and outcomes. Bovine thrombin, for example, is a topical hemostat with a long history of clinical application that is widely used alone or in combination with other hemostatic agents. Hematologists and coagulation experts are aware that these agents can lead to development of an immune-mediated coagulopathy (IMC). A paucity of data on the incidence of IMC contributes to under-recognition and leaves many surgeons unaware that this clinical entity, originating from normal immune responses to foreign antigen exposure, requires enhanced post-operative vigilance and judicious clinical judgment to achieve best outcomes.Postoperative bleeding may result from issues such as loosened ties or clips or the occurrence of a coagulopathy due to hemodilution, vitamin K deficiency, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) or post-transfusion, post-shock coagulopathic states. Other causes, such as liver disease, may be ruled out by a careful patient history and common pre-operative liver function tests. Less common are coagulopathies secondary to pathologic immune responses. Such coagulopathies include those that may result from inherent patient problems such as patients with an immune dysfunction related to systemic lupus erythrematosus (SLE) or lymphoma that can invoke antibodies against native coagulation factors. Medical interventions may also provoke antibody formation in the form of self-directed anti-coagulation factor antibodies, that result in problematic bleeding; it is these iatrogenic post-operative coagulopathies, including those associated with bovine thrombin exposure and its clinical context, that this panel was convened to address.The RETACC panel's goal was to attain a logical consensus by reviewing the scientific evidence surrounding IMC and to make recommendations for the clinical recognition, diagnosis and evaluation, and clinical management of these complications. In light of the under-recognition and under-reporting of IMC, and given the associated morbidity, utilization of health care resources, and potential economic impact to hospitals, the panel engaged in a detailed review of peer-reviewed reports of bovine thrombin associated IMC. From that clinical knowledge base, recommendations were developed to guide clinicians in the recognition, diagnosis, and management of this challenging condition.

### PMID 19446142 (2009) — Clinical therapeutics
TITLE: A safety review of topical bovine thrombin-induced generation of antibodies to bovine proteins.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2009.04.021 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical bovine thrombin has been used to accelerate attainment of hemostasis in the surgical setting for &gt;60 years, and its immunogenicity has been widely reported. Although the development of antibodies is inherent in the introduction of any non-self-therapeutic protein such as bovine-sourced thrombin, there are questions about the relationship between the presence of antibodies to constituents of the therapeutic protein preparation and the occurrence of clinically relevant adverse events (AEs).
OBJECTIVE: This review examines the proposed mechanisms for the immunogenicity of topical bovine thrombin preparations and summarizes available evidence from randomized clinical trials, observational studies, and case reports to explore possible relationships between the reported immunogenicity of topical bovine thrombin and the occurrence of AEs.
METHODS: A search of MEDLINE (1966-August 2008) for studies published in English was conducted using the Medical Subject Heading terms surgery, antibodies, and hemorrhage, as well as equivalent key words for bovine, adverse events, and thrombin. For inclusion in the review, studies had to report clinical or laboratory safety data for patients exposed to topical bovine thrombin during surgery.
RESULTS: The evidence suggests that patients with repeated perioperative exposure to topical bovine thrombin have a 3- to 10-fold greater risk for development of antibodies to topical bovine thrombin than do patients with no history of surgery-related exposure to this agent. Early case reports associated the development of anti-bovine protein antibodies with bleeding and/or thrombotic complications. However, in one prospective, randomized controlled trial comparing topical bovine thrombin with topical recombinant human thrombin, 99.5% of patients in each treatment arm developed postoperative AEs. In an-other, 54% and 55% of patients in the respective treatment arms developed postoperative AEs. In a prospective, randomized controlled trial that compared topical bovine thrombin and plasma-derived human thrombin, 95.5% of patients in each treatment arm developed postoperative AEs.
CONCLUSIONS: Repeated perioperative exposure to topical bovine thrombin may increase both the prevalence and titers of antibodies to &gt;or=1 protein contained in nonhomogeneous topical bovine thrombin preparations. However, the evidence reviewed does not support a definitive association between preoperative or postoperative generation of anti-bovine protein antibodies and an increased risk of AEs in surgical patients treated with topical bovine thrombin.

### PMID 19349898 (2009) — Journal of burn care &amp; research : official publication of the American Burn Association
TITLE: Recombinant thrombin: safety and immunogenicity in burn wound excision and grafting.
DOI: 10.1097/BCR.0b013e3181a28979 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017427">Clinical Trial, Phase II, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: This study evaluated the safety, immunogenicity, and hemostatic effect of recombinant human Thrombin (rThrombin), in patients undergoing skin grafting for burns. This was a phase 2 multiple site, single-arm, open-label study in patients receiving partial- or full-thickness autologous grafts. rThrombin was applied using a spray applicator to newly excised wounds of 1 to 4% body surface area at 5 minutes intervals for up to 20 minutes, after point source bleeding was stopped. Adverse events, skin graft survival, and formation of anti-rThrombin antibodies were measured at baseline and Day 29. There were no deaths or study drug discontinuations. Adverse events occurred in 63 of 72 patients (88%), and were typical of sequelae of skin grafting. Hemostasis was achieved within 20 minutes after application of rThrombin in 65 of 71 patients (91.5%). Skin graft failure occurred in 4 patients (6%). At the day 29 evaluation, for those patients who returned, 88.9% had &gt; or =90% graft survival. One patient (1 of 70, 1.4%) had specific, low titer antibodies to rThrombin at baseline, but no increase in titer posttreatment; a second patient (1 of 62, 1.6%), developed antibodies to rThrombin at day 29. None of the antibodies neutralized native human thrombin. In excised burn wounds, hemostasis at 20 minutes was achieved in 91.5% of patients and skin graft survival was excellent. There was a low rate of antibodies to rThrombin at baseline (1.4%) and a low rate of anti-rThrombin antibody formation at day 29 (1.6%). rThrombin was well tolerated when administered with a pump spray.

### PMID 19243705 (2009) — Clinical therapeutics
TITLE: A review of three stand-alone topical thrombins for surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2009.01.005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical thrombins are active hemostatic agents that can be used to minimize blood loss during surgery. Before 2007, the only topical thrombins available were derived from bovine plasma. Antibody formation to bovine thrombin and/or factor V, with subsequent risk of cross-reactivity with human factor V, and hemorrhagic complications associated with human factor-V deficiencies have been described in case reports of surgeries in which bovine thrombins were used. This risk is now included in the boxed warning section of the bovine thrombin prescribing information. In 2007 and 2008, 2 new topical thrombins from nonbovine sources received approval for use from the US Food and Drug Administration. The 3 active topical thrombins that are currently marketed are bovine plasma-derived thrombin, human plasma-derived thrombin, and human recombinant thrombin.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this review was to evaluate the literature on the efficacy and safety of topical thrombins and discuss the pharmacoeconomic considerations associated with their use.
METHODS: PubMed, EMBASE, and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts were searched for relevant papers published in English through October 10,2008, using the terms thrombin, human recombinant thrombin, bovine thrombin, plasma derived thrombin, and topical thrombin. Manufacturer-provided materials were also reviewed. Abstracts and unpublished data, as well as evaluations of sealants, adhesives, glues, and other hemostats that contain thrombin mixed with fibrinogen and other clotting factors, were excluded.
RESULTS: Four randomized, double-blind studies involving the active, stand-alone topical thrombins were found. The bovine thrombin involved in these studies was the predecessor to the currently marketed, highly purified bovine formulation. No studies comparing the human products, studies involving the highly purified bovine preparation, or placebo-controlled studies involving bovine thrombin were found. In a Phase III comparison of human recombinant thrombin and bovine thrombin, the percentages of patients who achieved hemostasis within 10 minutes of topical thrombin application were 95.4% and 95.1%, respectively (95% CI, -3.7 to 5.0). The incidence of hemostasis within 10 minutes was also similar in a Phase III comparison of human plasma-derived thrombin and bovine thrombin (both, 97.4% [95% CI, 0.96 to 1.05]). In the study that compared human recombinant and bovine thrombin, the incidence of antiproduct antibody formation was 21.5% (43/200) in the bovine thrombin group and 1.5% (3/198) in the human recombinant thrombin group (P &lt; 0.001); patients with antibodies to bovine thrombin had numerically higher incidences of bleeding or thromboembolic events than did patients without these antibodies (19% vs 13%; P value not reported). Human plasma-derived thrombin is available as a frozen sterile solution that must be thawed before application, whereas the human recombinant and bovine plasma-derived products are supplied as unrefrigerated sterile powders that must be reconstituted before use. The human thrombins are more costly than bovine thrombin on a per-vial basis. The average wholesale prices (US $, 2008) for 5000-IU vials of bovine thrombin and human recombinant thrombin were $87.85 and $103.20, respectively; the average wholesale price for a 4000- to 6000-IU vial of human plasma-derived thrombin was $96.00.
CONCLUSIONS: Topical thrombins vary in the ways in which they are manufactured and their safety profiles, storage requirements, and costs. Human recombinant thrombin and human plasma-derived thrombin have each been shown to have hemostatic efficacy comparable to that of bovine thrombin. Bovine thrombin carries the risk of formation of cross-reactive antibodies to bovine thrombin, factor V, and other impurities that may be present in these formulations. Immunogenicity data for the currently marketed, highly purified bovine thrombin relative to older formulations of bovine thrombin could not be found. Whether the potential safety advantage justifies the added cost of the human products remains to be established.

### PMID 19176758 (2009) — American journal of physiology. Cell physiology
TITLE: Dynamics of neutrophil extravasation and vascular permeability are uncoupled during aseptic cutaneous wounding.
DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00520.2008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: Transport of macromolecules and transmigration of leukocytes across vascular endothelium are regulated by a tight molecular junction, but the mechanisms by which these two inflammatory events are differentially controlled in time and magnitude during aseptic cutaneous wounding remain elusive. A real-time fluorescence imaging technique was developed to simultaneously track influx of Alexa 680-labeled albumin and genetically tagged enhanced green fluorescent protein-neutrophils [polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN)] within the wound bed. Vascular permeability increased approximately threefold more rapidly than the rate of PMN influx, reaching a maximum at 12 h, on the order of approximately 0.15% per minute versus approximately 0.05% per minute for PMN influx, which peaked at 18 h. Systemic depletion of PMN with antibody blocked their extravasation to the wound but did not alter the increase in vascular permeability. In contrast, pretreatment with antiplatelet GPIb decreased permeability by 25% and PMN influx by 50%. Hyperpermeability stimulated by the endothelium-specific agonists VEGF or thrombin at 24 h postwounding was completely inhibited by blocking Rho-kinase-dependent signaling, whereas less inhibition was observed at 1 h and neutrophil influx was not perturbed. These data suggest that in aseptic wounds, the endothelium maintains a tight junctional barrier to protein leakage that is independent of neutrophil transmigration, partially dependent on circulating platelets, and associated with Rho-kinase-dependent signaling.

### PMID 19117966 (2009) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Comparison of immunogenic potentials of bovine thrombin preparations.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029608327863 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Using a membrane filtration step, bovine crude thrombin was purified into thrombin 4A and 4B preparations. The purpose of this study was to determine whether the improved purity of a bovine thrombin preparation can reduce its overall immunogenic potential and lower the risk of development of factor V antibodies. Bovine crude thrombin and its purified versions, thrombin 4A and 4B, were administered to individual groups of rabbits on days 0, 21, 42, 91, 123, and 151 using standard immunologic methods. Blood was drawn from each rabbit on days 30, 50, 105, 137, and 165, and the pooled antisera from individual groups were purified to obtain the Ig Gs using protein G affinity columns. Using Western blotting, the specificity of each immunoglobulin G collected at the first time point (day 30) and last time point (day 165) was determined. The results of Western blotting using the Ig Gs collected on days 30 and 165 were consistent; both demonstrating that thrombin 4B has the least immunogenic potential among the 3 thrombin preparations tested. Compared with the immunoglobulin Gs collected on day 30, the Ig Gs from day 165 did not show obvious difference regarding their ability to detect antigens in bovine thrombin samples. Neither showed cross-reactivity with human coagulation factors nor the recognition of bovine factor Va antigens. These results suggest that despite the presence of a trace amount of bovine factor Va antigen in bovine thrombin preparations, these contaminants failed to elicit the generation of antibodies against factor Va light chain in rabbit.

### PMID 18977777 (2009) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Reduced immunogenic potential of membrane filtered bovine thrombin preparations for hemostatic application.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029608322550 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: There is concern that exposure to bovine thrombin can result in the development of antibodies, usually against factor V/Va, which can lead to hemostatic abnormalities. It is thought that purer preparations of bovine thrombin might be less immunogenic. Utilizing newer methods including a membrane filtration step, bovine crude thrombin is further purified into thrombin 4A and 4B preparations which exhibit a higher specific activity and are devoid of some of the protein contaminants. Bovine crude thrombin and its purified versions were administered intravenously to individual groups of rabbits using standard immunologic protocols. Antiserum was drawn from each rabbit and the pooled antisera were purified to obtain the IgGs using protein G affinity columns. The results suggest that the reported purification process, including filtration, resulted in the removal of most of the antigens found in crude thrombin, and that none of these preparations generated any detectable antibodies against bovine factor V related antigens.

### PMID 18512388 (2008) — Actas urologicas espanolas
TITLE: [Preventing urinary fistulas in laparoscopic renal conservative parenchyma surgery with purified bovine serum albumin and glutaraldehyde (bioglue). Initial outcomes].
DOI: 10.1016/s0210-4806(08)73836-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Urinary fistulas remain an important conservative renal parenchyma surgery (CRPS) complication, especially in central or hiliar tumours and bigger than 4 cm. Herein we present our initial experience preventing fistulae with bioglue (Criolife Inc GA, USA) on laparoscopic CRPS in which urinary tract was opened.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed 5 laparoscopic CRPS between September 2005 and February 2006 in which urinary tract was necessarily opened. Previous uretheral catheter, transperitoneal approach, selective arterial control, tumorectomy or heminephrectomy, suturing urinary tract and renal parenchyma and bioglue administration was performed.
RESULTS: Median follow up time was 8.2 months (6-12 months). Median surgery time was 138 minutes (105-180 minutes) with a median ischemia time of 45 minutes (35-60). Uretheral catheter was removed before second post-op day in all cases. Average discharged day was 3.8 (3-5 days). One patient required intraoperative transfusion due to breaking Rummel tourniquet and one arterio- calyceal fistula on tenth day pos-op that required selective embolization remained the worst complication. Neither urinary fistulas nor urinomas were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Uretheral cathetesim, suturing urinary tract and parenchyma in an independent fashion and applying some kind of surgical adhesive such as bioglue seems to reduce the urinary fistulae risk in laparoscopic CRPS.

### PMID 18633016 (2008) — Anesthesia and analgesia
TITLE: Anaphylactic reaction after systemic application of aprotinin triggered by aprotinin-containing fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1213/ane.0b013e31817e6043 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a 67-yr-old male after multiple surgical procedures for treatment of arterial occlusive disease who suffered an anaphylactic reaction after administration of aprotinin (Trasylol) prior to urgent coronary artery bypass surgery. The patient had been treated with aprotinin-containing fibrin sealant in 2004 and in 2007, 2 wk before coronary artery bypass surgery. The postoperative serologic screening revealed positive results for qualitative aprotinin-specific IgG, highly elevated quantitative aprotinin-specific IgG and moderately elevated aprotinin-specific IgE antibodies.

### PMID 17628597 (2008) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Adverse effects associated with the use of porcine cross-linked collagen implants in an experimental model of incisional hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2007.03.090 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Porcine cross-linked collagen (PermaCol, PCL; TSL, Aldershot, United Kingdom) has been proposed as permanent biomaterial in incisional hernia repair. We evaluated the biocompatibility of PCL in an established animal model.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In 10 Sprague Dawley rats, two hernias per animal were created in the abdominal wall left and right of the linea alba (1.5 cm in diameter), and the peritoneum was spared. The lesions were left untreated for 10 days, until incisional hernias developed. These defects were covered with non-perforated (out-of-the-box, n = 12) or perforated (modified; n = 8) PCL (2 x 2 cm). In a first step, 12 non-perforated implants were tested in a short-term observation period of 17 days. Eight of these non-perforated implants were fibrin sealed (0.3 mL, Tissucol; Baxter, Vienna, Austria), whereas four non-perforated implants were sutured with non-resorbable material. In a second step, perforations were added as modification to PCL to facilitate drainage of fluids, cell ingrowth, and transgression of fibrin sealant. All perforated implants were fibrin sealed and included in a long-term observation period of 3 months. The observation periods allowed the evaluation of the complete degradation of the fibrin sealant fixation after 2 weeks and of the implant integration in a chronic timeframe. Implant sites were analyzed macroscopically and histologically.
RESULTS: All PCL samples elicited strong local inflammation with signs of foreign body reaction. Integration of perforated PCL appeared limited after 3 months. Three animals had to be euthanized prior to intended time points because of transcutaneous migration of implants.
CONCLUSIONS: In an experimental model of incisional hernia repair, PCL does not integrate well in the abdominal wall and shows poor biocompatibility.

### PMID 18794413 (2008) — Archives of facial plastic surgery
TITLE: Efficacy of fibrin sealant (human) (Evicel) in rhinoplasty: a prospective, randomized, single-blind trial of the use of fibrin sealant in lateral osteotomy.
DOI: 10.1001/archfaci.10.5.339 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To determine whether patients receiving fibrin sealant placed in a single lateral osteotomy site during rhinoplasty will note substantial improvement in pain, bruising, swelling, and overall healing compared with the untreated side and to determine whether blinded observers detect a substantial difference in bruising and swelling on the basis of review of standard postoperative photographs.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective, randomized, single-blind, controlled trial of the use of fibrin sealant (human) (Evicel; Johnson &amp; Johnson-Wound Management, Somerville, New Jersey) in 10 consecutive patients undergoing lateral osteotomy in rhinoplasty. Written consent was obtained from all participants. Each patient was randomized for the use of fibrin sealant on either the right or the left side with the contralateral side acting as the control. Patients were evaluated on postoperative days 1, 7, and 21 with standard photographic views and a patient questionnaire. The blinded observers consisted of 5 raters familiar with the outcomes and results of rhinoplastic surgery. The observers evaluated all photographs and completed a grading scale to define bruising and swelling on each side.
RESULTS: The mean patient age was 41 years (age range, 21-66 years). Half of the patients were women. The blinded observer Wilcoxon rank sum test revealed a statistically significant difference on postoperative day 1 for bruising (P&lt; .03; Wilcoxon critical z value, 1.99) and swelling (P&lt; .01; 2.41). Similar findings were discovered on postoperative day 7 for both bruising and swelling (P&lt; .03). On postoperative day 21, bruising retained statistical significance (P&lt; .05); however, swelling did not achieve statistical significance. Patient questionnaires were evaluated and significance was determined for the treated compared with the untreated side of the nose on postoperative days 1, 7, and 21. Categories included pain, bruising and swelling, and overall rate of healing. The Wilcoxon rank sum test revealed no significance for pain or overall rate of recovery (P&gt; .06) on postoperative days 1, 7, or 21. However, bruising and swelling both achieved statistical significance. On postoperative day 1, both pain and swelling scales achieved a significance of P&lt; .01 (Wilcoxon critical z value, 2.34). On postoperative day 7, bruising achieved significance at P&lt; .005 (Wilcoxon critical z value, 2.63) and swelling achieved significance at P&lt; .01 (2.45). Both bruising and swelling achieved equal significance on postoperative day 21 (P&lt; .01; Wilcoxon critical z value, 2.57 and 2.45, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant applied to a lateral osteotomy site significantly reduced bruising and swelling per patient report on postoperative days 1, 7, and 21. Physician observation reported significant reduction in bruising on postoperative days 1, 7, and 21 and reduction in swelling on postoperative days 1 and 7. The ease of application and versatility of fibrin sealant enable rapid healing after rhinoplasty and produce increased patient satisfaction.

### PMID 18459502 (2008) — Chirurgia (Bucharest, Romania : 1990)
TITLE: [Non-surgical management of patients with blunt abdominal injury: the role of angiography].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the efficacy of nonsurgical management of patients with blunt hepatic or renal injury using detailed angiographic examinations and transcatheter arterial embolization.
METHODS: The study comprises 5 patients: 3 patients with blunt hepatic injury and 2 patients with blunt renal injury. All patients had CT evidence of hepatic injury, respectively renal injury. In one case with hepatic injury, emergency laparotomy was performed before angiography because of unstable circulatory status. DSA-angiography identified the site of bleeding in all patients, followed by selective embolization with particles of TachoComb. Nonsurgical treatment of hepatic or renal injury with transcatheter arterial embolization was successful in all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our success rate for nonsurgical management of patients with blunt injury to solid abdominal organs should more extensive evaluation and use of angiography for solid abdominal organs injury and the subsequent management of solid abdominal organs injury without surgery.

### PMID 18282265 (2008) — Wound repair and regeneration : official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue Repair Society
TITLE: Bioactivity and stability of endogenous fibrogenic factors in platelet-rich fibrin.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-475X.2007.00344.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) is an autologous fibrin sealant (FS) enriched with a platelet concentrate (&gt; 1,000,000 platelets/microL) produced by the automated Vivostat system and used to enhance wound healing. The effects of PRF were compared with supernatant from thrombin-activated platelet concentrate, recombinant human platelet-derived growth factor (rhPDGF) isoforms, and a homologous FS in cultured normal human dermal fibroblasts. Also, the release of selected endogenous growth factors from PRF and their stability against proteolytic degradation were studied. The proliferative effect of PRF exceeded that of FS and rhPDGF-BB, although it was lower than thrombin-activated platelet concentrate possibly due to sustained growth factor release from platelets in PRF. Anti-PDGF antibody blocked the mitogenic effect of rhPDGF-BB but not that of PRF in growth-arrested fibroblasts. PRF promoted secretion of carboxyterminal propeptide of type I collagen into conditioned medium while rhPDGF-AB had no significant effect on collagen biosynthesis. Limited proteolysis of PDGF-AB and no proteolysis of transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) in PRF were observed with trypsin treatment, whereas rhPDGF-AB and rhTGF-beta1 in bovine serum albumin, matching the total protein concentration of PRF, were almost completely degraded after 24 hours at 37 degrees C. To conclude, PRF provides sustained release and protection against proteolytic degradation of endogenous fibrogenic factors important for wound healing.

### PMID 18156889 (2008) — Anesthesiology
TITLE: A rat model of radicular pain induced by chronic compression of lumbar dorsal root ganglion with SURGIFLO.
DOI: 10.1097/01.anes.0000296073.16972.13 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Radicular pain is a common and debilitating clinical pain condition. To date, the mechanisms of radicular pain remain unclear, partly because of the lack of suitable preclinical models. The authors report a modified rat model of radicular pain that could mimic a subset of clinical radicular pain conditions induced by the soft tissue compression on dorsal root ganglion.
METHODS: A rat model of radicular pain was produced by infiltrating the L5 intervertebral foramen with 60 microl of a hemostatic matrix (SURGIFLO; Johnson &amp; Johnson, Somerville, NJ) resulting in chronic compression of lumbar dorsal root ganglion. Thermal hyperalgesia and mechanical allodynia were measured with or without epidural treatment with triamcinolone. Western blot was used to assess the expression of the NR1 subunit of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor and inhibitory factor kappabeta-alpha, an inflammatory marker, within the affected L5 dorsal root ganglion and spinal cord dorsal horn.
RESULTS: Chronic compression of lumbar dorsal root ganglion resulted in: (1) persistent mechanical allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia up to 4 or 5 postoperative weeks and (2) up-regulation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor and inhibitory factor kappabeta-alpha within the ipsilateral L5 dorsal root ganglion and spinal cord dorsal horn. Epidural administration of triamcinolone (6.25-100 microg) on postoperative day 3 dose-dependently attenuated both thermal hyperalgesia and mechanical allodynia in rats with chronic compression of lumbar dorsal root ganglion.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that this modified rat model of chronic compression of lumbar dorsal root ganglion may be a useful tool to explore the mechanisms as well as new therapeutic options of radicular pain.

### PMID 18981845 (2008) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Comparative safety and efficacy of topical hemostatic agents in a rat neurosurgical model.
DOI: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000327031.98098.DD | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Adequate hemostasis is extremely important in neurosurgery, commonly requiring the use of topical hemostatic agents. Apart from variable efficacy, the residual presence of these agents may cause foreign body reaction, infection, and delayed bone growth. This study compares the safety and efficacy of commonly used agents with a newly approved agent, Arista (microporous polysaccharide hemospheres; Medafor, Inc., Minneapolis, MN).
METHODS: A brain tissue defect was created in 228 Wistar outbred rats, and either no agent (negative control), Arista, Surgicel (oxidized cellulose; Ethicon, Inc., Somerville, NJ), Avitene (microfibrillar collagen; Alcon, Inc., Humacao, PR), FloSeal (gelatin matrix thrombin sealant; Baxter Healthcare Corp., Deerfield, IL), or kaolin (positive control) was implanted. Time to hemostasis was documented. The animals were sacrificed at different intervals up to 28 days, and presence of residual material and foreign body reaction was determined.
RESULTS: Arista, Avitene, FloSeal, and Surgicel performed better (defined as complete hemostasis within 1 minute) than control (no treatment). Residual material was not present at any time with Arista, markedly contrasting with the presence of residual material in 100% of lesions in the Avitene, FloSeal, and Surgicel groups on Day 14. Avitene and FloSeal also demonstrated a propensity for causing granuloma formation, whereas Arista and Surgicel showed no such evidence.
CONCLUSION: Each of these hemostatic agents was effective in controlling bleeding in the majority of standardized neurosurgical lesions. Arista degrades more rapidly than Surgicel, Avitene, and FloSeal and does not result in any foreign body reaction.

### PMID 18590447 (2008) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Postoperative acute disseminated encephalomyelitis after exposure to microfibrillar collagen hemostat.
DOI: 10.3171/JNS/2008/109/7/0149 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat, known by its trade name Avitene, has been used in neurosurgery for decades. Complications with this product have been documented in other surgical specialties and described as mostly immune-mediated foreign-body reactions that can lead to a granulomatous reaction. There has never been a case of disseminated encephalomyelitis associated with this topical hemostatic agent. In this report the authors present a case of postoperative acute disseminated encephalomyelitis after exposure to Avitene. Possible pathophysiological mechanisms are discussed and the pertinent literature is reviewed.

### PMID 19267971 (2008) — Zhonghua er bi yan hou tou jing wai ke za zhi = Chinese journal of otorhinolaryngology head and neck surgery
TITLE: [Glossopharyngeal neurotomy through laterocervical approach to treat idiopathic glossopharyngeal neuralgia].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To introduce a modified laterocervical approach for glossopharyngeal neurotomy to treat idiopathic glossopharyngeal neuralgia.
METHODS: The clinical data, the operative technique, the operative effects and (the results of) follow-up of 12 patients were presented. Through reviewing pertinent literatures, the therapeutic advancement of glossopharyngeal neuralgia and the modified technique of laterocervical approach for glossopharyngeal neurotomy were discussed. New idea on operations, of which the use of insulation coverings when cauterizing the inferior ganglion of glossopharyngeal nerve and Jacobson nerve were brought. Homonymous superior laryngeal nerve was excised at the same time.
RESULTS: All patients (the cases) were followed-up for 3 months to 3 years with an median of 15 months. Among the 12 patients suffered from glossopharyngeal neuralgia, 11 patients were satisfied with the outcomes and remained disease free after surgical treatment. The remission rate of pain was 100.0%, complete remission rate of pain was 91.7%. Only a few patients had complications. Intraoperative leakage of cerebrospinal fluid was obstructed with gelatin sponge and pasted with mucilage in 1 case and no complication appeared in the convalescence stage. Postoperatively, facial palsy was found in 1 case which was self-cured after a week, postoperative voice depression in 1 case, and foreign body sensation in 2 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Laterocervical approach for glossopharyngeal neurotomy is an available method to treat idiopathic glossopharyngeal neuralgia.

### PMID 18497493 (2008) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Endovascular treatment for traumatic ear bleeding associated with acute epidural hematoma.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.48.208 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 44-year-old woman presented with intractable ear bleeding after head trauma. Computed tomography showed a longitudinal petrosal bone fracture and a mastoid air cell hematoma with a small acute epidural hematoma. Conservative therapy for more than 12 hours failed to stop the bleeding, so we planned endovascular treatment rather than open surgery. Angiography of the external carotid artery demonstrated continuous extravasation of contrast material from the middle meningeal artery near the fracture line in the temporal bone. Intravascular embolization was performed using polyvinyl alcohol particles and gelatin sponge pieces, resulting in immediate successful hemostasis. Endovascular management should be considered for the treatment of intractable traumatic ear bleeding.

### PMID 18241525 (2008) — Current medical research and opinion
TITLE: Phase 3, randomized, double-blind study of plasma-derived human thrombin versus bovine thrombin in achieving hemostasis in patients undergoing surgery.
DOI: 10.1185/030079908X273426 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of plasma-derived human thrombin and bovine thrombin for achieving hemostasis during surgery.
METHODS: Adults (N = 305) with &gt; or = 1 mild or moderate bleeding site not manageable by conventional modalities during elective cardiovascular, neurologic, or general surgical procedures at multiple study centers were randomized to human (n = 153) or bovine (n = 152) thrombin, applied topically with an absorbable gelatin sponge. Bleeding was assessed 3, 6, and 10 min post-application. Other evaluations included laboratory assessments, vital signs, blood loss, blood transfusions, time in specialty-care units, procedure duration, and length of hospital stay. Blood samples for antibody assessment were collected at baseline and postoperative week 5.
RESULTS: The proportion of patients achieving hemostasis within 10 min (primary outcome) was equivalent for human and bovine thrombin (97.4 vs. 97.4%, respectively; ratio, 1.00; 95% CI, 0.96-1.05). The proportions of patients achieving hemostasis at 6 min (94.8 vs. 92.8%) and 3 min (73.2 vs. 72.4%) were also equivalent. No clinically meaningful differences were noted for other variables. The products had similar adverse event profiles. More patients (12.7%) who received bovine thrombin demonstrated seroconversion for &gt; or = 1 of the 4 antibodies assayed than patients who received human thrombin (3.3%). No patients in the human thrombin group developed seroconversion for anti-human thrombin or anti-human factor V/Va antibodies. Limitations of this study include the lack of a placebo-control group, the potential for inter-surgeon variability, and the fact that antibody assessment was not evaluable in all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma-derived human thrombin and bovine thrombin were equivalent in achieving hemostasis within 10, 6, and 3 min and had comparable safety profiles. None of the patients receiving human thrombin developed seroconversion for antibodies to any of the human antigens.

### PMID 17379329 (2008) — International journal of cardiology
TITLE: Use of the Amplatzer Vascular Plug for treatment of coronary steal.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2006.11.203 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: The left internal mammary artery (LIMA) is a widely used conduit during coronary artery bypass graft surgery because of its excellent long-term patency. Although large LIMA side branches are typically ligated during the surgery, the occurrence of a coronary steal phenomenon related to these side branches following surgery remains controversial. A variety of devices, including coil embolization and gelatin sponge particles, have been used in the percutaneous treatment of LIMA side branch induced coronary steal. The Amplatzer Vascular Plug has recently been applied in variety of clinical situations, including the occlusion of aortopulmonary collaterals, patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary arteriovenous malformations. The Amplatzer Vascular Plug is a self-expandable, cylindrical device made from nitinol that offers several potential advantages in this setting including ease of delivery, a wide range of device sizes and the ability to safely remove the device if placement location in not optimal. In this case report, we present a patient with objective ischemia in the left anterior descending artery distribution secondary to coronary steal from a large LIMA side branch that was successfully treated using the Amplatzer Vascular Plug.

### PMID 18681490 (2008) — Drugs
TITLE: An evaluation of eptacog alfa in nonhaemophiliac conditions.
DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200868120-00005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: We have analysed the published literature on eptacog alfa (recombinant factor VIIa; rFVIIa) for nonhaemophiliac conditions with the aim of determining its current place in therapy. Initial surgical and/or medical management is required for any patient with life-threatening bleeding. In those with continued life-threatening bleeding (i.e. despite maximal surgical and/or medical therapy), eptacog alfa may be considered as additional therapy, in exceptional circumstances. There is good evidence from systematic reviews and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that eptacog alfa stops bleeding in adults with intracerebral haemorrhage (ICH) if it is given within 4 hours of symptom onset. However, a recent phase III RCT suggests that it does not improve clinically relevant long-term outcomes (death and disability). There is also good evidence against prophylactic use of eptacog alfa during orthotopic liver transplantation or liver resection, and in treating variceal and nonvariceal haemorrhage in patients with cirrhosis. The evidence for the use of eptacog alfa for unexpected life-threatening bleeding in liver, cardiac or other surgery, or in blunt trauma, is not robust. In these circumstances, it should only be given as part of a clinical trial or in exceptional cases when other therapies have failed. The evidence for use of eptacog alfa in penetrating trauma is lacking. Conflicting RCT results exist for the prophylactic use of eptacog alfa in elective surgery; therefore, it cannot be recommended in this situation. There is insufficient evidence for a primary role of eptacog alfa in reversal of anticoagulation with heparin-like molecules and novel anticoagulant agents. There are effective therapies that correct all warfarin-induced factor deficiencies; thus, off-label use of eptacog alfa for reversal of warfarin should only be considered in the context of ICH. The evidence for eptacog alfa use in children is limited. The only RCT is in cardiac surgery for congenital heart disease, where eptacog alfa prophylaxis was actually associated with increased time to chest closure. It may be of potential benefit in some children with life-threatening bleeding in the context of trauma, surgery or liver disease (as additional therapy when surgical and/or medical control of bleeding has failed), but the overall benefit-risk ratio may be unfavourable if there is an underlying risk of thromboembolism (e.g. trauma, congenital heart disease, other hyperviscous or hypercoagulable states, presence of arterial or central venous catheters). Thromboembolism may be associated with eptacog alfa use. Although the magnitude of this risk and possible predisposing factors are not clearly delineated, some data suggest increased risk at higher doses. Variable effects of eptacog alfa use on mortality have been shown in a pooled analysis of RCTs. Data from some observational studies and postmarketing surveillance suggest an increased risk of thromboembolism associated with off-label uses. Further well designed studies are required to more definitively assess the risk of thromboembolism with eptacog alfa and to better determine its effects on mortality. Optimum dosages for nonhaemophiliac conditions are not defined and nor is the optimum timing of administration. Moreover, it is not clear which patients will be most likely to benefit in terms of haemostatic efficacy and mortality. In addition to conventional measures to stop bleeding (i.e. surgery and blood transfusion), correction of hypothermia and acidosis, and reversal of anticoagulation are all recommended. The outcomes (effectiveness and safety) of all off-label uses should be systematically evaluated and reported. Adequate data to assess cost effectiveness for eptacog alfa does not exist for most off-label indications.

### PMID 19707440 (2008) — Biologics : targets &amp; therapy
TITLE: Clinical use of topical thrombin as a surgical hemostat.
DOI: 10.2147/btt.s2435 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: When surgical ligation of bleeding fails, or is not possible, surgeons rely on a number of hemostatic aids, including thrombin. This review discusses the history, pharmacology and clinical application of thrombin as a surgical hemostat. The initial thrombin was bovine in origin, but its use has been complicated by the formation of antibodies that cross react with human coagulation factors. This has been associated with life threatening bleeding and in some circumstances anaphylaxis and death. Human thrombin, isolated from pooled plasma of donors, has been developed in an effort to minimize these risks, but its downside is the potential of transmitting blood-borne pathogens and limited availability. Recently a recombinant thrombin has been developed and approved for use by the FDA. It has the advantage of being minimally antigenic and devoid of the risk if viral transmission. Thrombin is often used in conjunction with other hemostatic aids, including absorbable agents (like gelfoam, collagen, and cellulose), and with fibrinogen in fibrin glues. The last part of this review will discuss these agents in detail, and review their clinical applications.

### PMID 18821572 (2008) — Journal of cellular biochemistry
TITLE: Thrombin induced secretion of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and its effect on nuclear signaling in endothelium.
DOI: 10.1002/jcb.21928 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The procoagulant thrombin stimulates endothelial cells (EC) to undergo rapid cytoskeleton changes via signaling pathways that induce multiple phenotypic changes, including alterations in permeability, vasomotor tone, adhesion molecule synthesis, and leukocyte trafficking. We studied a novel role of thrombin's action on the endothelium that results in MIF secretion, which is linked to myosin light chain (MLC) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK(1/2))-dependent nuclear signaling. In bovine pulmonary artery EC (BPAEC), thrombin treatment induced intracellular MLC phosphorylation within 15 min, followed by a significant increase in MIF secretion within 30 min. Thrombin treatment induced biphasic ERK(1/2) phosphorylation with an early phase occurring at 15 min and a later phase at 120 min. To understand the role of MIF secretion in thrombin-induced biphasic activation of ERK(1/2), BPAE cells were treated with (i) recombinant MIF, and (ii) the medium collected from thrombin-treated BPAE cells. These studies demonstrated a sustained monophasic ERK(1/2) phosphorylation. Inhibition of MIF secretion by MIF siRNA or antisense-MIF treatment, along with a neutralizing antibody, attenuated the thrombin-induced second phase ERK phosphorylation, suggesting a direct involvement of MIF in the second phase of ERK(1/2) activation. Pretreatment of BPAE cells with an ERK kinase inhibitor and with antisense-MIF significantly inhibited thrombin-induced nuclear factor kappa (NF-kappaB) activation. These results indicate that MIF secretion and ERK phosphorylation both play a necessary role in thrombin induced NF-kappaB activation.

### PMID 18785812 (2008) — Expert review of molecular diagnostics
TITLE: Exogenous bovine thrombin as a biomarker of exposure and outcome.
DOI: 10.1586/14737159.8.5.651 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Bovine thrombin has been used for more than 60 years as a surgical hemostat and sealant. Rare postsurgical events have been attributed to antibovine thrombin immunoglobulins cross-reacting with human homologs. In a literature review of 37 papers reporting safety outcomes in surgical patients, we extracted each paper for a quantitative measurement of bovine thrombin exposure and coagulopathic outcomes. We found that 59.5% of papers documented the commercial source of bovine thrombin and only 19% provided an estimate of exposure in units. Conventional tests for hypocoagulation were common (86%); however, only 9% of papers confirmed this inhibition as an isolated antibody. In addition, only 9% of papers cited a specific biomarker for thrombosis.

### PMID 18549663 (2008) — Current medical research and opinion
TITLE: Topical bovine thrombin and adverse events: a review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1185/03007990802186417 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To review published evidence suggesting a link between topical bovine thrombin (TBT) and important adverse events (AEs).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: English language articles and abstracts were obtained from MEDLINE using combinations of text and MeSH terms for thrombin, bovine thrombin and their trade names. References from summary articles were also retrieved. Published case reports, review articles, and retrospective, prospective or observational studies involving either immunogenicity or AEs were selected for further assessment. Retrieved articles were evaluated separately as AE case reports, quantitative studies of antibodies, or quantitative studies of AEs.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Presence of case causal information, temporal pattern of case report publication, reproducibility of aggregate data findings, and study design features.
RESULTS: The major limitations of reviewed publications were insufficient information regarding TBT and other exposures, and designs in which linkage between laboratory immune phenomena and AEs could not be evaluated. While immunogenicity studies did support an increased risk for post-TBT antibodies, there was no consistent evidence that this led to an increased AE risk or severity. Common evidentiary deficiencies included case reports from high incidence environments, studies of combination or mixture products, biased study designs, lack of patient-level exposure data, inadequate control groups and insufficient sample sizes. The best designed study (a randomized, controlled comparison of TBT to a recombinant bovine product) documented post-TBT antibody production, but no important efficacy or AE differences. An examination of publication dates for case reports showed a peak between 1992 and 1994 followed by a substantial drop. Since 1997 the number of published AE case reports has continued to decline.
CONCLUSIONS: TBT increases the risk for antibody elevations in patients. A careful review of published evidence does not show that either TBT itself or any associated elevations in anti-bovine antibodies are risk factors for clinically important AEs.

### PMID 18449414 (2008) — Thrombosis and haemostasis
TITLE: Plasma-derived biological medicines used to promote haemostasis.
DOI: 10.1160/TH07-10-0592 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Several biological medicines derived from human and animal plasmas can effectively improve haemostasis in individuals with inherited or acquired defects in haemostasis. Factor VIII and factor VIII/vWF and factor IX concentrates are used to treat haemophilia A, von Willebrand disease and hemophilia B respectively. Cryoprecipitates are used to treat hypofibrinogenemia and von Willebrand disease where desmopressin (DDAVP) is ineffective or when plasma-derived factor VIII/vWF concentrates are unavailable. Thrombin-containing topical haemostatic agents and fibrin sealants are used to control perioperative bleeding. Intravenous immunoglobulin has several uses, including management of patients with autoimmune thrombocytopenias and patients with acquired factor VIII deficiency. Similar to most protein-based biological medicines, all the above products can elicit some level of antibody response, with clinical consequences that vary from mild anaphylaxis to loss of product efficacy. An ongoing potential safety concern with any biological medicine derived from blood/plasma is transmission of blood-borne pathogens. This safety concern has lessened significantly in the past decade as a result of the institution of more effective pre- and post-donation screening that tests for potential pathogens, and institution of pathogen reduction strategies to which many plasma-derived biological medicines are now routinely subjected. This article considers the manufacture, standardization, clinical efficacy and adverse event profiles of the plasma-derived biological medicines currently used to promote haemostasis in patients with inherited or acquired functional defects in haemostasis. It also considers approaches employed to minimize infectivity of biological medicines derived from human and animal plasmas and to manage patients who develop antibodies (inhibitors) to clotting factor concentrate infusions.

### PMID 18440754 (2008) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: A comparison of recombinant thrombin to bovine thrombin as a hemostatic ancillary in patients undergoing peripheral arterial bypass and arteriovenous graft procedures.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2008.01.034 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Recombinant thrombin (rThrombin) is a potential hemostatic alternative to bovine and human plasma-derived thrombin. This report examines the clinical results for the vascular surgery subgroup of patients enrolled in a larger double-blind, randomized, multicenter trial, which evaluated the comparative safety and efficacy of rThrombin and bovine plasma-derived thrombin (bThrombin) when used as adjuncts to surgical hemostasis.
METHODS: Data from the 164 vascular patients who underwent either a peripheral arterial bypass (PAB) or arteriovenous graft (AV) procedure are included in this analysis. Time to hemostasis at proximal and distal anastomotic sites at 1.5-, 3-, 6-, and 10-minute intervals was determined by procedure (PAB or AV) and overall (PAB + AV). Baseline and day 29 immunologic sera were analyzed. The incidences of postoperative adverse events were compared between treatment groups. Categorical adverse events were evaluated in relation to thrombin product antibody formation.
RESULTS: Patients were randomized to either bThrombin (n = 82) or rThrombin (n = 82). Procedures included PAB (n = 88) and AV (n = 76). The bThrombin and rThrombin groups were well matched for demographics and baseline characteristics. A comparable incidence of anastomotic hemostasis was observed in both treatment groups at 10 minutes (94% bThrombin, 91% rThrombin). The incidence of hemostasis was lower at all time points for PAB procedures compared with AV procedures. In the PAB group, a significantly greater proportion of patients receiving rThrombin (55%) achieved hemostasis at 3 minutes compared with bThrombin (39%; P &lt; .05). Adverse event profiles and laboratory findings were similar between groups. No patients in the rThrombin group developed anti-rThrombin product antibodies at day 29, whereas 27% of patients in the bThrombin group developed antibodies to bThrombin product (P &lt; .0001).
CONCLUSIONS: rThrombin or bThrombin used as a hemostatic ancillary for anastomotic bleeding was equally effective at 10 minutes; however, rThrombin compared with bThrombin may provide a more rapid onset of hemostasis at 3 minutes in PAB procedures. Adverse events were similar between the two thrombins. In patients undergoing vascular surgery, both treatments were similarly well tolerated, although rThrombin demonstrated a superior immunogenicity profile.

### PMID 18544303 (2008) — Vascular
TITLE: Bovine thrombin: history, use, and risk in the surgical patient.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016456">Historical Article, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Thrombin is a common hemostatic drug used in surgical practice for over 100 years because of its simplicity and efficacy. Thrombin converts fibrinogen to fibrin, activates platelets, and induces vascular contraction. It is available in multiple forms, including human thrombin, bovine thrombin, and, most recently, human recombinant thrombin. Over 100 case reports of adverse reactions to bovine thrombin include hemorrhage, thrombosis, and substantial immune reaction when used on cardiovascular surgery patients. Approximately 30% of patients exposed to bovine thrombin develop cross-reacting antibodies. Thirty percent of patients with anticlotting factor antibodies develop abnormal coagulation that can be detected by prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, or thrombin time, which makes anticoagulation monitoring difficult. Patients with multiple elevated antibodies prior to surgery are also more likely to sustain adverse events. Animal studies confirm these immunological responses seen in humans. With the available clinical and laboratory data, a less immunogenic yet biologically effective thrombin should be available for use in our surgical patients.

### PMID 18291065 (2008) — Current medical research and opinion
TITLE: Efficacy of a haemostatic matrix for the management of bleeding in patients undergoing liver resection: results from 237 cases.
DOI: 10.1185/030079908x280392 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The haemostatic matrix (FloSeal) is a topical agent that provides effective haemostasis in a range of surgical applications. We evaluated this sealant for intraoperative haemostatic effectiveness in an observational series of patients undergoing surgery for the resection of primary and metastatic liver tumours.
METHODS: A haemostatic matrix was applied directly to areas of bleeding. The severity of bleeding before and after application was graded on a 5-point scale (0 = no bleeding, 1 = oozing, 2 = moderate blood flow, 3 = heavy blood flow, 4 = spurting blood). The time to complete haemostasis was also recorded.
RESULTS: 105 women (age 61 +/- 9 years) and 132 men (age 61 +/- 12 years) were included in this study. One hundred and seventeen patients (49.36%) had pre-operative coagulopathy resulting from co-existent cirrhosis (67 Child-Pugh Class A; 50 Child-Pugh Class B). Prior to administration of a haemostatic matrix, 93 bleeding sites (24.8%) had a bleeding severity score of 2, 269 bleeding sites (71.7%) had a score of 3 and 13 bleeding sites (3.5%) had a score of 4. Following administration of the haemostatic matrix, bleeding stopped completely (score of 0) at 367 (97.9%) of the 375 sites and was reduced to a score of 1 at the remaining 8 sites (2.1%), of which only 2 were in patients with coagulopathy. The mean time to achieve haemostasis in the overall population was 2.9 +/- 1 min; this was significantly increased in patients with coagulopathy versus noncoagulopathic patients (4 +/- 1 vs. 2 +/- 1 min, p &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In this prospective, uncontrolled study of 237 consecutive patients undergoing major hepatic surgery to remove primary or metastatic tumours, application of a haemostatic matrix provided rapid and effective intraoperative control of mild to severe bleeding from the liver edge, even in patients with prolonged bleeding times resulting from cirrhosis. This preliminary evidence warrants a randomised, controlled clinical trial with a larger sample size.

### PMID 17629859 (2007) — The Thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon
TITLE: Short-term tissue response of lapine carotid artery microanastomoses to BioGlue.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-965282 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Minimally invasive coronary artery surgery needs fast, reliable and easy methods of carrying out anastomoses. The aim of our study was to evaluate the use of BioGlue in sutureless vascular anastomoses in the lapine model.
METHODS: In 24 New Zealand white rabbits, 43 transsected carotid arteries were re-anastomosed using either a combination of balloon catheterisation and BioGlue or a conventional suture. In five carotid arteries, only BioGlue was applied. The animals were euthanised and tissue samples were taken for histological and immunohistological examination.
RESULTS: A higher inflammatory cell infiltrate was present in the glue control and glue anastomosis groups, with the invasion of inflammatory cells located especially at the junction between the wall with and the wall without glue. Early calcification was detected in two arteries.
CONCLUSION: The results of this short-term study show that the rabbit is an adequate as well as a sensitive model for the study of microanastomoses by glueing. Marked inflammatory reactions developed which may lead to vascular sclerosis or stenosis, and long-term studies are necessary to elucidate this problem further.

### PMID 17586223 (2007) — Surgical neurology
TITLE: Use of a protein-based tissue adhesive as an aid for the surgical reconstruction of advanced and recurrent skin cancer tumors to the head and neck region: a technical report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.surneu.2006.09.035 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Patients with advanced skin cancer present a unique challenge to neurosurgeons. Treatment involves aggressive surgical intervention and lengthy reconstructive procedures with considerable morbidity to obtain adequate and safe oncological margins. We reviewed our experience with BioGlue Surgical Adhesive, a protein-based adhesive, as an adjunct in free tissue transfer procedures to prevent CSF leakage and seroma formation.
METHODS: Between January 2000 and June 2004, 11 patients ranging in age from 32 to 87 years presented with advanced skin cancer tumors in the head and neck. Pathology included squamous (7) and basal (3) cell carcinoma and malignant schwannoma (1). Of the 11 patients, 8 had undergone previous surgery and/or radiation therapy. All were treated with a combination of craniotomy, skull base, and craniofacial approaches with reconstruction of the large defects using muscular or myocutaneous free flaps in a single operation. Fat, muscle, and a 1-mm epidural layer of BioGlue were used to seal the dural sutures and to obliterate any potential seroma-forming dead space.
RESULTS: A total of 6 patients underwent craniofacial resection with orbital exenteration and partial rhinectomy, whereas the remaining 5 underwent frontal, parietal, and/or occipital craniotomies. All patients required dural repair. Three patients required additional brain resection because of tumor infiltration. No patient developed a CSF leak or seroma. There were no adverse events related to the use of BioGlue. Three patients died of medical complications (pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction, late-onset myelodysplasia). The remaining patients are alive, and our follow-up (range, 9-58 months) has revealed no recurrence or distal metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Advanced skin cancer tumors in the head and neck region are associated with complex and disfiguring surgical procedures with increased morbidity. We demonstrate that an adjunctive use of a sufficiently strong tissue adhesive can yield acceptable outcomes and minimize comorbidity in this challenging patient population.

### PMID 17415167 (2007) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Wound complications associated with the use of bovine serum albumin-glutaraldehyde surgical adhesive in pediatric patients.
DOI: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000255416.55560.D2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The use of dural sealants has become common in neurosurgery. Ten patients in whom a bovine albumin-glutaraldehyde combination (BioGlue; Cryolife, Inc., Kennesaw, GA) was implanted have had wound complications. The clinical experience of these patients is presented along with recommendations regarding the use of BioGlue.
METHODS: All clinical information was reviewed for the patients who had wound complications after implantation of BioGlue. Data collected included diagnosis, type of original surgery, clinical presentation of the wound complication, culture results, and management.
RESULTS: BioGlue was implanted in 75 patients during 77 procedures. Ten patients (13%) had wound complications. There were six boys and four girls with an average age of 5.2 years (range, 11 mo-16 yr). Three had undergone spinal procedures for detethering of the spinal cord and seven underwent craniotomies (five infratentorial, two supratentorial). Six patients presented with purulent drainage, two had periorbital cellulites, and two had swelling and fluctuance without drainage. All patients were managed operatively by washout, debridement, and removal of the BioGlue followed by a course of intravenous antibiotics. The average interval between the implantation and the debridement was 12.5 weeks (range, 2.5-28 wk). All patients had purulence around the BioGlue. Positive cultures were obtained in seven patients (Staphylococcus species in six and Streptococcus pneumoniae in one), including five who presented with wound drainage.
CONCLUSION: We have found a strong association between the use of BioGlue and postoperative wound complications in our pediatric neurosurgical practice and, thus, discourage its future use. BioGlue triggers an intense acute pyogenic and chronic granulomatous inflammatory response, which is an ideal environment for bacterial growth. The bacteria may arise from the BioGlue or other foreign bodies or, more likely, from the skin if the inflammation breaches the skin surface.

### PMID 17669921 (2007) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Ostial stenosis after Bentall technique using glue: percutaneous stenting may be ineffective.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2006.146191 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemorrahage after coronary re-implantation during a Bentall surgery is a rare complication. In case of friable tissue, the use of a felt disc usually solves the problem. The use of resorcinol-formol-glue should be avoided to prevent tissue damage. Extrinsic compression of the coronary arteries has been reported with the use of this surgical glue.
CASE: We report a rare case of extrinsic compression of both coronary arteries after a Bentall procedure. A 50-year-old man with severe aortic valve stenosis, without coronary disease and an ascending aortic aneurysm, underwent a modified Bentall procedure with insertion of a valved tube and coronary re-implantation using surgical glue. Seven weeks later he suffered severe acute coronary ischemia and both coronary ostium were compressed by a dense and hard fibrose material. Three months after stenting, the patient required coronary surgery because of severe myocardial ischemia. Transesophageal and intracoronary ultrasounds were useful for the diagnosis of this rare complication.
CONCLUSIONS: Use of glue should be avoided for coronary reimplantation during Bentall surgery. In cases of external ostial compression by glue reaction, stenting may be ineffective and surgical coronary revascularization may be needed.

### PMID 21136718 (2007) — Proteomics. Clinical applications
TITLE: Analysis of recombinant human erythropoietin and darbepoietin in spiked plasma.
DOI: 10.1002/prca.200600972 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Darbepoietin (DAR) and recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO) stimulate erythropoiesis, leading to an increase in red blood cells. Along with their legitimate clinical use, rhEPO and DAR are also misused in racing horses for performance enhancement. To control the illegal use of DAR and rhEPO, it is important to develop analytical methods for the detection and confirmation of these proteins in plasma. Analysis of rhEPO and DAR in plasma is challenging due to the presence of a number of high abundance proteins including albumin that interferes with their extraction. The present study showed that the extraction of rhEPO or DAR from plasma using anti-EPO-antibody coupled immunoaffinity (IA) extraction yielded low (25-40%) recovery. Albumin-depletion using antialbumin-antibody coupled IA columns also depleted the target proteins and further reduced their recovery. Pre-extraction of spiked plasma using hydroxyapatite (HTP)-ProGel or ConA columns followed by the IA column yielded 65 to 70% recovery. The extracted samples were (i) analyzed directly with or without SDS-PAGE for intact proteins and (ii) analyzed after trypsin hydrolysis, with or without SDS-PAGE, for peptide fingerprinting using MALDI-TOF. Trypsin and enolase were used as internal calibrators for intact protein analysis and a peptide EYEATLEECCAK was used as internal calibrator for fragment analysis. Analysis of extracted sample without SDS-PAGE yielded, along with the target proteins (rhEPO and DAR), albumin and other related proteins. SDS-PAGE separated the target proteins with albumin and yielded clean samples. Inclusion of internal calibrators resulted in a linear dose-response relationship for both intact protein and digested fragments and allowed quantification of the target peptides. Thus, extraction of plasma using a combination of ConA and IA extractions yielded approximately 70% recovery of target proteins with a small amount of albumin and other proteins. SDS-PAGE improved the quality of the MALDI-TOF results. Minimum detection limits for digested fragments were lower than those for intact proteins.

### PMID 17258022 (2007) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Bronchial artery aneurysm treated with aortic stent graft and fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2006.06.082 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchial artery aneurysm occurs rarely but can cause a life-threatening hemorrhage when it ruptures. The traditional therapy has been aneurysm resection or transcatheter arterial embolization. We report a case of mediastinal bronchial artery aneurysm which could not be occluded with transcatheter arterial embolization and instead was treated with a thoracic aortic stent graft and embolization with fibrin sealant.

### PMID 17215739 (2007) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: The potential utility of fibrin sealant dressing in repair of vascular injury in swine.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000251595.45451.d0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A previous study in which fibrin sealant dressing (FSD) secured hemostasis in major arterial hemorrhage for 96 hours suggested the applicability of this dressing in damage control operations after severe trauma. The objective of this study was to determine the effective duration of FSD hemostatic function in vivo and to examine its potential utility for definitive repair of a major arterial injury in swine.
METHODS: High pressure bleeding in an infrarenal aortotomy was controlled by placing FSD on the wound with 4-minute compression (n = 15). If hemostasis was achieved, the abdominal cavity was closed. Surviving animals were killed at 2, 4, 6, and 8 weeks and aortotomy sites collected for histology.
RESULTS: FSD stopped arterial hemorrhage after 4-minute compression in 14 of 15 (93%) pigs. Dressings failed in two pigs at 36 and 53 minutes after treatment. Twelve (80%) animals recovered and resumed normal activities. Of the remaining 12, two developed rebleeding at the aortotomy site on days 8 and 11 and were killed; another was killed because of idiopathic low hematocrit on day 10. Nine pigs survived until scheduled to be killed, maintaining hemostasis with stable hematological values. In the surviving animals, serial computed tomography scans showed formation of a pseudoaneurysm at the aortotomy site, which resolved after 2 to 3 weeks. The initial vascular defect and pseudoaneurysm were filled with fibroblast-myoblast collagen rich tissues covered by endothelium.
CONCLUSION: FSD can seal an arterial injury, stop high pressure bleeding, and prevent rebleeding for at least 7 days. The dressing may be most beneficial in damage control operations. If combined with an elective interventional radiologic procedure (e.g. embolization or stenting), it may also offer an alternative to suture repair of vascular injuries in cases where profuse bleeding obstructs visualization.

### PMID 17537117 (2007) — Wound repair and regeneration : official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue Repair Society
TITLE: Treatment of recalcitrant venous leg ulcers with autologous keratinocytes in fibrin sealant: a multinational randomized controlled clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-475X.2007.00231.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: In a multicenter trial, the effect of a commercially available combination of autologous keratinocytes (3-6 x 10(6)/mL) with fibrin sealant (Tissucol Duo S Immuno, Baxter Hyland Immuno) on the healing of recalcitrant venous leg ulcers (duration &gt;3 months) was compared with standard care. The primary endpoint was time to healing, and the secondary endpoint was number of healed ulcers in both groups. Both groups received compression therapy with short-stretch bandages. Forty-four (38.3%) of the 116 patients who had BioSeed-S treatment achieved complete healing of the target ulcer compared with 24 (22.4%) of 109 patients who received standard treatment. The advantage for treatment with BioSeed-S over standard treatment was statistically significant (chi-square test: p=0.0106). Time to complete healing of ulcers: the log-rank test for equality over strata revealed a superiority of treatment with BioSeed-S+compression (median: 176 days) over compression+standard care (median &gt;201 days) (p&lt;0.0001). This study, to date the largest multicenter study with autologous keratinocytes, provides evidence for its efficacy in the treatment of patients with therapy-resistant chronic venous leg ulcers.

### PMID 18410009 (2007) — Klinichna khirurhiia
TITLE: [Local hemostasis during the carotid endarterectomy under condition of antithrombocytic therapy].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Comparative studying of preparation TachoComb application efficacy and the convenient tampon procedure for stopping of bleeding from the suture line, fixing the expanding flap, made of polytetrafluoroethylene, in arteriotomy zone was studied in the patients, operated for carotid arteries stenosis and obtaining Plavix preparation protractedly in 75 mg dosage. The preparation TachoComb application have had promoted the operative time reduction as well as the bleeding duration and the blood loss volume.

### PMID 18090006 (2007) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Hemostatic efficacy of a recombinant thrombin-coated polyglycolic acid sheet coupled with liquid fibrinogen, evaluated in a canine model of pulmonary arterial hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1097/TA.0b013e318151ffdc | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: In thoracic surgery, although infrequent, we encounter unexpected damage to the pulmonary artery (PA). In the present study, we evaluated the hemostatic efficacy of a newly developed fibrin-based sheet material, thrombin sheet, coupled with liquid fibrinogen (TSF), in an experimental model of PA hemorrhage.
METHODS: Female beagles (n = 8) were used for the study. Left thoracotomy was performed under general anesthesia. PA injury (approximately 4 x 2 mm) was created, and repaired by TSF (TSF group) or TachoComb (TC group). The animals were allowed to survive, and the repaired site was evaluated 4 weeks after the experiment.
RESULTS: The number of sheet application and compression procedures required for hemostasis was increased in the TC group compared with in the TSF group (TC vs. TSF, 4 +/- 1 vs. 1 +/- 0.5, p = 0.01, unpaired t test). The time required to achieve hemostasis was increased in the TC group compared with in the TSF group (TC vs. TSF, 7 +/- 3 vs. 1 +/- 0.5 minutes, p = 0.01, unpaired t test). The amount of bleeding during the hemostasis procedure was increased in the TC group compared with in the TSF group (TC vs. TSF, 48 +/- 22 vs. 3 +/- 3 g, p = 0.01, unpaired t test). At 4 weeks, rethoracotomy revealed no apparent indication of delayed bleeding, such as intrathoracic hematoma formation or excessive adhesion formation in the vicinity of PA, in either group. Histologically, the vessel lumen was well sustained in both groups, with no apparent stenosis or thrombus formation.
CONCLUSION: The hemostatic efficacy of TSF was superior to TC in this particular experiment. Single application of TSF was sufficient to achieve hemostasis in all but one animal. Compression time of approximately 1 minute was also very short albeit that the bleeding was from the PA and not an artery. These results were presumably because the adhesion was stronger, faster, and the sheet was more pliable in TSF compared with TC.

### PMID 17690654 (2007) — Vestnik otorinolaringologii
TITLE: [Use of fibrinocollagen complex in surgical treatment of patients with vascular tumors of the ear and external nose (a pilot report)].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A fibrinocollagen complex (TahoComb) has been used in surgical treatment of patients with vascular tumors of the ear and external nose (6 patients with hemangioma of the ear and 6 patients with hemangioma of the external nose). It is shown that TahoComb reduces significantly blood loss in removal of branchy arterial hemangiomas, need in ligation or embolization of afferent vessels, in tight tamponade of the tympanic cavity and external acoustic meatus.

### PMID 17137801 (2007) — European journal of vascular and endovascular surgery : the official journal of the European Society for Vascular Surgery
TITLE: Various local hemostatic agents with different modes of action; an in vivo comparative randomized vascular surgical experimental study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2006.10.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effects of different local hemostatic agents in a new high flow vascular experimental bleeding model.
DESIGN: Bovine thrombin combined with collagen matrix (bTcM), microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPH), freeze-dried rFVIIa with and without the combination of MPH were compared to a control group (solely compression) in a randomized fashion (20 animals/group). Primary endpoint was hemostasis, and secondary endpoints were time to hemostasis, blood loss, and blood pressure at hemostasis.
METHODS: The common carotid artery of heparinized rats was ligated proximally and transected. Compression was applied for one minute followed by application of the topical hemostatic agent. Compression was maintained for another two minutes followed by re-evaluation of hemostasis: if bleeding continued additional compression was applied and thereafter bleeding was checked every minute until hemostasis.
RESULTS: All animals in the bTcM group obtained hemostasis compared to 20% in the control group (p&lt;0.0001). The combination of MPH and rFVIIa (70% hemostasis) also showed a significant hemostatic capacity compared to control group (p&lt;0.001). None of the other active treatment groups differed compared to control group. Animals treated with bTcM had a significantly shorter time to hemostasis compared to animals in the other active treatment groups. No significant difference in blood loss and blood pressure at hemostasis was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: The most effective hemostatic agent was bTcM, followed by the combination of rFVIIa and MPH, while neither MPH nor rFVIIa alone displayed any hemostatic capacity compared to compression only.

### PMID 17719390 (2007) — Journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery : official journal of the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
TITLE: Evaluation of autologous platelet-poor plasma gel as a hemostatic adjunct after posterior iliac crest bone harvest.
DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2006.09.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D018848">Controlled Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the hemostatic efficacy of autologous platelet-poor plasma (PPP) gel following posterior iliac crest bone graft harvesting for oral and maxillofacial reconstruction.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a prospective study of 24 consecutive patients involving 26 posterior iliac crest bone harvests that had bone wax and either 1-gram of bovine microfibrillar collagen or 20 mL of autologous PPP, activated as a gel, used as adjunct hemostatic agents. Compression bulb suction drain was placed into the graft site and drain output recorded every 8 hours for 64 hours. Cost analysis was also undertaken between the 2 methods. Statistical significance between means of each group was determined by Student's t test and found significant for P &lt; .05.
RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences in average drain output between the PPP and MFC groups for each 8-hour interval. There was no statically significant difference in average total drain output between the PPP and MFC groups over the entire 64 hour period. Additionally, unlike the addition of MFC, the addition of PPP added no additional costs to the procedure.
CONCLUSION: PPP gel, when compared with bovine microfibrillar collagen, is an effective and inexpensive adjunct in hemostasis following posterior iliac crest bone harvest.

### PMID 17465365 (2007) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Hydrogel-induced cervicomedullary compression after posterior fossa decompression for Chiari malformation. Case report.
DOI: 10.3171/ped.2007.106.4.302 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The use of an absorbable hydrogel dural sealant has been approved for neurosurgical applications with no published reports of complications to date. The authors present the case of a 13-year-old girl with syringomyelia and quadriparesis who underwent posterior fossa decompression and dural augmentation for Chiari malformation Type I. Dural closure was performed with a dural substitute patch, hydrogel dural sealant, and gelatin sponge. Magnetic resonance imaging, performed after initial postoperative improvement in the patient's quadriparesis deteriorated, demonstrated an expanding epidural mass collection causing cervicomedullary compression. Exploration on postoperative Day 15 revealed an expanded layer of hydrogel underlying a layer of gelatin sponge. The authors conclude that hydrogel dural sealants should be used cautiously in spaces that cannot tolerate significant mass effect.

### PMID 17765567 (2007) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Elastomeric surgical sealant for hemostasis of cardiovascular anastomosis under full heparinization.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2007.06.046 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We developed a novel surgical sealant, a viscous diisocyanated prepolymer, applicable to arterial hemostasis. The purpose of this study is to evaluate hemostatic effect of this surgical sealant under heparinized conditions.
METHODS: The effectiveness of this sealant was verified by applying it to the end-to-end anastomosis of canine carotid arteries. Five mongrel dogs were used. After a complete heparinization, the carotid arteries were clamped, divided, and end-to-end anastomoses were performed with four simple interrupted sutures. The sealant was coated on the anastomosis. After 5 min the clamps were removed and the hemostatic effect was evaluated. Three dogs were immediately subjected to macroscopic evaluation. Two dogs were subjected to angiography after 3 months and 16 months, respectively.
RESULTS: No bleeding occurred in any of the anastomoses immediately after the removal of the clamp. Macroscopic finding revealed no leakage of the sealant into the lumen. Carotid angiography revealed patent anastomoses without stenosis.
CONCLUSION: A novel surgical sealant exhibited rapid and potent hemostatic effect on a moisturized tissue under full heparinization.

### PMID 17934352 (2007) — Current opinion in hematology
TITLE: Antifibrinolytic use in adult cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328270b89e | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Antifibrinolytics are used to attenuate the coagulopathy associated with cardiopulmonary bypass. However, recent studies suggest that the antifibrinolytic aprotinin is associated with increased renal and vascular events and death compared to its alternatives. To develop a recommendation for antifibrinolytic use in adult cardiac surgery, we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to determine the association of the antifibrinolytics with efficacy, safety and cost outcomes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Aprotinin, when compared to placebo, significantly decreased blood transfusions and reoperations for bleeding, strokes and cognitive dysfunction, and significantly increased renal dysfunction but not renal failure. Tranexamic acid significantly decreased blood transfusions, but was not statistically associated with other outcomes. Aminocaproic acid was not statistically associated with any measured outcome. Although aprotinin costs more than its alternatives, its costs may approximate those of its alternatives when longer time horizons are considered.
SUMMARY: We support the targeted use of aprotinin in adult cardiac surgery patients at high risk for bleeding or stroke, and discourage the use of aprotinin in those at high risk for renal failure. Although fewer data are available for tranexamic and aminocaproic acid, we support their use as alternatives to aprotinin in those at high risk for bleeding.

### PMID 17980288 (2007) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous embolization of a lumbar pseudoaneurysm in a patient with type IV Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2007.05.053 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a rare hereditary connective tissue disorder. Patients with type IV EDS are prone to develop visceral pseudoaneurysms and aortic aneurysms. Surgical and endovascular interventions are fraught with complications and high morbidity. We present a case of a patient with type IV EDS who presented with a new psoas pseudoaneurysm arising from a hypertrophied lumbar artery which was treated with percutaneous embolization by using n-butyl cyanoacrylate glue and coils.

### PMID 17592433 (2007) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Progression of left coronary artery dissection during and after aortic replacement in acute type A aortic dissection: a case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 69-year-old man was transferred to our hospital with a diagnosis of acute type A aortic dissection. In the emergent operation, the dissection was found to extend to the orifice of the left coronary artery, but not to the coronary artery itself. The false lumen was closed using glue and sutures with felt strips, and graft replacement of the ascending aorta was performed. However, signs of myocardial ischemia were present after the operation, and the patient's condition continued to be unstable, even though intraaortic balloon pumping was initiated. A coronary angiogram and intravascular ultrasound performed three hours after the operation revealed a left main trunk stenosis due to pulsatile compression of the false lumen, which was caused by the extension of dissection. A coronary artery stent was subsequently deployed in the left main trunk. The patient was discharged four weeks later in a stable condition, although with segmental asynergy of wall motion, due to myocardial damage.

### PMID 17203306 (2007) — European archives of oto-rhino-laryngology : official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS) : affiliated with the German Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
TITLE: Treatment of tripod fracture of zygomatic bone by N-2-butyl cyanoacrylate glue fixation, and its effects on the tissues.
DOI: 10.1007/s00405-006-0227-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The standard treatment of zygomatic bone fractures is fixation by microplates or miniplates and screws today. It is very difficult to place plates and screws into thin bones or small bone fragments especially in the facial bones and bones adjacent to important structures. Cyanoacrylate is used as a hemostatic agent, an embolic agent, in retinal tears, in corneal ulcers, in fixation of mandibular osteotomies and in craniofacial surgery. N-2-Butyl cyanoacrylate is a form of cyanoacrylate which is bioabsorbable and biocompatible. It is easily applied to the tissues. We aimed to determine the effect of N-2-butyl cyanoacrylate in the fixation of displaced zygomatic bone fractures. We examined the histotoxicity and the effects on healing and foreign body reaction of N-2-butyl cyanoacrylate. Eight New Zealand white rabbits underwent zygomatic osteotomies bilaterally. The fractures on left sides of the rabbits were determined as study site and right sides as control site. Knight and North classification of zygomatic bone fractures were used and group 4 fractures were made bilaterally. Open reduction of fractures was performed bilaterally and N-2-butyl cyanoacrylate was applied only on left sides. No fixation was made on right sides representing the control group. Postoperatively in the first, second, third and fourth weeks, two rabbits were sacrificed and the fracture sites were examined macroscopically and histopathologically. In the glued study group, fixation was obtained in all cases whereas in the control group, all the fractures were seen to be displaced. Tissue reaction was similar in the study and the control groups.

### PMID 17169664 (2006) — Urology
TITLE: Comparison of BioGlue reinforced and standard running sutured vesicourethral anastomoses.
DOI: 10.1016/j.urology.2006.09.032 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To compare a BioGlue-reinforced laparoscopically sutured vesicourethral anastomosis (VUA) with a standard laparoscopically sutured VUA in a porcine model.
METHODS: Twelve pigs were divided into two groups. In group 1 (n = 6), a standard laparoscopically sutured VUA was performed. In group 2 (n = 6), a standard laparoscopic sutured VUA was performed, and the anastomosis was reinforced with BioGlue. Groups 1 and 2 were completed consecutively. The animals in both groups were killed at 1 week postoperatively. In all cases, cystography was performed immediately after completion of the anastomosis and at death. At necropsy, the gross findings of the VUA were documented, and each anastomosis was excised en bloc for an extensive histopathologic evaluation of the healing parameters, including inflammation and fibrosis at each tissue level, foreign body reactions, and necrosis.
RESULTS: Of the 12 VUAs, 11 were successfully performed laparoscopically. The median operative time for groups 1 and 2 was 70 and 100 minutes, respectively (P = 0.03). The median anastomotic time for groups 1 and 2 was 30 and 50 minutes, respectively (P = 0.02). No difference was seen in urinary extravasation on the cystographic evaluation in the immediate postoperative or 1-week evaluations. At necropsy, a gross complete circumferential histologic tissue approximation was noted in 1 (20%) of 5 pigs in group 1 and 2 (33%) of 6 pigs in group 2 (P = 0.66). No urinomas were noted in either group. Histopathologic evaluation revealed no significant difference between groups 1 and 2 regarding inflammation, fibrosis, foreign body reactions, or necrosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The application of BioGlue to the anastomotic line extended the procedure time and did not improve the quality of the VUA.

### PMID 17670621 (2006) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Rapid formation of the left ventricular pseudoaneurysm after sutureless repair of a subacute left ventricular free wall rupture.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2005.127001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We report a rare, rapid, huge formation of the left ventricular pseudoaneurysm after sutureless repair with GRF glue.
METHODS: The case was a 70-year-old male, who received an emergency operation for a subacute left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) complicated by acute myocardial infarction. At that time the left ventricle was wrapped with equine pericardium by using gelatin resorcin formaldehyde (GRF) glue (sutureless repair). The patient had been stable for 13 months but suffered acute heart failure. The left ventricular angiogram (LVG) revealed a huge left ventricular aneurysm and 75% stenosis in the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). He had received the LVG one month before. There was a small concavity in the inferior wall of the left ventricle. A huge pseudoaneurysm had formed within one month.
RESULTS: A left ventricle direct patch closure, and coronary artery bypass were performed. In the pathological findings, the wall of the aneurysm was almost elastic collagen tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Sutureless repair is an effective technique for subacute left ventricular free wall rupture, a left ventricular pseudoaneurysm has to be cared for the late period.

### PMID 16872958 (2006) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Long-term effects in distal coronary anastomoses using different adhesives in a porcine off-pump model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2006.02.042 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Adhesives are useful supplements to seal distal coronary anastomoses, particularly in patients who receive less-invasive coupling techniques. Information regarding long-term structural effects after application, however, is limited. The purpose of this large animal study was to examine the effects of 3 different commercially available surgical adhesives.
METHODS: Twelve end-to-side anastomoses were created between the left internal thoracic artery and the left anterior descending coronary artery in a porcine beating heart model. Three different adhesives were applied externally and circumferentially to the anastomosis site. In group I (n = 4) gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue (Cardial, Technopole, Sainte-Etienne, France), in group II (n = 4) n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate glue, and in group III (n = 4) albumin-glutaraldehyde glue were used. All anastomoses were examined intraoperatively by flow measurement. After 3 months the anastomoses were reassessed for patency and the vessels were evaluated histologically.
RESULTS: By means of 4 stay sutures and subsequent glue application, anastomoses could be created successfully on the first attempt in all animals. Perioperative flow through the left internal thoracic artery was similar in all groups. In 4 animals an additional suture was placed to control bleeding. After 3 months, the patency rate was 83.3% (10/12). In group I all anastomoses were patent whereas in both groups II and III one anastomosis was occluded. None of the adhesives caused impaired vessel wall healing but they did demonstrate moderate-to-dense adhesions to the surrounding tissue. On histologic examination, gelantin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue exhibited minimal tissue reaction (foreign-body granuloma) whereas n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate glue showed moderate reaction. In contrast, albumin-glutaraldehyde glue caused severe inflammatory reaction with extensive fibroblastic proliferation.
CONCLUSION: Construction of an end-to-side internal thoracic artery-coronary artery sleeve anastomosis using adhesives was feasible in the pig. Among the tissue adhesives used in this study, gelantin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue appeared to be superior to cyanoacrylate and albumin-glutaraldehyde glue. The latter one, however, caused severe adverse histologic effects and thus cannot be recommended for bonding coronary anastomoses.

### PMID 16554980 (2006) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Less chronic pain following mesh fixation using a fibrin sealant in TEP inguinal hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-006-0080-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Endoscopic hernia repair methods have become increasingly popular over the past 15 years. The postulated main advantages of the endoscopic technique are less postoperative pain, early recovery and lower recurrence rates. Fixation of the endoscopic mesh seems to be necessary to minimize the risk of recurrence. Stapling has been implicated to cause chronic inguinal pain syndromes. We performed a retrospective study on male patients who were endoscopically operated on primary inguinal hernias. Our aim was to clarify whether mesh fixation using a fibrin sealant is as safe and reliable as conventional stapling. Additionally, we compared the prevalence of chronic inguinal pain. A standardized population of 133 male patients (mean age 55.9 years) with 186 (80 unilateral; 53 bilateral) consecutive primary laparoscopic total extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repairs was assigned to two groups, depending on whether stapling or a fibrin sealant had been used for mesh fixation. A retrospective case control study was performed to conduct statistical analysis based on the following parameters: recurrence, complications, chronic inguinal pain, foreign body sensation and numbness. Hernia repairs numbering 173 (staples n=87; fibrin n=86) were followed up for a mean duration of 23.7 (11-47) months. The prevalence of chronic inguinal pain was significantly (P=0.002; Fisher exact test) higher in the stapled group-20.7% than in the fibrin sealant group with a prevalence of 4.7%. In terms of recurrence rate, complications and foreign body sensation, fewer patients were affected in the fibrin group than in the reference population, although the differences were not statistically significant. There were no major complications in either of the groups. The mean postoperative stay in hospital was 1.4 days. Fibrin sealing is as effective as stapling in providing secure mesh fixation. The fibrin group displayed a statistically significant lower prevalence of chronic pain syndromes. Mesh sealing provides adequate fixation and reduces the risk of chronic inguinal pain as a complication of the intervention.

### PMID 17022152 (2006) — Polimery w medycynie
TITLE: [The use of the fibrin glue in the peripheral nerves reconstructions].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In this study we presented essential historical data about application of the fibrin glue in microsurgical reconstructions of the peripheral nerves. The technique of the preparation of the fibrin glue and the most important aspects of the clinical practice were described. We presented also our own experience in the use of the fibrin glue (Tissucol Kit firmy Baxter AG, Beriplast P firmy Behring), in microsurgical reconstructions of the brachial plexus and peripheral nerves. The basic principles of management were emphasized and a few clinical cases were presented. Microsurgical reconstructions of the nerves with using of the fibrin glue are atraumatic and don't cause inflammation and granuloma formation. These methods allowed to while away the time of surgical procedure and allowed to perform a microsurgical reconstruction in difficult conditions. Microsurgical reconstructions of the nerves with fibrin glue application may be used individually or in connection with suture materials.

### PMID 16331038 (2006) — Cornea
TITLE: Pterygium surgery: conjunctival autograft using a fibrin adhesive.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ico.0000164780.25914.0a | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficiency and safety of using a fibrin adhesive (Tissucol Duo, Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria) to avoid the need for sutures during conjunctival autograft surgery for primary pterygium.
METHODS: Twenty patients (20 eyes) with primary nasal pterygium were subjected to conjunctival autograft surgery. The free conjunctival graft placed over the bare sclera was fixed to the surrounding conjunctiva and cornea using the fibrin glue. An occlusive patch was applied. The outcome of surgery and any possible complications were periodically assessed.
RESULTS: Mean patient age was 54.9 years (28-75 years). The mean follow-up time was 26.05 +/- 3.15 (SD) weeks. The time of surgery was 15 to 20 minutes. During the postoperative course, none of the patients felt pain, and only 5/20 (25%) had the mild sensation of the presence of a foreign body. In 18/20 (90%) patients, the conjunctival autograft was observed to be correctly positioned and fixed in all the follow-up exams. No sutures were used during or after surgery. There were no cases of regrowth of the pterygium.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate the safety and efficiency of Tissucol Duo as a conjunctival adhesive for pterygium autograft surgery as treatment of primary pterygium. Because of its fast and easy application, this product considerably reduces the time of surgery. Its use also avoids complications derived from sutures and diminishes the sensation of a foreign body in the eye following surgery.

### PMID 16160756 (2006) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Transcatheter arterial embolization for tumor seeding in the chest wall after radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma.
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-004-0107-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Tumor seeding in the chest wall was depicted at follow-up CT obtained 9 months after radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma. Transcatheter arterial embolization was successfully performed, injecting emulsion of 10 mg of epirubicin and 1 ml of iodized oil followed by gelatin sponge particles via the microcatheter placed in the right eleventh intercostal artery. The patient died of tumor growth in the liver one year after the embolization, but no progression of the tumor seeding was noted during the follow-up period. We conclude that transcatheter arterial embolization was effective for the control of tumor seeding after radiofrequency ablation for hepatocellular carcinoma.

### PMID 16476614 (2006) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: The wrapping method using biodegradable felt strips has a preventive effect on the thinning of the aortic wall: experimental study in the canine aorta.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2005.09.044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Wrapping methods have been widely used to reinforce the anastomotic site in vascular surgery; however, postoperative changes in the aortic wall wrapped by nonbiodegradable felt have not been well characterized. The purposes of this investigation are to elucidate the sequelae of wrapping with nonbiodegradable felt on the aortic wall and to modify those changes by using biodegradable felt with or without basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF).
METHODS: The descending thoracic aortas of 15 beagles were wrapped with three different materials: nonbiodegradable polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) felt, biodegradable polyglycol acid (PGA) material, and PGA with 100 microg bFGF (n = 5 in each group). The descending thoracic aorta was resected after 3 months. The thickness of the aortic wall, vessel density in the media and the adventitia, and the wall strength were assessed. Untreated native aortic wall served as a normal control.
RESULTS: The thickness of the media of the PTFE group was lower than that of the PGA + bFGF group (66% +/- 5% vs 85% +/- 6% of control, P &lt; .05). The adventitia-media ratio in the PTFE group decreased compared with controls (59.1% of normal, P &lt; 0.05), whereas those in the PGA and PGA + bFGF groups increased (172.1% and 189.6% of normal, respectively, P &lt; .01). The collagen-smooth muscle ratio in the media was higher in the PTFE group than in the controls (0.14 +/- 0.02 vs 0.07 +/- 0.01, P &lt; .01). The number of vessels in the adventitia was higher in the PGA + bFGF group than those in PTFE or PGA groups (29.6 +/- 2.5/mm2 vs 6.4 +/- 0.8/mm2, 19.0 +/- 1.1/mm2, P &lt; .01). The PGA + bFGF group demonstrated larger failure force than the PTFE group (4.0 +/- 0.3 kgf vs 1.6 +/- 0.3 kgf, P &lt; .01). The failure stress in the PGA and PGA + bFGF groups was larger than that in PTFE group (PTFE:PGA + bFGF = 5.3 +/- 0.9 x10(2) kPa:11.7 +/- 1.7 x 10(2) kPa, P &lt; .01; PTFE:PGA = 5.3 +/- 0.9 x 10(2) kPa:11.2 +/- 1.2 x 10(2) kPa, P &lt; .05).
CONCLUSION: The aortic wall wrapped with nonbiodegradable PTFE felt showed a reduced thickness and diminished vessels in the adventitia. Biodegradable felt (PGA), with or without bFGF, modified these histologic changes. The vessel-rich thickened adventitia, after wrapping by PGA with bFGF, was associated with increased aortic wall strength.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: This investigation was conducted in an attempt to elucidate mechanisms underlying the occurrence of late postoperative false aneurysm after aortic surgery. We hypothesized that sustaining compression of the aorta by the felt strip may cause structural derangement and local ischemia on the aortic wall. We used a simple wrapping of the aorta with a felt strip rather than a felt strip at anastomotic sites to simplify the experimental model and to exclude confounding factors brought by technical inconsistency on the surgical anastomosis. We further attempted to find a clue for preventing adverse effects of wrapping with a conventional felt strip. Practically, we pursued a possible application of a biodegradable felt strip to aortic wrapping in our experimental model before we proceed in a clinical application of the new material.

### PMID 17213297 (2006) — The British journal of radiology
TITLE: Embolisation of proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysm developing after surgical repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm with a bifurcated graft with n-butyl cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1259/bjr/97367208 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a 60-year-old man who after undergoing surgical repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm with a bifurcated graft subsequently developed a proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysm, which was successfully treated by embolisation with n-butyl cyanoacrylate.

### PMID 17057010 (2006) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Embolization of an aortic arch pseudoaneurysm with coils and N-butyl-cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1097/01.RVI.0000240739.17833.60 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Endovascular treatment strategies are evolving as viable alternatives for the treatment of aortic pseudoaneurysms. The present report describes an enlarging aortic arch pseudoaneurysm that was successfully treated with a combination of embolization with detachable coils and N-butyl-cyanoacrylate.

### PMID 17062247 (2006) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Effective management of refractory postcardiotomy bleeding with the use of recombinant activated factor VII.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2006.05.076 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Severe coagulopathy after cardiovascular surgery may lead to intractable bleeding and is associated with increased mortality and morbidity. Recent studies have suggested that recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa) may play a role in decreasing postoperative bleeding. Herein we report our experience with the off-label use of rFVIIa in patients with refractory postcardiotomy bleeding.
METHODS: From June 2003 to December 2005, 17 patients (mean age, 65 +/- 18 years) received rFVIIa for refractory bleeding after cardiac surgery. Preoperative risk factors for bleeding included reoperation (n = 7), emergency surgery (n = 7), and renal or hepatic failure (n = 3). Surgical procedures were aortic surgery (n = 7), complex valve operations (n = 7), coronary artery bypass grafting (n = 2), and cardiac tumor resection (n = 1).
RESULTS: The average dose of rFVIIa was 103.1 +/- 30.2 microg/kg. After the administration of rFVIIa the blood loss was reduced and chest tube output decreased from an average of 300 mL/h to 60 mL/h (p = 0.024). Coagulation variables normalized (mean prothrombin time, 18 +/- 7 versus 14 +/- 3 seconds; p = 0.03; mean partial thromboplastin time, 94 +/- 50 versus 49 +/- 14 seconds; p = 0.02), and the need for blood products was significantly reduced. Only 1 patient required mediastinal reexploration. No thromboembolic complications occurred during hospitalization.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that rFVIIa is safe and efficacious in the management of refractory postcardiotomy bleeding. The use of rFVIIa is associated with reduced blood loss, rapid improvement of coagulation variables, and decreased need for blood products. Further studies are necessary to determine the safety and efficacy of this new hemostatic agent and its precise role in the treatment of severe postoperative coagulopathy.

### PMID 17041519 (2006) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Intratumoral hydrogen peroxide injection during meningioma resection.
DOI: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000233908.69004.95 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Meningiomas, although histologically benign, pose a particular challenge to the neurosurgeon because of their extensive and exuberant vascularity. They often bleed extensively during resection until separated from their blood supply. There are a wide variety of hemostatic agents available to the neurosurgeon. Most of these means of hemostasis involve some sort of chemical, electrical, or compressive action. Although anecdotally known to be useful, the use of hydrogen peroxide as an intracranial hemostatic agent in meningioma surgery has not been formally reported. We report a technique of meningioma resection that uses intratumoral hydrogen peroxide injection, reducing the potential for blood loss and shortening resection times.
METHODS: Seventy-five patients underwent resection of a meningioma using the direct intratumoral H2O2 injection technique. The locations of these meningiomas included convexity and cranial-based lesions. None of the patients underwent preoperative endovascular embolization.
RESULTS: The use of this technique greatly facilitated the removal of these tumors. No evidence of air embolism occurred during Doppler surveillance and no other significant side effects attributable to H2O2 application were observed.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate a previously unreported technique of meningioma resection that uses direct intratumoral hydrogen peroxide injection, potentially reducing blood loss, shortening resection times, and obviating the need for preoperative embolization.

### PMID 16899862 (2006) — Chest
TITLE: Successful use of recombinant factor VII in massive hemoptysis due to community-acquired pneumonia.
DOI: 10.1378/chest.130.2.577 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa) is a powerful hemostatic agent developed for use in hemophilia. It has been used increasingly in life-threatening hemorrhage in a variety of other settings in which conventional medical or surgical therapy is unsuccessful. This report describes the successful use of rFVIIa for pulmonary hemorrhage due to a focal bleeding source in a regional hospital where bronchial artery embolization or surgery were not available. rFVIIa may be a useful temporizing measure in the unstable patient with pulmonary hemorrhage without coagulopathic bleeding when conventional treatment is not immediately available.

### PMID 17670424 (2005) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Acute limb ischemia due to embolization of biological glue after repair of type A aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2005.106641 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We present two cases of type A aortic dissection repaired with the help of biological glue, that were followed by acute limb ischemia due to embolism of glue.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A 30-year-old man was diagnosed with aortic dissection from left coronary sinus to right subclavian artery. Under deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (DHCA), distal aortic anastomotic site was reconstructed with injection of Bioglue between dissected layers, and a valve sparing inclusion technique was performed using a straight dacron graft. On postoperative day 14, he presented acute limb ischemia due to femoral artery glue embolism that required surgery. A 76-year-old woman with the diagnosis of type A dissection ending proximal to the celiac trunk was operated under cardiopulmonary bypass and DHCA. The ascending aorta was replaced with a straight dacron tube, with resuspension of aortic valve and reinforcement of proximal and distal anastomosis with Bioglue between the diseased layers. Absence of previously patent radial pulse was detected intraoperatively, solved with humeral thromboembolectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: Management of the diseased aortic wall in acute dissections is a surgical challenge for the cardiac surgeon. Despite our group having a positive experience with biological glue in type A aortic dissection, this report reminds us that the use of bioadhesives to reinforce anastomotic sites may be an important tool but it is not free of problems.

### PMID 15740977 (2005) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Embolisation, inflammatory reaction and persistent patent false lumen: is biological glue really effective in repair of type A aortic dissection?
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2004.12.018 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016420">Comment, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 16374275 (2005) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Comparison of hemorrhage control agents applied to lethal extremity arterial hemorrhages in swine.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000187655.63698.9f | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: QuikClot powder (QC), chitosan dressing (CD), and fibrin sealant dressing (FSD) are new hemostatic products touted to be more effective in controlling severe extremity bleeding than the current standard gauze dressing. All have been utilized in the global war on terrorism. Our objective was to evaluate the hemostatic efficacy of these three products in a model of severe extremity arterial hemorrhage that could not be stopped by standard gauze treatment.
METHODS: A model of severe extremity arterial hemorrhage was developed in swine that was 100% fatal with standard gauze application and manual compression. The Army Field Bandage (AFB) was the standard gauze control. Anesthetized animals (n = 60, 15/group, 37.7 +/- 2.5 kg) were splenectomized and instrumented. A reproducible femoral artery injury was created using a 6 mm aortic punch, and free bleeding was allowed for 45 seconds. Each hemostatic agent was applied twice with three-minute compressions. All products were applied on actively bleeding wounds through a pool of blood. Fluid resuscitation was started with the first compression and titrated to a mean pressure of 65 mm Hg. Animals were observed for 180 minutes or until death. Endpoints were percent survival, survival time, blood loss, resuscitation volume, wound temperatures and tissue histology. Data are expressed as mean +/- SD and analyzed by Fisher's exact, logrank, and nonparametric ANOVA tests.
RESULTS: Baseline physiologic parameters were similar among groups. AFB did not produce hemostasis. QC also showed no hemostatic benefit, and QC treatment markedly increased maximum wound temperatures to an average of 70.8 +/- 4.2 degrees C (p &lt; 0.001). CD stopped bleeding temporarily in only one animal. There were no survivors in the AFB, QC, or CD groups. CD numerically prolonged survival time (58.9 +/- 21.1 minute) compared with the control (38.4 +/- 24.7 minutes, p = 0.045) but the difference was not significant. FSD reduced bleeding (p &lt; 0.05) and prevented exsanguination in 10/15 (2/3) animals, and resulted in a significantly longer average survival time (p &lt; 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: FSD was superior to other currently utilized hemostatic products in controlling lethal arterial hemorrhage in this model of a fatal extremity wound. CD showed some hemostatic benefit. The exothermic reaction of QC was significant and resulted in gross and histologic tissue changes of unknown clinical significance. Controlled human studies with the promising products are required.

### PMID 16212458 (2005) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: Fibrin glue aneurysm sac embolization at the time of endografting.
DOI: 10.1583/05-1574MR.1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To describe the procedural details for primary prevention of type II endoleak with fibrin glue injection into the aneurysm sac at the time of endografting.
TECHNIQUE: After deployment of the main stent-graft component, the angiographic pigtail catheter is withdrawn, leaving the 0.035-inch standard guidewire between the endograft and the native aorta. Through a brachial-femoral arterial guidewire loop, an 11-cm-long, 6-F introducer is advanced over the wire into the contralateral iliac artery. After deployment of the contralateral iliac extension, a 23-cm, 5-F sheath is advanced over the wire into the aneurysm sac. The wire and vessel dilator are removed, leaving the cannula in the sac. To prevent distal embolization of the sealant, a balloon is inflated in the contralateral limb to secure it to the native vessel before 5 mL of fibrin sealant are injected into the sac via a double-syringe delivery system inserted through the sheath. The balloon is left in place for 1 minute after sealant injection. In 64 consecutive patients in whom this technique has been used, sac embolization has been successful. There have been no intraoperative complications or in-hospital mortality. Over a mean follow-up of 9.3+/-4.4 months (range 1-18), only 1 lumbar endoleak has been detected on surveillance imaging.
CONCLUSIONS: This preventive strategy appears to be an effective approach and the best therapeutic choice for preventive management of type II endoleak.

### PMID 16096535 (2005) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Hemostatic efficacy of two advanced dressings in an aortic hemorrhage model in Swine.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000171458.72037.ee | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An effective hemostatic agent capable of stopping severe arterial bleeding and sustaining hemostasis over a prolonged time is required. The U.S. Army recently distributed fibrin sealant (under an Investigational New Drug-approved protocol) and chitosan dressings among deployed medics for treating severe external hemorrhage on the battlefield. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of these dressings, as compared with the standard gauze army field dressing, to provide initial and sustained hemostasis up to 96 hours in a lethal uncontrolled arterial hemorrhage model.
METHODS: Anesthetized pigs were splenectomized and chronically instrumented for fluid/drug administration and continuous monitoring of vital signs. An infrarenal aortotomy was created using a 4.4-mm aortic hole punch and free bleeding was allowed for 5 seconds. While bleeding profusely, a dressing was applied and pressed into the wound for 4 minutes (occluding the distal flow) and then released. If hemostasis was not obtained, the dressing was replaced with a new one (maximum, two dressings per experiment) with another 4-minute compression. If hemostasis was achieved, the abdomen was closed; the animal was then recovered and monitored up to 96 hours. Initial hemostasis, duration of hemostasis, survival time, blood loss, and other variables were measured.
RESULTS: Application of army field dressing (gauze) did not stop the arterial hemorrhage and led to exsanguination of all the pigs (n = 6) within 10 to 15 minutes of the injury. Chitosan dressing produced initial hemostasis in five of seven pigs. However, the dressings failed to maintain hemostasis for more than 1.6 hours (range, 28-102 minutes), resulting in secondary bleeding and death of the animals. Fibrin sealant dressing produced initial hemostasis in all the pigs (n = 6) and maintained hemostasis in five cases, with one failure at 2.2 hours. These pigs resumed normal activities and lived for the 96-hour experiment duration. Computed tomographic images and histologic sections of the aortas from surviving fibrin sealant dressing-treated animals showed formation of pseudoaneurysms and early granulation tissue at the aortotomy site. The posttreatment blood loss, duration of hemostasis, and survival time were significantly different in the fibrin sealant dressing group than the chitosan dressing and army field dressing groups.
CONCLUSION: Both chitosan dressing and fibrin sealant dressing stopped initial arterial bleeding that could not be controlled by the standard army field dressing. However, although the fibrin sealant dressing secured hemostasis for up to 4 days, the chitosan dressing consistently failed within 2 hours after application. There may be a risk of rebleeding for high-pressure arterial wounds treated with chitosan dressings, particularly in situations where definitive care is delayed substantially.

### PMID 16293923 (2005) — Internal medicine (Tokyo, Japan)
TITLE: Anaphylaxis to aprotinin in fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.44.1088 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 50-year-old man with chronic otitis media was admitted to our hospital for investigation of lung cancer. He had received repeated instillations of fibrin sealant (Bolheal) in myringoplasty 7 times over 12 months. During the lower lobectomy, soon after fibrin sealant was applied to seal bronchopleural fistulas, systolic blood pressure decreased to 60 mmHg. Treatment with epinephrine and dopamine was required until his condition improved 2 days later. The specific IgE antibody was detected for the solution for fibrinogen and factor XIII containing bovine aprotinin. Cross-reactivity between purified aprotinin and the solution was noted by competitive ELISA inhibition tests.

### PMID 15953052 (2005) — Wound repair and regeneration : official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue Repair Society
TITLE: Wound healing and degradation of the fibrin sealant Beriplast P following partial liver resection in rabbits.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1067-1927.2005.130315.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The objective of this study was to investigate the degradation kinetics of the fibrin sealant (FS) Beriplast P in an experimental liver surgery model in rabbits. A partial liver resection was performed in 21 rabbits, and the wound area covered with Beriplast P to ensure hemostasis. Wound healing of the resection sites was evaluated morphologically over 11 weeks. Degradation of the FS was evaluated by measuring the thickness of the remaining fibrin layer. Plasma samples were analyzed for antibodies against fibrinogen, albumin, thrombin, fibrin, and factor XIII. No postoperative hemorrhage was observed, indicating successful hemostasis throughout. The FS was degraded with a half-life of about 25 days postapplication and was completely replaced by granulation tissue within 9 weeks. The FS degradation and tissue development followed the general stages of wound healing: inflammation and resorption, proliferation, organization and production of collagen, maturation, and scarring. An immune reaction was elicited against the main four human proteins of the FS. The antibody titers peaked on day 14, with a gradual decrease thereafter. We conclude that the FS accomplished hemostasis, facilitated healing in accordance with natural processes, and was completely degraded over time. In humans, the reduced immunogenicity of the FS would potentially increase its degradation half-life.

### PMID 15921738 (2005) — Biomaterials
TITLE: Biochemical characterization of autologous fibrin sealants produced by CryoSeal and Vivostat in comparison to the homologous fibrin sealant product Tissucol/Tisseel.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.04.014 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Different principles for production of "autologous fibrin sealant" have been established, and commercial devices employing these methods are nowadays available and used in clinical routine. Users might anticipate for these autologous fibrin sealants features comparable to commercial homologous fibrin sealants, used in surgical routine for many years. However, only little is known about biochemical properties, formation, cross-linking and stability of fibrin sealant clots produced for autologous use with the aid of commercially available devices. We have investigated protein composition, formation and stability of clots obtained from autologuous fibrin sealants produced with commercially available devices (CryoSeal and Vivostat) and compared these parameters to those of the industrially produced homologous fibrin sealant Tissucol/Tisseel. The CryoSeal product is a mixture of many plasma proteins; the Vivostat product and Tissucol/Tisseel appear as comparatively pure plasma derivatives. The products differ in their protein composition and concentrations, including their concentration in fibrin. Significant fibrin alpha and gamma-chain cross-linking by FXIIIa occurs only in Tissucol/Tisseel clots. In test tubes CryoSeal and Vivostat (tranexamic acid-free formulation) fibrin clots liquefy within 1-2 days, but Vivostat (tranexamic acid containing formulation) clots were stable for 4 days and showed partial liquefaction after 5 days. Tissucol/Tisseel clots, containing the protease inhibitor aprotinin, appeared unchanged over the observation period of 5 days. In an in vitro model mimicking in vivo conditions (diffusion of protease inhibitors and proteolytic digestion) clot liquefaction occurs at day 1 for all autologous fibrin sealants clots, with an observable delay for the tranexamic acid containing Vivostat, and day 5 for Tissucol/Tisseel clots. Characterization of the CryoSeal and Vivostat fibrin sealants and Tissucol/Tisseel and their performance show a clear difference in biochemical properties.

### PMID 16525952 (2005) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Haemostasis using a ready-to-use collagen sponge coated with activated thrombin and fibrinogen.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Adequate haemostasis is an important part of any surgical procedure, but particularly so in the case of visceral organ surgery where apparently insignificant ooze can ultimately result in significant haemorrhage and coagulopathy. To achieve haemorrhage control, the surgeon may use conventional techniques (eg, suture ligation, diathermy, and swab compression), but failing this has the option of using physical coagulation tools (eg, the argon beam coagulator) and haemostasis adjuncts (eg, fibrin glues and collagen sheets). Advances in manufacturing have led to development of several other haemostatic products including absorbable gelatin sponges, cyanoacrylates, and polymer-based adhesives. One such product consists of a fixed, ready-to-use equine collagen sponge coated with human thrombin and fibrinogen. It may be applied directly to the bleeding surface, without the need for preparation or reconstitution. This chapter reviews the published evidence and compares its use to other classes of haemostasis adjuncts across a range of surgical specialties, namely hepatic, splenic, thoracic, vascular, and minimally invasive surgery. It also aims to highlight the apparent advantages and limitations of the fibrinogen and thrombin-coated collagen sponge compared to other commercially available haemostasis adjuncts, and identify potential applications for the product.

### PMID 16305845 (2005) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Reconstitution of blood supply of the denuded bronchial stump.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2005.05.104 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Our aim was to study the process of microcirculatory reconstitution in the bronchial stump after pneumonectomy.
METHODS: Eighteen juvenile pigs (median weight 40.6 kg) were randomly assigned to three groups. In all animals left pneumonectomy was performed and the stapled bronchial stump (median length 3.8 cm) carefully denuded. Group I animals received coverage of the stump by intercostal flap. In group II, the stump was covered with TachoComb, an impermeable hemostatic fleece; and group III served as a control without any coverage of the stump. Animals were sacrificed at day 14 after surgery. Vascular density was evaluated in serial histologic sections at multiple levels stained with CD-31 antibody. One-way analysis of variance and the Wilcoxon test were used for data analysis.
RESULTS: At autopsy, stumps of group III animals were totally covered by adjacent mediastinal structures. In group I, intercostal flaps were viable and completely healed to the bronchial stumps. There were no signs of infection or stump insufficiency in these groups. In all group II animals, empyema developed, and stumps were found necrotic at macroscopic and histologic evaluation. Statistical analysis revealed significantly lower vascular density of mature vessels in the area of the bronchial stump in group II compared with both other groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Reconstitution of microcirculation of the denuded bronchial stump after pneumonectomy takes place in a centripetal way from adjacent viable tissue. Hence, the purpose of covering the bronchial stump is the improvement of blood supply rather than mechanical reinforcement.

### PMID 16167820 (2005) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Acute left ventricular rupture and cardiac tamponade caused by blunt trauma; report of a case].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: It is difficult to save patients with acute left ventricular rupture and cardiac tamponade caused by blunt trauma. A 67-year-old man hospitalized due to sustained multiple blunt trauma. The systolic blood pressure was 40 mmHg. Chest computed tomography (CT) and ultrasonic echocardiography revealed cardiac tamponade. Abdominal CT indicated left renal contusion. Pericardial drainage via the subxiphoid approach drew about 1,000 ml of blood from the pericardial sac, which only transiently increased blood pressure. Median sternotomy and subsequent pericardiotomy revealed pulsatile bleeding jet through a laceration of about 2.0 cm long in the left ventricle near the first diagonal branch. After complete digital compression, the portion was covered by a biological tissue adhesive/sealant sheet (TachoComb), which completely suppressed bleeding. The postoperative course was uneventful. He was discharged from the hospital on the 20th day after the operation.

### PMID 16261893 (2005) — Chinese medical sciences journal = Chung-kuo i hsueh k'o hsueh tsa chih
TITLE: Reconstruction of the sellar floor following transsphenoidal surgery using gelatin foam and fibrin glue.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To introduce a new principle of sellar reconstruction and to evaluate the effectiveness of absorbable gelatin foam and fibrin glue for sellar reconstruction.
METHODS: A total of 176 consecutive patients who underwent surgery for pituitary adenomas, cysts, chordomas, or subdiaphragmatic craniopharyngiomas in the sella turcica between January 2001 and April 2003 at Peking Union Medical College Hospital were enrolled. Different techniques of sellar closure and indications for each specific condition were retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: Seventy-seven (43.7%) patients developed a visible cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage during surgery. Intra-operative CSF leakage were repaired simply with gelatin foam and fibrin glue in 62 (35.2%) patients, and with autologous fat graft and sellar floor reconstruction in 15 (8.5%) patients. Postoperative CSF rhinorrhea occurred only in 1 case. There were no visual deterioration, allergic rhinitis, meningitis, pneumocranium, granulomas, or other complications associated with the reconstruction procedure.
CONCLUSION: The procedure of using gelatin foam and fibrin glue and principle of cranial base reconstruction is safe and effective in preventing postoperative complications following transsphenoidal surgery.

### PMID 16125959 (2005) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Fibrinolytic inhibitors in off-pump coronary surgery: a prospective, randomized, double-blind TAP study (tranexamic acid, aprotinin, placebo).
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2005.06.027 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate and compare hemostatic effects of tranexamic acid vs. aprotinin vs. placebo in off-pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB) surgery and, in addition, to assess the safety of fibrinolytic inhibitors therapies.
METHODS: In a prospective, randomized, double-blind study finally 91 patients undergoing OPCAB were investigated (group A, n=32, tranexamic acid 1g before skin incision and continuously 200mg/h; group B, n=29, aprotinin 1,000,000IU before skin incision and 250,000IU/h; group C, n=30, placebo).
RESULTS: Highly significant inter-group differences were found in cumulative blood loss within 4h (geometric means [95% confidence intervals]-group A: 89.3 [72.7, 109.8] mL, group B: 72.3 [49.2, 106.3] mL and group C: 192.3 [151.8, 243.5] mL) (P&lt;0.001), within 8h (group A: 152.1 [120.7, 191.6] mL, group B: 130.3 [88.1, 192.8] mL and group C: 283.8 [226.0, 356.3] mL) (P=0.001), and within 24h postoperatively (group A: 410.3 [337.6, 498.6] mL, group B: 345.8 [256.0, 398.2] mL and group C: 619.8 [524.3, 732.8] mL) (P&lt;0.001). At all time points, placebo group C was significantly distinct from the groups treated with fibrinolytic inhibitors (groups A and B). However, no differences between groups A and B were found. Both mean hemoglobin and hematocrit values 24h postoperatively were different between the groups (P=0.018 and P=0.077, respectively), acheiving the lowest value in group C. Number of re-transfuzed patients was highest in group C, but without statistical significance (either packed red blood cells, P=0.119 or fresh-frozen plasma, P=0.118). We observed one postoperative myocardial infarction in aprotinin treated group B and one temporary postoperative myocardial ischemia in placebo group C, no cerebrovascular or pulmonary embolism was noticed. Treated groups A and B did not demonstrate postoperative increase in mean levels of myocardial enzymes, compared with group C. Significantly higher mean values of D-dimer were found in group C 24h postoperatively (P&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Both tranexamic acid and aprotinin seem to be similarly effective in the reduction of postoperative blood loss in OPCAB. Tranexamic acid appears to be cost-effective and safe alternative to aprotinin.

### PMID 15995463 (2005) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Therapeutic endovascular treatments for traumatic carotid artery injuries.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000171550.01402.ed | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The diagnosis and management of traumatic carotid vessel injuries continue to be controversial, with direct surgical repair with parent artery preservation still presenting difficulties. The purpose of this report is to review the endovascular therapy of patients with traumatic carotid vessel injuries for preservation of the parent artery, and to determine the safety and efficacy of endovascular therapy.
METHODS: Ten patients with traumatic carotid lesions were treated using therapeutic endovascular methods. Endovascular therapy was accomplished by implanting balloons, porous or polytetrafluoroethylene-covered stents, and/or embolic materials including coils or glue.
RESULTS: All fistulas and pseudoaneurysms were successfully embolized with no periprocedural complications including vessel disruption/rupture, distal embolization, or new neurologic deficits. The parent arteries of all patients except one were preserved. The reason for the parent artery sacrifice was a thrombus formation due to coil migration into the parent artery. No additional surgical procedures for vascular lesions were required. There were no delayed neurologic or vascular complications, and no lesions recurred during the follow-up periods (mean 20.3 months).
CONCLUSION: The goal of endovascular therapy is the selective elimination of the vascular pathology with the normal patency of the cerebral arteries. The authors' experience demonstrates that endovascular therapy using stents, balloons, and coils is both feasible and safe for treatment of traumatic carotid injuries. Of these endovascular methods, the stent can be used to exclude the aneurysm or fistula from the circulation and preserve the parent artery in selective cases. Long-term follow-up review of these repairs will be necessary to provide a full evaluation of the safety and efficacy of these devices.

### PMID 16111949 (2005) — Gastrointestinal endoscopy
TITLE: Endoscopic debridement of paraesophageal, mediastinal abscesses: a prospective case series.
DOI: 10.1016/j.gie.2005.03.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Mediastinal abscesses after esophageal perforation or postoperative leakage nearly always require surgical intervention.
METHODS: Patients with paraesophageal abscesses were treated with EUS-guided or endoscopic mediastinal puncture if the abscess was &gt;2 cm and sepsis was present. Abscess cavities were entered with a 9.5-mm endoscope after balloon dilation to allow irrigation and drainage. Debris was removed with a Dormia basket. Concomitant pleural effusions were treated with transthoracic drains. Patients received intravenous antibiotics and enteral/parenteral nutrition.
RESULTS: Twenty patients fulfilled the entry criteria. Simple drainage was sufficient in 4 cases, and puncture was impossible in one case. Of the 15 treated patients (age 39-76 years, 5 women) the etiology of perforation was Boerhaave's syndrome (n = 8), anastomotic leak (n = 3), and iatrogenic perforation (n = 4). Debridement was successful in all cases and required a median of 5 daily sessions (range 3-10). All patients became apyrexial, with a C-reactive protein &lt; 5 mg/L within a median of 4 days (range 2-8 days). Esophageal defects were closed with endoclips (n = 7), fibrin glue (n = 4), metal stents (n = 1), or spontaneously healed (n = 3). One patient died from a massive pulmonary embolism one day after successful debridement (mortality 7%). No other complications were seen. Median follow-up was 12 months (range 3-40 months).
CONCLUSIONS: Nonoperative endoscopic transesophageal debridement of mediastinal abscesses appears safe and effective.

### PMID 15750431 (2005) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Management of middle meningeal and superficial temporal artery hemorrhage from total temporomandibular joint replacement surgery with a gelatin-based hemostatic agent.
DOI: 10.1097/00001665-200503000-00020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Complications associated with temporomandibular joint (TMJ) replacement surgery may include injury to nerves, blood vessels, and otologic structures. Vascular injuries can be associated with trauma to the carotid artery and its terminal branches, the superficial temporal artery, and the internal maxillary artery. Suggested management to control hemorrhage has included uniand bipolar electrocautery, laser ablation, local anesthetics with vasoconstrictors, direct pressure, embolization, and ligation. In this case report, the iatrogenic injury to both the middle meningeal and superficial temporal arteries during total TMJ replacement surgery controlled by using a gelatin-based hemostatic agent is discussed.

### PMID 15526133 (2004) — Surgery today
TITLE: Repair of delayed left ventricular rupture after mitral valve replacement: report of a case.
DOI: 10.1007/s00595-004-2844-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Rupture of the left ventricle (LV) after mitral valve replacement (MVR) is a devastating complication, associated with high mortality. A 64-year-old woman with a type I delayed LV rupture, which occurred after MVR with a 27-mm St. Jude Medical mitral prosthesis for mitral stenosis, was successfully treated by a combination of intracardiac and extracardiac surgical repair techniques. The extracardiac repair involved approximating the edges of myocardium around the tear with large sutures bolstered by strips of Teflon felt, then covering the epicardial hematoma with another porcine pericardial patch, using gelatin resorcinol formaldehyde glue and collagen sheets. The intracardiac repair involved suturing the edges of an oval piece of porcine pericardium to the endocardium around the laceration. No LV pseudoaneurysm was detected postoperatively on echocardiography or computed tomography scans. The patient is well 2 years after the operation.

### PMID 15757301 (2004) — Vestnik khirurgii imeni I. I. Grekova
TITLE: [Means of reducing blood loss and volume of the used transfused media in operative treatment of burn lesions of the liver].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An experience with surgical treatment of 77 patients with focal lesions of the liver is described. The patients were divided into two groups. In the main group (42 patients) the treatment-and-prophylactic method was used including acute isovolemic and hypervolemic hemodilution, preliminary preparation of autoblood, isolation and ligation of the vascular-secretory elements, the application for local hemostasis with Takhokomb of "Tissucol", gelatinous sponge with gentamycin. In the group of comparison the compression of the hepatoduodenal ligament, isolation of the vascular-secretory elements by digitoclasia method, suturing the liver stump with polysorb were used in resection of the liver. The strategy used in the main group allowed to reduce the volume of blood loss, to lessen the number of doses of the transfused donor blood, to diminish the number of postoperative complications by 30.5%. The used complex is effective, simple and is not expensive.

### PMID 15280747 (2004) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Application of the poly-N-acetyl glucosamine-derived rapid deployment hemostat trauma dressing in severe/lethal Swine hemorrhage trauma models.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000136746.97192.b2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The Rapid Deployment Hemostat (RDH) Bandage was developed for the rapid control of bleeding caused by trauma.
METHODS: An extremity wound involving skin, muscle, bone, and femoral arterial injury and a 1-cm vertical incision in the abdominal aorta in swine were studied to compare the RDH Bandage, a fibrin sealant dressing and gauze to restore hemostasis. The total blood loss was determined and the survival of animals was measured.
RESULTS: In the extremity injury model, the RDH Bandage reduced blood loss by 63% compared with the gauze control. In the aorta arterial incision model, the RDH Bandage required a significantly lower compression time to control bleeding compared with gauze and TachoComb. The RDH Bandage was able to stop bleeding from this injury in 100% of the tests.
CONCLUSION: The RDH Bandage was superior to a commercially available fibrin bandage in controlling hemorrhage, decreasing blood loss, and increasing survival.

### PMID 15079782 (2004) — European journal of vascular and endovascular surgery : the official journal of the European Society for Vascular Surgery
TITLE: Randomised controlled trial to evaluate the efficacy of TachoComb H patches in controlling PTFE suture-hole bleeding.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2004.01.018 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Suture-hole bleeding is a considerable problem in vascular procedures using polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) grafts. This study aimed to study the efficacy of TachoComb H patches in controlling suture-hole bleeding.
DESIGN: Prospective randomised controlled trial. Materials and methods. Patients undergoing femoral anastomosis and femoral or carotid patch angioplasty with PTFE grafts were prospectively randomised to TachoComb H patches or standard compression with surgical swabs.
RESULTS: Twenty four patients were randomised (12 patients in each treatment group). The median time to haemostasis was 300 (range 180-600)s in patients treated with TachoComb H and 660 (range 180-1200)s in the control group. The log rank test of equality over treatments based on the 22 patients with assessment of time to haemostasis showed statistical significance (p=0.0134). There were no serious complications associated with use of TachoComb H patches.
CONCLUSION: TachoComb H patches were found to be safe and effective for the control of suture-hole bleeding in patients undergoing vascular reconstruction with PTFE grafts.

### PMID 15214828 (2004) — Archives of pathology &amp; laboratory medicine
TITLE: Textiloma (gossypiboma) mimicking recurrent intracranial tumor.
DOI: 10.5858/2004-128-749-TGMRIT | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: CONTEXT: Resorbable substances used to achieve hemostasis during neurosurgical procedures comprise 3 principal classes based on chemical composition: (1) gelatin sponge, (2) oxidized cellulose, and (3) microfibrillar collagen. Nonresorbable hemostatic aides include various forms of cotton and rayon-based hemostats (cottonoids and kites). Resorbable and nonresorbable hemostatic agents have been reported to cause symptomatic mass lesions, most commonly following intra-abdominal surgery. Histologic examination typically shows a core of degenerating hemostatic agent surrounded by an inflammatory reaction. Each agent exhibits distinctive morphologic features that often permit specific identification. Hemostat-associated mass lesions have been variously referred to as textilomas, gossypibomas, gauzomas, or muslinomas.
OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to (1) identify cases of histologically proven cases of textiloma in neurosurgical operations, (2) characterize the specific hemostatic agent associated with textiloma formation, and (3) characterize the preoperative magnetic resonance imaging appearance of textiloma.
DESIGN: Cases in which a textiloma constituted the sole finding on repeat surgery for recurrent brain tumor, or was a clinically significant component of a radiologically identified mass lesion together with residual tumor, constituted the study set.
RESULTS: Five textilomas were identified and evaluated. The primary neoplasm was different in each case and included pituitary adenoma, tanycytic ependymoma, anaplastic astrocytoma, gliosarcoma, and oligodendroglioma. In all cases, preoperative magnetic resonance imaging suggested recurrent tumor. Textilomas included all categories of resorbable hemostatic agent. Other foreign bodies were present in some cases; the origin of these foreign bodies was traced to fibers shed from nonresorbable hemostatic material placed temporarily during surgery and removed before closure (cottonoids and kites). Inflammatory reactions included giant cells, granulomas, and fibroblastic proliferation. Microfibrillar collagen (Avitene) textilomas were associated with a striking eosinophil infiltration that was not seen with any other hemostatic agent.
CONCLUSIONS: Hemostatic agents may produce clinically symptomatic, radiologically apparent mass lesions. When considering a mass lesion arising after intracranial surgery, the differential diagnosis should include textiloma along with recurrent tumor and radiation necrosis.

### PMID 16933382 (2004) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Traumatic dissection of the internal maxillary artery associated with isolated glossopharyngeal nerve palsy: case report.
DOI: 10.1227/01.neu.0000134467.39340.55 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE AND IMPORTANCE: Spontaneous or traumatic dissection of the internal carotid artery with resultant lower cranial nerve palsies is well documented. However, dissection of the external carotid artery with lower cranial palsies has not been reported previously.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A 42-year-old man experienced an epidural hematoma as the result of a fall and underwent a craniotomy and hematoma removal. Subsequently, he developed dysgeusia and difficulty in swallowing. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a dilated linear structure, with isosignal intensity on T1-weighted images and hyperintense signal intensity on T2-weighted images. Strong enhancement was seen on postcontrast T1-weighted images, indicating a dissected internal maxillary artery. This was confirmed on selective angiography of the left common carotid artery.
INTERVENTION: Guglielmi detachable coils were introduced into the false lumen of the dissected artery. Subsequently, 0.5 ml of glue mixed with Lipiodol (Lafayette Pharmacal, Lafayette, IN) was packed into the remnant of the false lumen. Repeat angiograms demonstrated complete occlusion of the dissected vessel. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and the neurological deficits gradually improved.
CONCLUSION: We describe the first reported case of internal maxillary artery dissection and pseudoaneurysm presenting with isolated glossopharyngeal nerve palsy. The association between cranial nerve palsy and dissection of the external carotid artery branch may be the result of a compressive mechanism, as suggested by its anatomic relationships, the characteristics of the dissection, and the good prognosis. Endovascular embolization of the external carotid artery dissection and pseudoaneurysm is suggested as an effective therapeutic method for improving or alleviating neurological deficits produced by mass effect.

### PMID 14759427 (2004) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Application of biological glue in repair of intracardiac structural defects.
DOI: 10.1016/S0003-4975(03)01533-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: BioGlue (Cryolife Inc, Kennesaw GA) was introduced as an alternative tissue sealant. Its most common application has been in repairs of acute dissections of the aorta. There is no reported experience with its use in the repair of intracardiac structural defects.
METHODS: In 5 patients BioGlue was used as an adjunct in repairs of complex intracardiac structural defects. It was used during patch repair of posterior mitral annular defects in 2 patients and aortic annular defect in 1 patient in the presence of active endocarditis. It was also used in 1 patient with a chronic atrioventricular groove pseudoaneurysm following mitral valve replacement, and in 1 patient during repair of a postinfarction posterior ventricular septal rupture.
RESULTS: There were no hospital or late deaths. Immediate intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography and late follow-up echocardiography documented complete and durable repair of all defects without recurrence. At follow-up all patients are in New York Heart Association class I-II, 6 to 29 months postoperatively. No patient has suffered late complications or exhibited signs of glue embolization.
CONCLUSIONS: BioGlue was found to be an effective adjuvant to the standard techniques used for the repair of intracardiac structural defects of various etiologies. Long-term follow-up is recommended to determine its long-term safety in this application.

### PMID 14747107 (2004) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Histopathological effects of ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive following surgical application: an experimental study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2003.11.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To investigate experimentally the possible histopathological effects of ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate glue when used as a tissue adhesive in cardiovascular and thoracic surgery.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were used for this study. For histopathological investigation, a study group of 144 rats in which intentionally produced lesions in myocardium (n=36), ascending aorta (n=36), lung (n=36) and abdominal aorta (n=36) were closed by using ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate was compared with the control group (n=144) in which the same lesions were closed by using sutures. On each of days 1, 7, 15, 30, 45 and 60, six rats from the study group and six rats from the control group were sacrificed and analyzed for each relevant organ in terms of bonding of ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate polymers to tissue, foreign body reaction, inflammatory reactions, and necrosis. Endothelial cell damage, intimal hyperplasia, and thrombus formation were also evaluated in arteriotomy sections.
RESULTS: In histopathological analysis of vascular, myocardial and pulmonary tissue sections, there was no significant histopathological difference between conventionally sutured tissues and ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate-applied tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: As no significant difference between conventional suture and ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate application was detected in terms of histopathological reactions, ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate may be considered as an alternative or adjunct to conventional techniques in controlling hemorrhage that cannot be controlled by conventional methods, in tissue repair and in the control of pulmonary air leakage, and may be used in vascular, myocardial and pulmonary surgery.

### PMID 11888460 (2002) — Archives of surgery (Chicago, Ill. : 1960)
TITLE: A polymeric sealant inhibits anastomotic suture hole bleeding more rapidly than gelfoam/thrombin: results of a randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1001/archsurg.137.3.326 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: HYPOTHESIS: An experimental polymeric sealant (CoSeal [Cohesion Technologies, Palo Alto, Calif]) provides equivalent anastomotic sealing to Gelfoam (Upjohn, Kalamazoo, Mich)/thrombin during surgical placement of prosthetic vascular grafts.
DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial.
SETTING: Nine university-affiliated medical centers.
PATIENTS: One hundred forty-eight patients scheduled for implantation of polytetrafluoroethylene grafts, mainly for infrainguinal revascularization procedures or the creation of dialysis access shunts, who were treated randomly with either an experimental intervention (n = 74) or control (n = 74).
INTERVENTION: Following polytetrafluoroethylene graft placement, anastomotic suture hole bleeding was treated intraoperatively in all control subjects with Gelfoam/thrombin. Subjects in the experimental group had the polymeric sealant applied directly to the suture lines without concomitant manual compression.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary treatment success was defined as the proportion of subjects in each group that achieved complete anastomotic sealing within 10 minutes. The proportion of subjects that achieved immediate sealing and the time required to fully inhibit suture hole bleeding also were compared between treatment groups.
RESULTS: Overall 10-minute sealing success was equivalent (86% vs 80%; P =.29) between experimental and control subjects, respectively. However, subjects treated with CoSeal achieved immediate anastomotic sealing at more than twice the rate of subjects treated with Gelfoam/thrombin (47% vs 20%; P&lt;.001). Consequently, the median time needed to inhibit bleeding in control subjects was more than 10 times longer than for experimental subjects (16.5 seconds vs 189.0 seconds; P =.01). Strikingly similar findings for all comparisons were observed separately for subgroups of subjects having infrainguinal bypass grafting and for those undergoing placement of dialysis access shunts.
CONCLUSIONS: The experimental sealant offers equivalent anastomotic sealing performance compared with Gelfoam/thrombin, but it provides this desired effect in a significantly more rapid time frame.

### PMID 12142185 (2002) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Significant merits of a fibrin sealant in the presence of coagulopathy following paediatric cardiac surgery: randomised controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(02)00271-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The efficacy of a fibrin sealant in paediatric cardiac surgery has been demonstrated. However, its effectiveness in the presence of significant untreated coagulopathy has not been addressed. This study was designed to investigate the role of the topical application of a fibrin sealant, Beriplast P (BP), in the presence of coagulopathy following paediatric cardiac surgery.
METHODS: After confirming the presence of significant post-bypass coagulopathy, patients undergoing repair of congenital heart defects using cardiopulmonary bypass were randomised to the use of BP (group BP) or no intervention (group C). BP was applied over suture lines and microvascular bleeding sites. Criteria for transfusion of blood and blood products were standardised for both groups. Outcome variables were: (1) post-operative bleeding; (2) transfusion of blood and blood products; (3) theatre time to achieve haemostasis; (4) ventilation time, intensive therapy unit (ITU) and hospital stay.
RESULTS: Fifty-two patients (n=26 in each group), aged 3 days to 17.4 years were recruited. There were no hospital deaths and no significant differences in demographic or intraoperative variables that might have affected the chosen endpoints. After protamine, all patients in both groups had significant coagulopathy (P&lt; or = 0.05 versus baseline). There were fewer patients receiving transfusions of fresh frozen plasma (FPP) in the intervention group, when compared to the control group (P&lt; or = 0.05). Patients receiving BP spent less time in theatre to achieve haemostasis (P&lt; or = 0.05), had a lesser amount of bleeding intraoperatively (P&lt; or = 0.01), at 4h (P&lt; or = 0.05) and at 24h (P&lt; or = 0.05), required a lower amount of transfusions of red cells (P&lt; or = 0.01), FPP (P&lt; or = 0.05) and platelets (P&lt; or = 0.05). There were no differences in ventilation time, length of stay in ITU or in hospital.
CONCLUSIONS: Even in the presence of significant coagulopathy, intraoperative use of fibrin sealant in paediatric cardiac surgery reduces the amount of bleeding and need for transfusions of blood and blood products. The theatre time necessary to achieve haemostasis is also significantly reduced. These findings have a potential to improve clinical outcomes and enhance cost benefits.

### PMID 11960146 (2002) — Neurology India
TITLE: Microneural anastomosis with fibrin glue: an experimental study.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An experimental study was designed to compare the histological analysis of nerve anastomosis with 10-0 microsurgical sutures and fibrin adhesive. Wistar albino rats' sciatic nerves were transected and repaired either with fibrin adhesive-Beriplast P (M/s Centeon-Cadila Health Care) or with 10-0 monofilament microsutures. Histological assessment was performed at 10, 20, 30, 60 and 90 days after surgery. Functional recovery of the sciatic nerves started at two months and was near normal by three months. Separation of the stumps did not occur in any of the glued nerves. Histological evaluation showed no appreciable difference in the outcome of nerve regeneration after microsurgical repair using sutures or fibrin tissue adhesive. However, inflammation and granuloma formation were appreciated at the suture site, which presented a focal hindrance to myelin and axonal regeneration. Fibrin glueing is attractive for clinical purposes, since it is simpler and less time consuming than suturing.

### PMID 11957796 (2002) — Polski merkuriusz lekarski : organ Polskiego Towarzystwa Lekarskiego
TITLE: [Topical treatment of bleeding post removed teeth in patients with prosthetic heart valves whose receiving long-term of oral anticoagulant therapy].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Removed teeth in patients receiving long-term oral anticoagulant drugs there are all the time live insure, very important and controversial problem in stomatological practice. Continuation of anticoagulation oral drugs exposure the patients so long haemorrhage while withdraw anticoagulant therapy to induce the risk of thromboembolism. The investigation were in 53 patients with prosthetic heart valves whose treated oral anticoagulant agents. The all patients have removed teeth without withdraw anticoagulant therapy. TachoComb administrated in alveoli post extraction teeth. The hemorrhage were in 4 (7.54%) cause.

### PMID 12127814 (2002) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Comparative study of the efficacy of the common topical hemostatic agents with fibrin sealant in a rabbit aortic anastomosis model.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2002.6426 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to compare the hemostatic efficacy of the common surgical hemostatic agents with fibrin sealant (FS) and to assess their functional strength to secure hemostasis in lieu of placing additional sutures.
METHODS: End-to-end anastomosis of transected abdominal aorta was performed in moderately anticoagulated rabbits using 4 or 6 interrupted sutures. The suture line was covered either with gauze alone ("untreated") or with gauze plus Gelfoam, Avitene, Surgicel, FloSeal, or FS, following which blood flow was restored. Blood loss was absorbed by gauze and measured. The surviving rabbits were recovered and the repaired vessel was examined histologically 4 weeks after operation. The investigators were blinded to the treatment groups. Aortic anastomoses using 8 or 12 sutures (untreated) were also performed.
RESULTS: Untreated 4-suture anastomosis of aorta resulted in a profuse hemorrhage with an average 108.0 +/- 19.2 (mean +/- SD) ml blood loss and 100% mortality (n = 4). FS application sealed the anastomoses, prevented blood loss (P &lt; 0.01 vs untreated) and exsanguination of the rabbits (n = 4). Other hemostatic agents reduced the bleeding to varying degrees compared to the untreated animals (Gelfoam 66.4 +/- 17.6, Avitene 80.6 +/- 34, Surgicel 66.7 +/- 16.7, FloSeal 44.2 +/- 8.5 ml blood loss, n = 4/group), but the changes were not statistically significant. One to three rabbits in each group survived the operation. Six-suture aortic anastomoses, untreated, resulted in 67.7 +/- 21.8 ml blood loss and 100% survival (n = 6). Application of FS produced immediate and sustained hemostasis in all the animals (P &lt; 0.01 vs untreated). Other hemostatic agents also reduced the bleeding (Gelfoam 42.5 +/- 10, Avitene 50.9 +/- 12.4, Surgicel 32.1 +/- 14, FloSeal 33.9 +/- 5.4 ml blood loss, n = 6/group), but the changes were not statistically significant. The 8- and 12-suture aorta repairs resulted in a moderate blood loss (43.9 +/- 19 and 21.3 +/- 14.9 ml, respectively), followed by a stable hemostasis that precluded the need to use any hemostatic agent. The aortic cross-clamping time of the 12-suture and time to hemostasis for both the 8- and the 12-suture techniques were significantly longer than those of the 4-suture plus FS application (P &lt; 0.01, P &lt; 0.01 and P &lt; 0.05, respectively).
CONCLUSION: In a moderate coagulopathy, FS was proven to be the most efficacious hemostatic agent, producing immediate and sustained hemostasis at the arterial anastomotic site. This high efficacy is in part attributed to the strong tissue adhesive property of this agent. FS application may potentially ease the anastomosis and shorten the duration of timely critical vascular procedures.

### PMID 12381219 (2002) — Drugs
TITLE: Pharmacological strategies to decrease transfusion requirements in patients undergoing surgery.
DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200262150-00003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Surgical procedures are inevitably associated with bleeding. The amount of blood loss may vary widely between different surgical procedures and depends on surgical as well as non-surgical factors. Whereas adequate surgical haemostasis may suffice in most patients, pro-haemostatic pharmacological agents may be of additional benefit in patients with (diffuse) surgical bleeding or in patients with a specific underlying haemostatic defect. In general, surgical haemostasis and pharmacological therapies can be complementary in controlling blood loss. The use of pharmacological therapies to reduce blood loss and blood transfusions in surgery has historically been restricted to a few drugs. Antifibrinolytic agents (aprotinin, tranexamic acid and aminocaproic acid) have the best evidence supporting their use, especially in cardiac surgery, liver transplantation and some orthopaedic surgical procedures. Meta-analyses of randomised, controlled trials in cardiac patients have suggested a slight benefit of aprotinin, compared with the other antifibrinolytics. Desmopressin is the treatment of choice in patients with mild haemophilia A and von Willebrand disease. It has also been shown to be effective in patients undergoing cardiac surgery who received aspirin up to the time of operation. However, overall evidence does not support a beneficial effect of desmopressin in patients without pre-existing coagulopathy undergoing elective surgical procedures. Topical agents, such as fibrin sealants have been successfully used in a variety of surgical procedures. However, only very few controlled clinical trials have been performed and scientific evidence supporting their use is still limited. Novel drugs, like recombinant factor VIIa (eptacog alfa), are currently under clinical investigation. Recombinant factor VIIa has been introduced for the treatment of haemophilia patients with inhibitors, either in surgical or non-surgical situations. Preliminary data indicate that it may also be effective in surgical patients without pre-existing coagulation abnormalities. More clinical trials are warranted before definitive conclusions can be drawn about the safety and the exact role of this new drug in surgical patients. Only adequately powered and properly designed randomised, clinical trials will allow us to define the most effective and the safest pharmacological therapies for reducing blood loss and transfusion requirements in surgical patients. Future trials should also consider cost-effectiveness because of considerable differences in the costs of the available pro-haemostatic pharmacological agents.

### PMID 12204761 (2002) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: A foreign body reaction to Surgicel mimicking an abscess following cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(02)00328-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Comment, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 11722077 (2001) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Ostial stenosis of coronary arteries after complete replacement of aortic root using gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(01)02566-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Coronary ostial stenosis between an interposition graft and coronary artery is rare and fatal. A 46-year-old woman who had reconstruction of both coronary arteries using interposition grafts for type A acute dissecting aneurysm presented with acute chest pain. Emergent coronary artery bypass grafting was done with saphenous vein grafts. Inappropriate use of gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue can be associated with ostial stenosis in the long term. Transesophageal echocardiography is useful to diagnose ostial stenosis of the coronary arteries.

### PMID 11318757 (2001) — Artificial organs
TITLE: Experimental study of small arterial anastomosis with gelatin-resorcin-formaldehyde glue and collagen sheet.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In cardiovascular surgery, the manual continuous suture has often been used for microvascular anastomosis, but the luminal irregularity often causes thrombotic stenosis in the anastomosis sites. The purpose of this study was to examine the feasibility of the combined use of gelatin-resorcin-formaldehyde (GRF) glue and a collagen sheet for the anastomosis of small arteries 3 to 4 mm in diameter in experimental animals. End-to-end anastomoses of the carotid and femoral arteries of mongrel dogs were carried out with the combined use of GRF glue and collagen sheet. The physical strength of the anastomosis, the histopathologic condition of the vassels, and the absorptivity and the inflammatory response of the glue were evaluated. The physical strength of the anastomosis sites was good and their flexibility optimal, the smooth luminal surface appeared excellent for preventing thrombotic stenosis in all follow-up periods, and the glue was absorbed almost completely within 12 weeks postoperatively. The combined use of GRF glue and collagen sheet would be feasible for the anastomosis of small arteries 3 to 4 mm in diameter and could substitute for the conventional suture method.

### PMID 11496501 (2001) — Vestnik khirurgii imeni I. I. Grekova
TITLE: [Use of the glue composition TachoComb in forming the portosystemic anastomosis].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The Tachocomb plates were used by the authors in 15 patients for forming the proximal splenorenal anastomosis and selective decompression of the portal system. The data of sonography have shown the valuable functioning of the shunt in all the patients within the period from 6 months to 3 years. The proposed method provides reliable hemostasis during operation and prevents thrombosis of portosystemic anastomoses.

### PMID 11496500 (2001) — Vestnik khirurgii imeni I. I. Grekova
TITLE: [Can perforated ulcer be not sutured?].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Experiments in 5 pigs and 18 mongrel dogs have shown the possibility to close perforating ulcers with plates of biopolymer "Tachocomb". The method is proposed as an alternative to suturing perforations in the zone of pylorus in order to prevent stenosis of the pyloric part of the stomach. The experimental data obtained have confirmed good adhesive and stimulating properties of the fibrin-collagen substance. Successful results of using the method were demonstrated in 2 patients with perforating ulcers.

### PMID 11283536 (2001) — Surgery
TITLE: A novel collagen-based composite offers effective hemostasis for multiple surgical indications: Results of a randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1067/msy.2001.112365 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intraoperative bleeding is ubiquitous during open surgical procedures and uniformly effective hemostasis remains elusive. We conducted a randomized controlled trial to determine the effectiveness of a novel collagen-based composite (CoStasis Surgical Hemostat) compared with standard methods of hemostasis during general, hepatic, cardiac, and orthopedic operations.
METHODS: Hemostatic treatment was assigned randomly to 347 subjects; 318 subjects (167 CoStasis, 151 controls) underwent operation, received treatment, and provided hemostatic success data. CoStasis was applied to the bleeding site without manual pressure as a sprayable liquid composite of bovine microfibrillar collagen, bovine thrombin, and autologous plasma. Manual compression was used as the control hemostat. Hemostatic success was achieved if bleeding had ceased completely within 10 minutes (3 minutes for cardiac subjects). The time to controlled bleeding (ie, slight oozing) and time to complete hemostasis were recorded for all subjects.
RESULTS: Hemostatic success was achieved in more than 90% (153/167) of CoStasis subjects compared with 58% (88/151) of control subjects (P =.01). Superior hemostatic effectiveness with CoStasis was realized in every surgical specialty: general (77/79 vs 49/75, P =.01), hepatic (38/39 vs 20/29, P =.01), cardiac (28/37 vs 17/37, P =.02), and orthopedic (10/12 vs 2/10, P =.01). The duration of bleeding was also significantly shorter with CoStasis. The median time to controlled bleeding (42 seconds vs 150 seconds, P =.0001) and time to complete hemostasis (75 seconds vs 252 seconds, P =.0001) were both markedly longer with the control intervention. There were no serious adverse events related to the use of CoStasis.
CONCLUSIONS: CoStasis is more effective at controlling and stopping diffuse intraoperative bleeding than standard methods of hemostasis in 4 distinct surgical indications representing a wide variety of operative interventions.

### PMID 11598530 (2001) — Spine
TITLE: Lumbar cauda equina syndrome associated with the use of gelfoam: case report.
DOI: 10.1097/00007632-200110150-00029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: A case of cauda equina syndrome is reported.
OBJECTIVE: To recognize a serious complication related to the use of Gelfoam in the lumbar spine.
SUMMARY AND BACKGROUND DATA: Absorbable hemostatic gelatin sponges have long been used to control bleeding around the spinal cord. Despite widespread use and a safe history with few reported adverse reactions, Gelfoam sponges have potential for complications that may be overlooked.
METHOD: A case of cauda equina syndrome is reported and discussed.
RESULTS: A retained Gelfoam sponge was found in the epidural space after lumbar decompression and fusion for spinal stenosis. The retained gelatin sponge had expanded and solidified, causing a mass affect. The resultant nerve compression led to progressive myelopathy. On removal of the Gelfoam, symptoms rapidly resolved.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the use of Gelfoam in spine surgery generally is considered safe, care must be taken to avoid placing a large mass of sponge in a potentially closed space. If Gelfoam is not handled properly, it can engorge and fail to be resorbed appropriately, thus causing a mass effect. If neurologic compromise develops, Gelfoam should be considered a potential cause and subsequently removed.

### PMID 11565875 (2001) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Foreign body reaction to hemostatic materials mimicking recurrent brain tumor. Report of three cases.
DOI: 10.3171/jns.2001.95.3.0503 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chemical agents routinely used in neurosurgery to achieve intraoperative hemostasis can cause a foreign body reaction, which appears on magnetic resonance (MR) images to be indistinguishable from recurrent tumor. Clinical and/or imaging evidence of progression of disease early after surgical resection or during aggressive treatment may actually be distinct features of granuloma in these circumstances. A series of three cases was retrospectively analyzed for clinical, imaging, surgical, and pathological findings, and the consequences they held for further disease management. All patients were boys (3, 3, and 6 years of age, respectively) and all harbored primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Two tumors were located in the posterior fossa and one was located in the right parietal lobe. Two boys exhibited clinical symptoms, which were unexpected under the circumstances and prompted new imaging studies. One patient was asymptomatic and imaging was performed at planned routine time intervals. The MR images revealed circumscribed, streaky enhancement in the resection cavity that was suggestive of recurrent disease. This occurred 2 to 7 months after the first surgery. At repeated surgery, the resected material had the macroscopic appearance of gelatin sponge in one case and firm scar tissue in the other cases. Histological analysis revealed foreign body granulomas in the resected material, with Gelfoam or Surgicel as the underlying cause. No recurrent tumor was found and the second surgery resulted in imaging-confirmed complete resection in all three patients. Because recurrent disease was absent, the patients continued to participate in their original treatment protocols. All patients remain free from disease 34, 32, and 19 months after the first operation, respectively. During or after treatment for a central nervous system neoplasm, if unexpected clinical or imaging evidence of recurrence is found, a second-look operation may be necessary to determine the true nature of the findings. If the resection yields recurrent tumor, additional appropriate oncological treatment is warranted, but if a foreign body reaction is found, potentially harmful therapy can be withheld or postponed.

### PMID 11163552 (2001) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Experimental use of an albumin-glutaraldehyde tissue adhesive for sealing pulmonary parenchyma and bronchial anastomoses.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(00)00613-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Despite advanced surgical techniques, major complications of bronchial anastomoses and parenchymal repair, including early leak, fistula formation and granulations still occur. The purpose of this study was to test the performance of an albumin-glutaraldehyde tissue adhesive (BioGlue), CryoLife Inc., Kennesaw, GA) as a sealant for bronchial anastomoses and parenchyma lesions.
METHODS: Twenty-four sheep were split into two surgical groups. The first group consisted of six control sheep receiving standard sutured bronchial anastomosis with a 4-week end-point. The second group included 18 sheep receiving both a bronchial anastomosis and parenchymal defect repair using the adhesive with 2, 4, and 12 week end-point. Histopathologic evaluation was conducted at the study end-points.
RESULTS: Bronchial anastomosis and parenchymal tissue repair can be sealed successfully against air leakage with adhesive. Macroscopic evaluation revealed a tight closure of the anastomosis and parenchyma defect in all postoperative stages, initially by the adhesive layer, and later by connective tissue. On microscopic examination, an inflammatory tissue response consisting of polymorphonuclear neutrophils, macrophages, granulation tissue and foreign body giant cells were found surrounding the glued area after 2 weeks. After 4 weeks the tissue response presented a granulomatous character. No granulomatous or foreign body reaction was present in the hand sutured group. After 12 weeks few remnants of adhesive surrounded by fibrous scar tissue were detectable in bronchial anastomosis and parenchymal repair. Healing was not considerably complicated by foreign body reaction or tissue granulation.
CONCLUSION: This study supports BioGlue to be effective as an adjunct in sealing bronchial anastomosis and lung parenchyma defects in sheep, with minimal secondary healing disruptions such as granuloma formation. The results of this study indicate that the use of BioGlue in human pulmonary surgery should be effective.

### PMID 10821905 (2000) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Endoluminal embolization of bilateral atherosclerotic common iliac aneurysms with fibrin tissue glue (Beriplast).
DOI: 10.1007/s002700010054 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The standard surgical approach to nonleaking iliac aneurysms found at repair of a leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm is to minimize the operative risk by repairing the abdominal aorta only. This means that the bypassed iliac aneurysms may have to be repaired later. As this population of patients are usually elderly with coexisting medical problems, interventional radiology is being used to embolize these aneurysms, thus avoiding the morbidity and mortality associated with further general anesthesia and surgery. Various materials and stents have been reported to be effective in the treatment of iliac aneurysms. We report the successful use of endoluminal fibrin tissue glue (Beriplast) to treat two large iliac aneurysms in a patient who had had a previous abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. We discuss the technique involved and the reasons why we used tissue glue in this patient.

### PMID 11126918 (2000) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Transdural cauda equina incarceration after microsurgical lumbar discectomy: case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE AND IMPORTANCE: Complications usually occur when they are least expected. We present an unusual case of nerve entrapment after microsurgical discectomy.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A patient undergoing uneventful first lumbar microsurgical discectomy developed severe back and leg pain and a progressive neurological deficit during the first postoperative night. Herniation of cauda equina nerve roots had occurred through an unnoticed minimal defect in the dura, which had not caused cerebrospinal fluid leakage. The roots were incarcerated and swollen, and they filled the space of the resected nucleus pulposus. It was presumed that elevation of intra-abdominal pressure and consequent increased intraspinal pressure during extubation led to the herniation of arachnoid and cauda equina roots. The nerve roots were then trapped and incarcerated in the manner of bowel loops in an abdominal wall hernia.
INTERVENTION: During reoperation, the nerve roots were repositioned into the dural sac. The patient recovered without further complications and without long-term sequelae.
CONCLUSION: All dural tears that occur during intraspinal surgery, even if they are small and the arachnoid is intact, should be closed with stitches or at a minimum with a patch of muscle or gelatin sponge with fibrin glue. Care should be taken to avoid increased intra-abdominal pressure during extubation. Excessive pain and progressive neurological dysfunction occurring shortly after microsurgical lumbar discectomy or any intraspinal procedure is indicative of possible hemorrhage with subsequent compression of nerve roots. The case reported here provides anecdotal evidence that this situation can also be caused by a herniation of cauda equina nerve roots through a small dural defect that was not evident during the initial operation.

### PMID 10412165 (1999) — Nihon yakurigaku zasshi. Folia pharmacologica Japonica
TITLE: [Adhesive and sealing effects of TO-193 on tissues and organs in various experimental models].
DOI: 10.1254/fpj.113.269 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We studied the adhesive and sealing effects of sheet style fibrin adhesive, TO-193 (TachoComb), on some tissues and organs, comparing them with those of sheet style collagen agent, collagen sponge, Novacol, and Avitene and liquid fibrin adhesive agent, Beriplast P. TO-193 showed more a potent adhesive effect on liver than the sheet style collagen agents and was more potent on bone and skin than the liquid fibrin adhesive agent. Furthermore, TO-193 had a potent sealing effect at the site of incomplete suture immediately after application on a motile organ such as lung and stomach. These effects may be partly attributable to rapid expression of the effect due to the presence of a high concentration of fibrinogen on coverage. Enhancement of fibrin penetrability to the tissues by compression and inhibition of cleavage of coverage by the collagen sponge also may be participating in the effects of TO-193. These results suggest that TO-193 will be a valuable adhesive and sealing agent.

### PMID 10587389 (1999) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Thrombin injection versus compression of femoral artery pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1016/s0741-5214(99)70043-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The compression of femoral artery pseudoaneurysms is a time consuming, painful, and sometimes unsuccessful procedure. Thrombin injection has been advocated as a superior alternative. In this study, we compare our experiences with both techniques.
METHODS: All the records of femoral artery false aneurysms that were treated in the vascular laboratory from January 1996 to April 1999 were retrospectively reviewed. Treatment with ultrasound scan-guided compression was compared with treatment with dilute thrombin injection (100 U/mL).
RESULTS: Both groups had similar demographics and aneurysm sizes (P &gt;.2). Of the pseudoaneursyms, 88% were caused by cardiac catheterization and the others were the results of femoral artery access for cardiac surgery (6%), arteriography (5%), and renal dialysis (1%). Compression was successful in 25 of 40 patients (63%). Nine persistent aneurysms necessitated operation, and six were treated successfully with thrombin injection. Primary thrombin injection successfully obliterated 21 pseudoaneurysms in 23 patients. Overall, 27 of 29 pseudoaneurysms were treated successfully with thrombin injection (93%). Thrombosis occurred within seconds of the thrombin injection and required, on average, 300 units of thrombin (100 to 600 units). The patients who underwent successful compression required an average of 37 minutes of compression (range, 5 to 70 minutes) and required analgesia on several occasions. No patients in the thrombin group required analgesia or sedation. Neither group had complications. A cost analysis shows that thrombin treatment results in considerable savings in vascular laboratory resource use but not in overall hospital expenditures.
CONCLUSION: Ultrasound scan-guided thrombin injection is a safe, fast, and painless procedure that completely obliterates femoral artery pseudoaneurysms. The shift from compressive therapy to thrombin injection reduces vascular laboratory use and is less expensive, although it does not significantly impact hospital costs.

### PMID 10439648 (1999) — Revista espanola de anestesiologia y reanimacion
TITLE: [Fatal gas embolism during corrective surgery for scoliosis using the posterior approach].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Use of hydrogen peroxide as a germicide and hemostatic agent during surgery has been associated with gas embolism that can prove fatal. A 15-year-old girl with severe kyphoscoliosis undergoing vertebral arthrodesis by a posterior route experienced worsening of respiratory function and hemodynamic variables coinciding with the massive irrigation of the surgical area with hydrogen peroxide. Noteworthy among the relevant signs was a sharp fall in CO2 end expiratory pressure (PetCO2) and oxygen saturation (SpO2) by pulse oximetry as well as hypotension and bradycardia. The patient died in spite of treatment. Availability of appropriate monitoring allows this type of complication to be suspected early. Other than life support measures, treatment should include elimination of the cause as soon as possible by rinsing the surgical field or the point of gas entry with saline solution, as well as evacuation of the gas through a venous catheter. Although gas embolisms happen much more often than we are able to detect them, most have no important effects. As serious complications may develop under certain circumstances, however, the use of less dangerous irrigation products is advisable.

### PMID 9492456 (1998) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [A case of progressive right coronary ostial stenosis after Carrel patch method using gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 31-year-old man with type A chronic aortic dissection associated with annuloaortic ectasia underwent the concomitant graft replacement of the total aortic root and the transverse aortic arch. The two coronary arteries were reconstructed using the Carrel patch method. The false lumen of right coronary artery was closed by injection of GRF glue into the dissected space and compressing the dissected layers. Postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient has returned to normal daily life 2 months after surgery. Remarkable progression of the right coronary artery ostial stenosis was observed by coronary angiography 6 months after surgery. The remarkable progression of stenosis may occur in association with injection of GRF glue into the dissected space, although the exact etiology of the progressive stenosis remains obscure.

### PMID 9468043 (1998) — Journal of biomedical materials research
TITLE: Polyethylene glycol/microfibrillar collagen composite as a new resorbable hemostatic bone wax.
DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4636(19980305)39:3&lt;358::aid-jbm3&gt;3.0.co;2-i | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Although bone wax is effective at achieving hemostasis, it is nonresorbable, causes a foreign body reaction, and inhibits osteogenesis. We report development of a polyethylene glycol/microfibrillar collagen composite (PEG/MFC) that has inherent hemostatic qualities, is biodegradable, and is compatible with bone repair. PEG/MFC composite (n = 42) was placed in 5 mm cranial defects in New Zealand white rabbits. Hemostasis and healing were compared to unfilled defects (n = 32) and defects filled with standard bone wax (n = 10). Both PEG/MFC and bone wax handled well and stopped bleeding. The polyethylene glycol component was resorbed by 8 h, and the microfibrillar collagen was resorbed over 2 months, eliciting only a minor inflammatory response during the first month. Defects filled with the PEG/MFC composite showed similar amounts of bony regeneration as did unfilled control defects. At 4 weeks, healing bone accounted for 43 +/- 13% in those treated with PEG/MFC and 47 +/- 19% defect area in untreated holes. In contrast, less than 1% of the area was bone in defects filled with bone wax (p &lt; 0.05). PEG/MFC composite provided excellent bony hemostasis and did not inhibit bone growth.

### PMID 9468396 (1998) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Embolization of perigraft leaks after endovascular stent-graft treatment of distal arch anastomotic pseudoaneurysm with coil and n-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1016/s1051-0443(98)70483-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 9702319 (1998) — Artificial organs
TITLE: Succinylated collagen crosslinked by thermal treatment for coating vascular prostheses.
DOI: 10.1046/j.1525-1594.1998.06066.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Vascular prostheses coated with collagen carefully prepared to avoid contamination were tested to see if it could induce endothelial cell lining throughout the graft surface in a natural way. The collagen fibers were succinylated. Hydrogel produced with the succinylated collagen was used for the sealant to reduce the amount of solid substance. To avoid contamination and the side effects of chemical reagents, the collagen thermally crosslinked under sterile conditions. A suspension of the collagen fibers was enmeshed in the interstices of Dacron fibers of fabric prostheses, which were then thermally crosslinked at 130 degrees C for 20 h. The prostheses were porous when the collagen fiber network was dry. Under wet conditions, however, the water permeability of the grafts was reduced to 0.1 ml/min from the 1,250 ml/min of the original prostheses. Three weeks after implantation in the abdominal aortas of dogs, 81.2 +/- 11% of the luminal surface was macroscopically thrombus free, and 56 +/- 14% was endothelialized. More than 95% of the coated collagen had been absorbed. Numerous fibroblasts had migrated into the graft walls, and capillary blood vessels had infiltrated the inside of the graft walls without foreign body reaction. In the controls, thrombus free areas averaged 9.0 +/- 5%, and endothelialized areas averaged 5.2 +/- 4%. Many giant cells, plasma cells, and lymphocytes had migrated into the graft walls, but no fibroblasts. These results suggest that rapid endothelialization is possible when clean collagen is used.

### PMID 9096800 (1997) — Artificial organs
TITLE: Myristoyl gelatin as a sealant for Dacron vascular prostheses.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1525-1594.1997.tb00363.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Myristoyl gelatin (MG) retains its gel structure at temperatures above body temperature without any crosslinking. As a coating material, MG adheres well to polyester fibers, and the outermost layers of the sealant that are in contact with blood or surrounding tissue become hydrophilic. We produced MG-impregnated knitted Dacron vascular prostheses (MG graft [MGG]) and investigated the usefulness of MG as a sealant by replacing the thoracic aorta of dogs. MGGs (5 cm long with an inner diameter of 10 mm) were implanted in 5 mongrel dogs (10-20 kg), and the grafts were retrieved at intervals of 4 h and 2, 4, 8, and 15 weeks after grafting. There was no thrombus formation on the flow surface of the MGGs, indicating adequate antithrombogenic properties. No resorption of MG occurred until after 2 weeks, and neither immune reaction nor excessive foreign body reaction was noted. Fragmentation of the sealant induced by cell infiltration began to occur at 4 weeks, yet the sealing effect persisted. The organization of MGG was almost complete at 8 weeks. Because of its pliability and effective adhesion to polyester fibers, its antithrombogenicity, and the persistent sealing effect due to delayed biodegradation and resorption, we conclude that MG is an extremely useful sealant for polyester vascular prostheses.

### PMID 9175225 (1997) — The Thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon
TITLE: Experimental gluing of lung parenchyma in rats.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-1013693 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Gelatin-resorcinol-dialdehyde adhesive has been developed from a gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde adhesive by replacing the formaldehyde with two less histotoxic dialdehydes, ethandial and pentandial. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the usefulness of this modified composition in gluing defects in lung parenchyma. In 40 male Wistar rats a standardized lung incision 1.0 cm in length and 0.8 cm in depth were closed by application of gelatin-resorcinol-dialdehyde adhesive. For macroscopic and microscopic examination 4 animals were sacrificed on each of postoperative days 2, 7, and 14 and 14 animals on each of postoperative days 28 and 120. Macroscopic examination revealed a tight closure of the parenchymal defects in all postoperative stages. Initially by an adhesive layer and later on by granulation tissue and scar tissue respectively. On microscopic examination an inflammatory tissue response with polymorphonuclear neutrophils and macrophages predominating was found 2 days postoperatively. After 7 days multinucleated giant cells appeared. On postoperative day 14 the tissue response presented a distinct granulomatous character with multinucleated giant cells persisting. After 28 days remnants of adhesive surrounded by granulation tissue were detectable. On postoperative day 120 the adhesive had been completely resorbed and the parenchymal defect was replaced by fibrous scar tissue. The gelatin-resorcinol-adhesive proved effective in tight closure of lung parenchyma in rats. The adhesive is resorbed completely and does not interfere with parenchymal healing.

### PMID 7497494 (1995) — Catheterization and cardiovascular diagnosis
TITLE: Repeat embolization of the side branch of the internal mammary artery graft by gelatin sponge particles and micro coils.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.1810340116 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The internal mammary artery (IMA) is increasingly used as a coronary bypass conduit because of better long-term patency and improved prognosis as compared with venous grafts. Previous investigators have suggested that the "steal" of blood flow of the IMA graft via the subclavian artery or a persistent large side branch of the graft may lead to its thinning. However, only a few reports have described the embolization of a large side branch using a transcatheter procedure. We present a case of repeated embolization of a large lateral costal side branch of the left internal mammary arterial graft applying gelatin sponge particles and micro coils, as well as angioplasty to the graft conduit, with resulting easing of chest pain.

### PMID 8604922 (1995) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Tissue engineering heart valves: valve leaflet replacement study in a lamb model.
DOI: 10.1016/0003-4975(95)00733-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Valve replacements using either bioprosthetic or mechanical valves have the disadvantage that these structures are unable to grow, repair, or remodel and are both thrombogenic and susceptible to infection. These characteristics have significantly limited their durability and longevity. In an attempt to begin to overcome these shortcomings, we have tested the feasibility of constructing heart valve leaflets in lambs by seeding a synthetic polyglycolic acid fiber matrix in vitro with fibroblasts and endothelial cells.
METHODS: Mixed cell populations of endothelial cells and fibroblasts were isolated from explanted ovine arteries. Endothelial cells were selectively labeled with an acetylated low-density lipoprotein marker and separated from the fibroblasts using a fluorescent activated cell sorter. A synthetic biodegradable scaffold constructed from polyglycolic acid fibers was seeded with fibroblasts, which grew to form a tissue-like sheet. This tissue was subsequently seeded with endothelial cells, which formed a cellular monolayer coating around the leaflet. Using these constructs, autologous (n = 3) and allogenic (n = 4) tissue engineered leaflets were implanted in 7 animals. In each animal the right posterior leaflet of the pulmonary valve was resected and replaced with an engineered valve leaflet.
RESULTS: All animals survived the procedure. Postoperative echocardiography demonstrated no evidence of stenosis and trivial pulmonary regurgitation in the autografts and moderate regurgitation in the allogenic valves. Collagen analysis of the constructs showed development of an extracellular matrix. Histologic evaluation of the constructs demonstrated appropriate cellular architecture.
CONCLUSIONS: This preliminary experiment showed that a tissue engineered valve leaflet constructed from its cellular components can function in the pulmonary valve position. Tissue engineering of a heart valve leaflet is feasible, and these preliminary studies suggest that autograft tissue will probably be superior to allogenic tissue.

### PMID 7887710 (1995) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Tranexamic acid significantly reduces blood loss associated with coronary revascularization.
DOI: 10.1016/0003-4975(94)01010-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Controlled Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Four hundred fifteen patients undergoing coronary revascularization over a 12-month period were divided into two groups: 209 controls in the first 6 months received no tranexamic acid (TA) before cardiopulmonary bypass and 206 patients in the second 6 months received TA as a hemostatic agent. The demographics and the surgical techniques used were similar in the two groups. With TA there was a significant decrease in blood loss postoperatively, from 1,114.1 mL in the controls to 803.7 mL in those given TA (p &lt; 0.001); in red blood cell use, from 1.7 units/patient in the controls to 0.69 units/patient in those given TA (p &lt; 0.001); in fresh frozen plasma requirements, from 0.23 units/patient in the controls to 0.024 units/patient in those given TA (p &lt; 0.01); and in platelet transfusion, from 1.06 units/patient in the controls to 0.30 units/patients in those given TA (p &lt; 0.01). The percentages of patients not receiving any blood products were 65% in those given TA versus 49% in the controls (p &lt; 0.01). There was no significant difference between the two groups in the incidence of perioperative myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accidents, pulmonary embolism, or venous thrombosis to clearly suggest hypercoagulability. In this study, TA profoundly affected the coagulopathy associated with bypass in patients undergoing coronary revascularization. It significantly reduced blood loss and blood product transfusions. Any potential increased thrombotic complications could not be clearly demonstrated in this study, but should not be ignored.

### PMID 8416335 (1993) — Catheterization and cardiovascular diagnosis
TITLE: Platelet adhesion/aggregation in an in vitro model of coronary artery stenosis.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.1810280113 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: Platelet adhesion/aggregation (PAA) at a site of coronary artery stenosis is believed to be a process strongly modulated by local shear rates and the functional state of neighboring endothelium. One purpose of the present work, therefore, is to describe an in vitro model for the direct imaging of such PAA. Another is to apply the model to the question as to whether the use of nonionic vs. ionic contrast media (CM) in the presence of vascular endothelium contributes to PAA at the stenosis site. Toward these ends, we utilized a special flow chamber which incorporates a monolayer of endothelial cells (ECs), a step 66% flowpath constriction at a site preadsorbed with microfibrillar collagen, and arterial shear rates. By epifluorescence microscopy and digital image analysis of video recordings, PAA was found to be greater with dysfunctional ECs (pretreated with lysine acetylsalicyclate) than with normal ECs, thereby confirming a modulatory role in PAA of functionally intact ECs. When nonionic (iohexol) or ionic (ioxaglate, diatrizoate) CM was added to the flowing blood at a concentration of 20% by non-red cell volume, PAA was inhibited in the order diatrizoate &gt; ioxaglate &gt; iohexol &gt; saline control. No inhibition by any CM was seen, however, when chamber prefill culture medium containing 20% by volume CM was displaced by CM-free blood, in simulation of bolus administration of CM. In terms of inhibition of PAA during percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), therefore, our model provides a conceptual basis by which one may anticipate in flowing blood no clear benefit of ionic over nonionic CM.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 8377898 (1993) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Hemorrhagic vascular lesions in facial injuries treated by intravascular embolization: report of two cases].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We have encountered 2 cases of hemorrhagic vascular lesion in the external carotid artery system caused by facial injury. In case 1, treatment of epistaxis by nasal packing was unsuccessful. Good result was obtained by intravascular embolization in the internal maxillary artery using polyvinyl alcohol particles and gelatin sponge pieces. In case 2, massive subgaleal hemorrhage due to tearing of the middle meningeal artery caused by a skull base fracture appeared following surgery for open skull fracture. Hemostasis was performed successfully by intravascular embolization in the middle meningeal artery using microcoils and gelatin sponge pieces. In cases of facial injuries with hemorrhagic lesions in the external carotid artery system, hemostasis is generally difficult. Referring to these two cases, we think that the treatment of choice is angiography followed by intravascular embolization.

### PMID 8295648 (1993) — Neuro-Chirurgie
TITLE: [Teflon wrapping in cerebral aneurysm surgery. A technical note].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Wrapping is a well-known alternative technique when clipping the aneurysm is by no means possible or when it seems necessary to complete an imperfect clip. In 22 operated cases of intracranial aneurysm, we recently experienced pledgets of Teflon arranged and then fixed by drops of fibrin sealant. We used this technique in the following operative circumstances: to reinforce the ectatic base of the clipped aneurysm (11 cases); to wrap a pre-aneurysmal ectasia distant from the ruptured aneurysm (5 cases); to minimize the compression due to the clip to an adjacent cranial nerve or artery (6 cases). So far no complication was noted in relation to this technique. We then propose this technique of wrapping or interposing Teflon as an alternative to the other well-known techniques using autogenous tissue, gelatin sponge, cotton or other synthetic coatings or glue. Up to now, no known material received a worldwide approval for its complete innocuity and/or efficiency. Nowadays, in neurosurgical microvascular decompression and in cardiovascular surgery Teflon is widely and satisfactorily used. Its biologic tolerance is known to be good. This may apply in this new indication, and we would like recommend its practical use. However, for reliability and safety, there is an obvious need for a long-term clinical follow-up and an experimental controlled study as well.

### PMID 1343220 (1992) — American journal of physiologic imaging
TITLE: A radioimaging technique for quantifying regional myocardial blood flow.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: We developed a radioimaging technique for measuring regional myocardial blood flow (rMBF) in 5 mm2 myocardial tissue using canine closed-chest models. RMBF was measured in three groups: (1) total occlusion of left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery with microfibrillar collagen, (2) fixed stenosis of LAD with angioplasty balloon, and (3) comparison of clinical dose response of adenosine (AD) and dipyridamole (DP) on rMBF. In these studies, rMBF in every 5 mm2 tissue was measured throughout the epicardium and endocardium. In groups 1 and 2, rMBF was also measured during adenosine-induced coronary hyperemia (ADICH). In group 1 (n = 7), rMBF measured at 6 hours post-LAD occlusion in epicardial infarct center (IC), peri-infarct (PI) and normal zone (NZ) were 17 +/- 7, 55 +/- 8, and 132 +/- 12 ml/min/100 tissue, respectively. The area and location of infarct seen in TTC staining matched with rMBF images. During ADICH, the corresponding rMBF were 16.2 +/- 13.9, 98.3 +/- 53.0, and 226.0 +/- 103.6 ml/min/100 g tissue, respectively. RMBF measured during ADICH in group 2 (n = 4) in areas of LAD stenosis (LS), surrounding stenosis (SS), and no stenosis (NS) were 120 +/- 58, 249 +/- 123, and 432 +/- 181 ml/min/100 gm tissue, respectively. In group 3, rMBF measured during 3 min into 0.14 mg/kg/min adenosine infusion in areas perfused by LAD, circumflex (CX) and right coronary artery (RCA) were 244 +/- 22, 238 +/- 19, and 215 +/- 19 ml/min/100 g tissue, respectively.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 1532072 (1992) — Presse medicale (Paris, France : 1983)
TITLE: [Contribution of fibrin glue to the reinforcement of esophageal anastomoses].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, English Abstract, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: A prospective randomized study was conducted on 100 patients operated upon for oesophageal diseases to evaluate the usefulness of fibrin glue in reinforcing oesophageal anastomoses. The anastomoses were located in the neck, the chest or the lower mediastinum. The operative mortality rate, the number and severity of fistulae and the incidence of anastomotic stenosis were studied. This series was insufficient to demonstrate that fibrin glue was effective in this type of surgery.

### PMID 2145537 (1990) — Oral surgery, oral medicine, and oral pathology
TITLE: Dental extraction for patients on oral anticoagulant therapy.
DOI: 10.1016/0030-4220(90)90139-j | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Dental extraction in patients receiving long-term oral anticoagulant therapy is a controversial issue. Continuation of anticoagulation exposes the patient to serious hemorrhage, whereas cessation of therapy increases the risk of thromboembolism. Forty patients treated by coumarin underwent 63 tooth extractions, without a change in the therapeutic protocol of anticoagulation. The biologic adhesive Beriplast was used successfully to achieve local hemostasis at the site of the surgical wound. Apart from one patient who had mild oozing, there were no incidences of postsurgical hemorrhage.

### PMID 2104767 (1990) — Blood
TITLE: Platelet aggregation in flowing blood at a site of injury to an endothelial cell monolayer: quantitation and real-time imaging with the TAB monoclonal antibody.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: Epifluorescence videomicroscopy permits real-time imaging of platelet adhesion/aggregation to a defined microinjury of a monolayer of endothelial cells exposed to flowing blood. The fluorescent label is the TAB murine monoclonal antibody directed against human platelet GP IIB, together with a fluorescein-conjugated goat F(ab')2 against murine immunoglobulin. The combination assures specificity for platelet membranes, yet leaves platelet function intact. TAB is first added to gently mixed, citrated human blood; the second antibody is added 1 hour after the first, mixing continuing for a second hour. Bovine aortic endothelial cell monolayers (ECMs), grown on rectangular cover glasses precoated with microfibrillar collagen, comprise one wall of a flow chamber mounted on a vertical microscope stage. A loop of 6-0 sterile suture is drawn across the ECM in order to create microinjuries of width 70 +/- 15 microns (mean +/- SD) oriented in a direction transverse to flow. Platelet adhesion/aggregation is virtually absent on intact and confluent regions of the monolayer. On micro-injury sites and at shear rates of 60 to 1,080 sec-1, however, computer-enhanced images obtained by means of videomicroscopy show arrival and adherence of single platelets resulting in the formation of platelet aggregates elongated in the flow direction. When the monolayers are pretreated with 1.0 mmol/L lysine acetylsalicylate, the mean aggregate thickness increases (2P less than .05) to 260 +/- 58% (mean +/- SE, N = 6) of control, aggregates are regularly shed downstream, and the surface area of the injury site covered by platelets is augmented (2P less than .05) from 14.8 +/- 3.9% to 49.2 +/- 4.7% (mean +/- SE, N = 6). Donor ingestion of aspirin, on the other hand, leads to an increase (2P less than .01) in percent surface coverage to 42.7 +/- 8.5 without a concomitant increase in mean aggregate thickness. In parallel with the above, outflow levels of serum thromboxane and prostacyclin are measured by radioimmunoassays (RIAs) for thromboxane B2 and 6-Keto-PGF1 alpha, respectively. Thromboxane B2 is increased (2P less than .01) by monolayer pretreatment with lysine acetylsalicylate from 5.08 +/- 1.47 to 9.35 +/- 2.42, but decreased (2P less than .05) after oral aspirin to 1.21 +/- 0.38 ng/mL (mean +/- SE, N = 6). Levels of 6-Keto-PGF1 alpha were reduced (2P less than .05) by monolayer pretreatment from 0.48 +/- 0.046 to 0.36 +/- 0.016 ng/mL. Platelet adhesion/aggregation at a site of injury to an endothelial cell monolayer, therefore, can be imaged in flowing blood in real time using a monoclonal antibody approach.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

### PMID 2203925 (1990) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [A case of foreign body granuloma after aortic valve replacement].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A patient who developed a foreign body granuloma three years after aortic valve replacement was surgically treated. Oxidized cellulose was suspected of its cause.

### PMID 2711039 (1989) — Research in experimental medicine. Zeitschrift fur die gesamte experimentelle Medizin einschliesslich experimenteller Chirurgie
TITLE: The chick chorioallantoic membrane as test system for biocompatible materials.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01856032 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Biologic and non-biologic materials clinically used as hemostyptica, as vascular prostheses, or as temporary skin substitutes were implanted to the chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) during days 9-14 of incubation. The histological study revealed an intact CAM after application of cellulose gauze (Tabotamp). The fibrin tissue adhesive (Tissucol), the collagen sponge (Tachotop), or the gelatin sponge (Gelfoam) induced different amounts of connective tissue. Some fibroblasts were about to grow into the fibrin adhesive. Fibroblasts and capillaries filled the interstices of the collagen sponge poorly, and in the case of the gelatin sponge markedly. Neutrophils and giant cells of the foreign body type occurred more often in the gelatin sponge than in the collagen sponge. With regard to the non-biologic materials, expanded polytetrafluorethylene induced squamous metaplasia of the chorionic epithelium. Dacron caused ulceration with the onset of connective tissue ingrowth, based on a reaction of giant cells of the foreign body type. Polyurethane foam (SYSpur-derm) showed bleeding into the implant due to spikes of the material. Eosinophilic granulocytes were absent in all materials studied. The results are related to different clinical findings. The correlation allows consideration of the CAM as an in vivo model in screening materials for their biocompatibility and their connective tissue reaction.

### PMID 2679465 (1989) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Simultaneous use of microfibrillar collagen hemostat and blood saving devices in a canine kidney perfusion model.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(10)66854-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative autotransfusion and topical microfibrillar collagen hemostats have been increasingly used, often simultaneously, in various surgical procedures to minimize intraoperative blood loss and thus reduce the inherent risks of homologous blood transfusion. As moderate amounts of small particles have been shown to pass through filtering devices during intraoperative autotransfusion, concern has been raised over the amount of heterologous collagen fibrils transfused and their effect on the host. We found that 2% of microfibrillar collagen hemostat particles pass through the 20-microns millipore filter contained in the tested autotransfusion device (William Harvey H-4700 cardiotomy reservoir). Using a canine kidney perfusion model, we found multifocal perivascular inflammatory reactions within the renal parenchyma five days after transfusion of filtered autologous blood containing minute amounts of microfibrillar collagen hemostat. The findings demonstrate a strong inflammatory foreign body response to heterologous collagen particles trapped in the microcirculation of the perfused kidneys. It is concluded that despite using filters with a pore size of 20 microns, using intraoperative autotransfusion and microfibrillar collagen hemostats simultaneously creates a potential risk because adverse reactions can be elicited especially within the microvasculature of tissues containing end-arterial circulation.

### PMID 3395009 (1988) — American journal of veterinary research
TITLE: Influence of nonbiologic implants on laminectomy membrane formation in dogs.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The effects of various surgical implants, spinal cord hypothermia, and glucocorticoid administration on formation of the laminectomy membrane were evaluated in 32 preconditioned chondrodystrophoid dogs. Modified dorsal laminectomies and full-length durotomies, from T12 to L1, were performed on all dogs. Dogs were allotted to 2 groups. Group-1 dogs (n = 20) were further allocated to 4 subgroups (a, b, c, and d) consisting of 5 dogs each. Group-1a dogs received no implant, group-1b dogs had absorbable gelatin sponges implanted, group-1c dogs had absorbable gelatin films implanted, and group-1d dogs had absorbable gelatin sponges and absorbable gelatin films implanted. Daily neurologic examinations permitted correlation of neurologic dysfunction with secondary spinal cord compression in those dogs in which it developed. The influence of these implants on laminectomy membrane formation and dural healing was assessed by gross and microscopic evaluation of transverse sections of the vertebrae and spinal cord after euthanasia of one member of each subgroup at 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 weeks after surgery. Group-2 dogs (n = 12) were further allotted to 3 subgroups (a, b, and c) consisting of 4 dogs each. One dog in each group-2 subgroup underwent the same surgical procedures described for the group-1 subgroups (ie, 4 procedures/group-2 subgroup). The additional effects of 3 conventional supportive techniques (selective regional spinal cord hypothermia, glucocorticoid administration, or spinal cord hypothermia and glucocorticoid administration) on laminectomy membrane formation and on immediate postoperative recovery were examined in groups 2a, 2b, and 2c, respectively. Neurologic examinations were performed daily until this time. All dogs in group 2 were euthanatized 1 week after surgery for gross and microscopic examination of transverse sections of the vertebrae and spinal cord. Qualitative histopathologic effects of the different implants and supportive techniques on formation of the laminectomy membrane were determined. Statistical analysis of the degrees of secondary spinal cord compression was performed in group-1 dogs by measuring and comparing ratios of the vertical to the horizontal diameters of the transverse spinal cord sections from locations within (T12 to L1) and out of (T11, T11-12, L1-2, and L2) the region of surgical intervention. The vertical/horizontal diameter ratios measured from transverse sections from T11 to L2 in size-matched, untreated control dogs formed the standards for a mean roundness index of the spinal cord in the various anatomic locations of the vertebral column.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

### PMID 3675675 (1987) — Arzneimittel-Forschung
TITLE: Immunological safety evaluation of a haemostatic agent and wound dressing made of horse collagen fibrils.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A haemostatic agent and wound dressing made of horse collagen (Tachotop) was applied to guinea-pigs in such a way that the intended use of this material in humans was simulated, and cell-mediated and humoral immune responses of the animals were investigated. In addition, immune reactions were forcefully induced in guinea-pigs in order to validate the methodical approach and quantitate the observed reactions. Cell-mediated immunity was measured as delayed-type hypersensitivity skin reactions, and antibodies were detected by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Simulation of the intended application of this haemostyptic material did not induce immune reactions in guinea-pigs even under critical conditions. The animals could only be immunized when the antigen was administered in solution or finely dispersed and together with adjuvant. Immune reactions thus induced were specific for collagen, no reaction was obtained against possible impurities such as albumin, immunoglobulin or fibronectin. It is concluded--in accordance with clinical experience--that this material is very unlikely to induce immune reactions upon clinical application to humans.

### PMID 3437968 (1987) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Peritumoral and intratumoral hemorrhage after gelatin sponge embolization of malignant meningioma: case report.
DOI: 10.1227/00006123-198712000-00031 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors report a case of peritumoral and intratumoral hemorrhage during therapeutic embolization with gelatin sponge powder for malignant meningioma. One should be wary of this severe, unexpected complication when performing preoperative embolization.

### PMID 3762206 (1986) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Inherent dangers of simultaneous application of microfibrillar collagen hemostat and blood-saving devices.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen hemostat is a topically applicable hemostatic agent that has been introduced relatively recently. Because of the possibility that this substance may pass through different blood-collecting circuits and cause organ damage if reintroduced into the patient's circulation, we performed a series of in vitro and in vivo experiments. The results of these experiments suggest that such a passage may indeed occur and could cause organ damage, either by direct or by induced embolization that cannot be completely prevented even with the application of commercially used filters. We therefore recommend that the substance should not be used if the shed blood is intended to be collected and returned into the patient's circulation.

### PMID 3520941 (1986) — Thrombosis research
TITLE: Hemostatic effects of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (MCH) in experimental coagulopathy model and its mechanism of hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/0049-3848(86)90269-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 3930885 (1985) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Cryoprecipitate-topical thrombin glue. Initial experience in patients undergoing cardiac operations.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The use of fibrin glues as topical hemostatic agents is reported in the European literature. We have composed an analogous compound in our operating rooms using cryoprecipitate and topical thrombin (1000 units/ml) in equal volumes applied directly to the bleeding site. We have used cryoprecipitate-topical thrombin glue in 26 patients undergoing cardiac operations. Severe bleeding not responding to usual methods of control was encountered during or after coronary artery bypass (n = 17), valve replacement (n = 3), bypass plus valve replacement (n = 5), or repair of postinfarction ventricular septal defect (n = 1). Five patients were operated on emergently and four were undergoing their second cardiac operation. The glue was used in four patients while on bypass and fully heparinized and in 17 patients who continued to bleed after separation from bypass and administration of protamine. Hemostasis was achieved in all patients and none required reexploration for bleeding. In five patients undergoing reexploration for postoperative hemorrhage (none having received cryoprecipitate-topical thrombin glue during the initial operation), the glue provided hemostasis when other measures failed, and no additional reexplorations were needed. No patient exhibited hypersensitivity, fibrinolysis, or coagulopathy following the use of this glue. In 16 patients followed for 9 to 12 months postoperatively, no hepatitis has occurred. The highly concentrated fibrinogen in cryoprecipitate is activated by thrombin to form fibrin and bring about rapid hemostasis. Cryoprecipitate-topical thrombin glue is a readily available, reliable, and inexpensive topical hemostatic agent in the patient undergoing a cardiac operation.

### PMID 6803551 (1982) — AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology
TITLE: Preoperative embolization of hypervascular head and neck neoplasms using microfibrillar collagen.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microfibrillar collagen is a bovine collagen material that promotes hemostasis. When mixed with contrast material it makes a fine slurry that is easily injected through small catheters. Experience with preoperative embolization of head and neck neoplasms in six patients indicates that microfibrillar collagen slurry is a highly effective, easy to use embolic material for occlusion of highly vascular neoplasms.

### PMID 7212838 (1981) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: The embolization of bone wax from sternotomy incisions.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(10)60967-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We discuss our study on the effects of discontinuation of the usage of bone wax as a hemostatic agent in sternotomy incisions. In 1976, we abandoned use of bone wax because it was suspected of causing several cases of Mycobacterium fortuitum sternal osteomyelitis. In a retrospective study involving 400 patients, we found that this step did not increase postoperative bleeding as measured by drainage from the chest tube and by the need to return patients to the operating room because of bleeding. It also was observed that there was an appreciable simultaneous drop in pulmonary complications. To test our theory that the wax pressed into the bone marrow can embolize to the lung, radioactively tagged bone wax was pressed into the cut sternum in animal models, and a search was made for radioactive deposits in the peripheral lung tissue. Shortly after the application of the wax, there was evidence of large radioactive deposits in the lungs. It is probable that this embolization occurs also under clinical conditions and may play a role in pulmonary complications following open-heart operations.

### PMID 711395 (1978) — Investigative radiology
TITLE: Transcatheter embolization with microfibrillar collagen in swine.
DOI: 10.1097/00004424-197805000-00005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Transcatheter embolization of the gastrosplenic and renal arteries was performed in 7 domestic swine with suspensions of microfibrillar collagen (MFC), a recently developed topical hemostatic agent. Embolized vessels remained occluded 2 days following embolization. Recanalization occurred by 14 days, although some occlusion in distal vessel persisted at 3 months. Pathologically a marked granulomatous arteritis was noted at 14 days which resolved by 3 months. Gastric ulcers or infarcts were present in two animals. The severe vasculitis and gastric pathology observed with MFC in this study would seem to preclude its use as a general embolic agent. It may be useful, however, in the preoperative embolization of neoplasms, especially in pediatric patients since its physical characteristics allow it to be easily injected through small diameter catheters.

### PMID 4608152 (1974) — Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry
TITLE: Gel-foam granuloma in the brain.
DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.37.8.971 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A case is recorded in which a large giant cell reaction to gel-foam is noted after its use in neurosurgery. This caused blockage to the flow of cerebrospinal fluid and also thrombosis of superficial vessels of the brain with subsequent infarction. We recognize the value of gel-foam as a haemostatic agent in neurosurgery but wish to warn against its use too close to viable cerebral tissue, as it can induce a marked giant cell granulomatous reaction.

