# SLICE: complication_pseudoaneurysm  (133 records)

### PMID 41914790 (2026) — Asian cardiovascular &amp; thoracic annals
TITLE: Refined suturing technique for graft-to-aorta anastomoses.
DOI: 10.1177/02184923261439235 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BackgroundSecuring hemostasis at graft-to-aorta anastomoses represents a challenging feature of the surgical management of aortic pathologies, and can impact postoperative morbidity and mortality. A new refined suturing technique was developed to address this challenge.MethodsA Dacron tube graft of appropriate size is secured within the aortic lumen using a horizontal 4-0 Prolene U-stay suture, and its two arms are used to complete the anastomosis continuously. With every bite, the needle is driven horizontally across an outer circumferential felt strip and aorta (out-in), through the graft at a 2-3-mm distance from its edge (out-in), back through the graft at a 7-8-mm distance from its edge (in-out), and finally bridging over the aortic edge back to its outer aspect without piercing the aortic wall. The two running sutures are firmly tightened and knotted, and Bioglue is applied.ResultsThe described technique was used in 175 patients who underwent ascending aortic replacement for aortic aneurysm or acute dissection. We have found its application to be associated with improved hemostasis and reduced intraoperative and postoperative blood loss. Additional sutures were rarely needed for hemostasis at suture lines, and there were no incidents of false aneurysm formation at anastomosis lines on long-term follow-up.ConclusionsThe described technique is associated with improved hemostasis, reduced blood loss, and decreased operating time, ultimately bringing significant benefits to patients undergoing surgical management of aortic pathologies.

### PMID 41601237 (2026) — Interdisciplinary cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Left Ventricular Rupture Due to Congenital Partial Defect of the Left Ventricular Free Wall.
DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivag028 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: A neonate who underwent corrective surgery for cardiac-type total anomalous pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) was suspected of having a pseudoaneurysm of the left ventricular (LV) free wall on transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) on postoperative day 11. Emergency surgery was performed the following day, revealing LV rupture due to a congenital partial defect of the LV free wall. The defect was successfully repaired using double-patch closure reinforced with BioGlue. The postoperative course was uneventful. This case highlights that left ventricular rupture may occur due to an unrecognized congenital defect after neonatal cardiac surgery, particularly in conditions such as TAPVC, where the left ventricle is underfilled preoperatively.

### PMID 41311727 (2026) — Journal of vascular surgery cases and innovative techniques
TITLE: Successful ultrasound-guided percutaneous embolization of splenic artery pseudoaneurysm with Glubran 2 cyanoacrylate glue: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvscit.2025.102023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The current report presents a case of a 50-year-old female who developed worsening abdominal pain following the initiation of dual antiplatelet therapy for a recent diagnosis of non-ST elevation myocardial infarction. Clinical suspicion of intra-abdominal hemorrhage prompted computed tomography imaging, which revealed a splenic artery pseudoaneurysm at the splenic hilum, accompanied by hemoperitoneum. Subsequent angiography showed no active extravasation. The patient was treated successfully with transabdominal ultrasound-guided percutaneous embolization using a mixture of N-butyl cyanoacrylate and Lipiodol. The procedure was completed without complications and resulted in significant symptomatic improvement.

### PMID 41952115 (2026) — International journal of emergency medicine
TITLE: Pseudoaneurysm of the thoracoacromial artery associated with habitual shoulder dislocation: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s12245-026-01202-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Shoulder dislocation is one of the most common joint dislocations encountered in emergency departments, but vascular complications are rare and often underrecognized. Pseudoaneurysms of the thoracoacromial artery, a branch of the axillary artery, are extremely uncommon and may present with subtle symptoms, delaying diagnosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 82-year-old woman with a history of habitual anterior shoulder dislocation presented with a 10-day history of progressive pain and swelling in the left shoulder. She was on edoxaban for atrial fibrillation. Examination revealed localized tenderness and swelling without neurological deficits. Computed tomography angiography showed a 30&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;35&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;35&#xa0;mm pseudoaneurysm arising from the acromial branch of the thoracoacromial artery. Endovascular embolization was performed using a proximal oxidized regenerated cellulose sheet placement followed by injection of N-butyl cyanoacrylate and Lipiodol due to the risk of coil migration into the joint space. The procedure achieved complete exclusion of the lesion. At three-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic with preserved left upper limb function. Computed tomography angiography demonstrated the pseudoaneurysm remains excluded.
CONCLUSION: Although rare, pseudoaneurysms of the thoracoacromial artery can occur after repeated shoulder dislocation and reduction, especially in elderly patients on anticoagulation therapy. Early recognition through imaging and prompt endovascular intervention can prevent serious vascular and neurological complications.

### PMID 40909211 (2026) — DEN open
TITLE: Endoscopic Closure Combined With the Endoscopic Submucosal Dissection Technique and Over-the-scope Clip for Chronic Aortoesophageal Fistula: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1002/deo2.70202 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Aortoesophageal fistula (AEF) is a rare but life-threatening condition. Initial management typically includes thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) or aortic graft replacement to achieve hemostasis, followed by esophagectomy with aortic graft replacement and greater omentum wrapping to eliminate the source of infection. We report a case of successful endoscopic closure of a chronic esophageal fistula secondary to AEF. A 63-year-old man presented with hematemesis. He had a history of two ascending aortic replacements and one descending aortic replacement for aortic dissection. Computed tomography revealed a pseudoaneurysm at the graft anastomosis site and perforation into the esophagus. He was diagnosed with AEF and underwent TEVAR for hemostasis. Although the bleeding was stopped, follow-up imaging confirmed a residual fistula. Because of his poor general condition, surgery was contraindicated, and endoscopic closure was attempted. Initial treatment with hemostasis clips was ineffective. A second attempt using polyglycolic acid sheets, fibrin glue, and hemostasis clips with endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) achieved closure, but the fistula reopened after 5 months. Finally, the combination of ESD and over-the-scope clip (OTSC) achieved complete and sustained closure. The patient was discharged after 3 months but died 8 months postoperatively owing to idiopathic splenic rupture. This case demonstrates that the combination of ESD and OTSC may be an effective treatment option for chronic esophageal fistulas caused by AEF.

### PMID 42069633 (2026) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Fate of proximal anastomosis after aortic repair for acute aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-026-04010-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study aimed to investigate events related to proximal anastomosis after acute aortic dissection surgery.
METHODS: We analyzed the data of 119 consecutive patients with Stanford type A aortic dissection who underwent emergency surgery at our hospital between October 2015 and March 2023. All patients underwent proximal anastomosis with felt strips and biologic glue reinforcement. Among these, 18 patients (15%) experienced events related to the proximal anastomosis: 14 (12%) had residual dissection in the aortic root, and 4 (3%) had pseudoaneurysms in the aortic root after surgery. We compared the clinical course between the 18 patients with proximal anastomotic events and the other 101 patients. The primary endpoint was all-cause mortality, and the secondary endpoint was redo open-heart surgery.
RESULTS: No significant differences were observed in preoperative and procedural characteristics. The incidence of redo open-heart surgery showed a significant difference between the two patient groups (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0015); however, all-cause mortality showed no significant difference (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.51). The clinical course was different between patients with residual aortic root dissections and those with proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysms. Residual aortic root dissections were detected via postoperative computed tomography within 1 month and followed-up conservatively owing to the absence of worsening signs. All proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysms were detected suddenly in the late postoperative phase and presented prompt worsening. All such cases underwent successful redo surgery with patch repair. At reopening, the anastomosis appeared completely detached and nearly ruptured in all cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with proximal anastomotic events required redo open-heart surgery significantly more frequently. Patients with residual aortic root dissections and those with proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysms showed a different clinical course. Residual aortic root dissection was associated with insufficient proximal anastomotic repair because it manifested just after surgery. In contrast, proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysm occurs suddenly in the late phase and shows prompt worsening, thereby requiring acute repair.

### PMID 41934622 (2026) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Proximal Anastomotic New Entry Tear Following Surgical Repair of Acute Type A Aortic Dissection: Anatomical Location, Risk Factors, and Impact on Long-Term Outcomes.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezag144 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Proximal anastomotic new entry tear (PANE) after surgical repair of acute type A aortic dissection (ATAAD) remains poorly characterized. This study aimed to determine the incidence, anatomical distribution, perioperative risk factors, and long-term impact of PANE.
METHODS: We retrospectively analysed 532 consecutive patients who underwent open aortic repair for ATAAD at our institution between 2003 and 2023. Patients without postoperative contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) or those who underwent root procedures were excluded. PANE was defined as true-false lumen communication or pseudoaneurysm formation at the proximal anastomosis on CT. Risk factors were assessed using multivariable logistic regression. Long-term outcomes were evaluated using Kaplan-Meier and Fine-Gray competing risk analyses.
RESULTS: The final study cohort included 425 patients; PANE occurred in 50 (11.8%), predominantly at the noncoronary sinus (70% isolated, 88% including adjacent sinuses) and colocalized with preoperative dissection sites in 96% of cases. Independent risk factors were preoperative severe aortic regurgitation (OR 3.69, 95% CI 1.23-11.1, P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.020) and surgery by less experienced surgeons (OR 3.75, 95% CI 1.53-9.23, P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.004), whereas biological glue use was protective (OR 0.37, 95% CI 0.19-0.70, P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.002). Long-term survival was not significantly different between groups (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.086). PANE significantly increased proximal reoperation risk (10-year cumulative incidence 14.2% vs 2.2%; subdistribution HR 8.39, 95% CI 3.35-21.0, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.001).
CONCLUSIONS: PANE affected 12% of ATAAD repairs and significantly increased reoperation risk without affecting survival. Prevention may require experienced surgical teams and optimized anastomotic techniques. All patients warrant early postoperative CT imaging to aid identification and guide surveillance strategies.
CLINICAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: 4667.

### PMID 42367271 (2026) — Indian journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Endovascular embolization of a ruptured bronchial artery pseudoaneurysm in an elderly female.
DOI: 10.1007/s12055-025-02165-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchial artery pseudoaneurysm (BAP), pathologically defined as a contained hematoma, is a rare pathology with few reported cases (approximately 60) in the literature. In circumstances where patients are critically ill, prompt diagnosis and treatment are required. A 73-year-old woman with a history of coronary artery disease and interstitial lung disease presented with chest pain and dyspnea. She was hypotensive and anemic on arrival. Computed tomography (CT) angiography revealed a ruptured bronchial artery pseudoaneurysm with a large mediastinal hematoma. Endovascular embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue and Lipiodol achieved successful occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm. Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) is the investigation of choice to screen for the disease, with digital subtraction angiography (DSA) being the gold standard for confirmation and guiding management. With recent advances in interventional procedures and vascular access techniques, transcatheter embolization has become the first-line management option for managing these cases. In this case report, the pertinent anatomy, work-up, imaging findings, and&#xa0;overview of the interventional procedure technique are discussed.

### PMID 41768304 (2026) — Journal of the Saudi Heart Association
TITLE: From Compression to Closure: Efficacy and Safety of Vascular Closure Devices (VCD) Versus Manual Compression: A Comparative Analysis of Hemostatic Strategies of Obtura, Angioseal, and ProGlide VCD.
DOI: 10.37616/2212-5043.1477 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Use of vascular closure devices (VCDs) for femoral artery puncture site hemostasis has increased but their safety and efficacy have remained unclear. This study was designed to compare safety and efficacy of Obtura, Angioseal, and Proglide VCD to manual compression (MC) and also between for femoral artery haemostasis.
METHODS: This was prospective, randomized controlled study where patients were randomly assigned on 1:1:1:1 basis. Primary endpoints were time to hemostasis (TTH) and ambulation time (AT) while secondary endpoints were deployment success, device related adverse events and technical success rate. ANOVA and Tukey HSD was conducted to draw significant difference between individual strategies. P &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: Total of 1000 patients (250 in each arm) who underwent transfemoral intervention at LPS Institute of Cardiology, Kanpur, India between January 2025 and March 2025 were evaluated. Sheath size, common femoral artery diameter and device size did not differ significantly across all the groups. Mean TTH was shortest for Angioseal (1.30 min) followed by Obtura (2.58 min), Perclose (3.97 min), and MC (17.61 min). Similarly, mean AT was shortest for Angio-Seal (123.06 min) followed by Perclose ProGlide (162.56 min), Obtura (185.42 min) and MC (743.23 min). Technical success in Angio-Seal, Obtura and Perclose ProGlide were 99.1%, 97.4% and 94.6% respectively. No access site complications (re-bleeding, infection, arteriovenous fistula, and transient access site nerve injury) were noted. There were 2(0.8%), 5(2%), 7(3.2%) and 12 (4.8%) cases of haematoma in Angio-Seal, Obtura, Perclose ProGlide and MC arm respectively. There were 2(0.8%), 2(0.8%), and 4 (1.6%) case of arterial pseudoaneurysm Obtura, Perclose ProGlide and MC arm respectively while none in Angio-Seal arm.
CONCLUSION: Vascular closure devices showed significantly faster haemostasis and shorter ambulation time compared to manual compression highlighting their clinical efficiency and Angio-Seal was superior safety and efficacy over Obtura and Perclose ProGlide.

### PMID 40230179 (2025) — Innovations (Philadelphia, Pa.)
TITLE: A Reinforcement Technique for Dissected Arch Vessels Using Hydrofit During Acute Type A Aortic Dissection Repair.
DOI: 10.1177/15569845251327397 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Acute type A aortic dissection is a fatal condition that presents with arch vessel dissection necessitating emergency surgical intervention and reconstruction. During surgical treatment of acute type A aortic dissection, thorough analysis is required to prevent complications while reconstructing these fragile dissected arch vessels. This study describes the surgical treatment of 8 patients with dissected arch vessels who underwent reinforcement technique for anastomosis mediated by Hydrofit&#xae; (Sanyo Chemical Industries, Kyoto, Japan). The arch vessels were anastomosed with a prosthetic graft. Following the application of Hydrofit to the suture line on the adventitia, no intraoperative bleeding was detected at the reconstruction site of the dissected arch vessels. Postoperative computed tomography revealed no new anastomotic tear or pseudoaneurysm. We highly recommend the use of this reinforcement technique with Hydrofit for the management and reconstruction of vessels involved in acute type A aortic dissection. We observed a fast and uneventful recovery, suggesting promising postoperative results.

### PMID 41169321 (2025) — JTCVS open
TITLE: Twenty-year experience of supracoronary reconstruction with fibrin glue in type A acute aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.xjon.2025.07.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: In surgery for type A acute aortic dissection, we perform supracoronary reconstruction with fibrin glue when the sinus of Valsalva has no intimal tears, and the diameter is &#x2264; 45 mm. This study aimed to clarify the surgical outcomes with fibrin glue, the incidence of aortic root events, and the influence of the preoperative severity of aortic regurgitation (AR) on aortic root events.
METHODS: Among 621 patients who underwent central repair in the past 20 years, we included 546 who underwent supracoronary reconstruction (87.9%). We closed the false lumen using fibrin glue and placed inner and outer polytetrafluoroethylene felt strips. The mild AR group included patients with no, trivial, or mild preoperative AR, whereas the severe AR group included patients with moderate or severe AR.
RESULTS: Acute aortic root events occurred in 19 patients (3.5%), and the incidence was higher in the severe AR group than in the mild AR group (9 [5.9%] vs 8 [2.2%]; P = .029). The long-term outcomes were investigated in 486 patients who underwent supracoronary reconstruction and were subsequently discharged. Late events occurred in 13 patients (2.7%), the 5-year and 10-year event-free rates were 98.4% and 95.1%, respectively. The pseudoaneurysm-free rate was 99.8% at 10 years. The 5-year and 10-year event-free rates were lower in the severe AR group than in the mild AR group (97.1% vs 99.3% and 85.8% vs 98.5%, respectively; P = .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Supracoronary reconstruction can be performed safely with fibrin glue with excellent long-term outcomes. Preoperative AR is a risk factor for aortic root events.

### PMID 40998373 (2025) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Cardiac Arrest due to Pseudoaneurysm-induced Compression after Ascending Aortic Replacement for Stanford Type A Acute Aortic Dissection:Report of a Case].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports, English Abstract
ABSTRACT: We present the case of a 27-year-old male who collapsed due to severe stenosis of an artificial vessel caused by a pseudoaneurysm at the central anastomotic site after acute aortic dissection Stanford type A. Although we believe that BioGlue mediated tissue toxicity may be one cause of this pseudoaneurysm, other factors, such as tissue separation due to tissue fragility caused by infection, inflammation, and cutting caused by the surgical procedure, are also thought to have contributed. Emergency re-operation was performed after resuscitation. The patient was eventually discharged home without adverse events on the 34th postoperative day. Careful observation in mid- to long-term and remote post-operative phases is necessary for patients subjected to procedures using BioGlue, and prompt repair of pseudoaneurysms is desirable.

### PMID 40217906 (2025) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: The Effect of Albumin/Glutaraldehyde Glue (Bioglue) on Colonic Anastomosis Under Intestinal Obstruction: An Experimental Study in Rats.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm14072457 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background/Objectives: Healing of colonic anastomoses is critical to surgical recovery, particularly under obstructive ileus conditions. Adhesive biological materials such as albumin/glutaraldehyde glue (Bioglue) show potential in enhancing anastomotic healing and minimizing complications. This study investigates the effect of Bioglue on colonic anastomoses healing under obstructive ileus conditions in rats. Methods: Eighty albino Wistar rats were divided into control, ileus, Bioglue, and ileus + Bioglue groups (n = 20 each). Subgroups (n = 10) were sacrificed on the 4th or 8th postoperative day. In the control and Bioglue groups, end-to-end anastomoses were performed after colonic resection. In the ileus and ileus + Bioglue groups, obstructive ileus was induced by colonic ligation, followed by resection and primary anastomosis. Bioglue was applied in the Bioglue and ileus + Bioglue groups. Assessments included bursting pressure, peritoneal adhesion and inflammation scores, and biochemical markers (fibroblast activity, neoangiogenesis, collagen deposition, hydroxyproline, and collagenase concentrations). Results: Bursting pressure and fibroblast activity were significantly higher in the ileus + Bioglue group compared to the ileus group on both postoperative days. Although anastomotic rupture occurred in the ileus and ileus + Bioglue groups, the incidence was not significantly different from the control and Bioglue groups. Ileus + Bioglue showed significantly higher adhesion scores, inflammatory infiltration, neoangiogenesis, and collagen deposition compared to the control and ileus groups. Hydroxyproline was significantly elevated in the ileus + Bioglue group on the 8th day. Collagenase I concentrations were higher in ileus + Bioglue but not significant. Conclusions: Bioglue application enhances colonic anastomotic healing under obstructive ileus conditions, improving mechanical strength and promoting tissue repair by the 4th and 8th postoperative days. These findings support its potential clinical application.

### PMID 40221755 (2025) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Endovascular treatment under laparotomy with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate in a pediatric traumatic aortic injury: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-025-03412-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The Society for Vascular Surgery (SVS) guidelines recommend thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) for blunt traumatic aortic injuries (BTAI) in adults, especially BTAI grades II to IV. TEVAR is increasingly performed for BTAI in children and adolescents; however, reports on treatment strategies are limited. Percutaneous routes for stenting may not be available in children with anatomically small vessel diameters, and the indications for stent grafts are challenging because of the steep aortic angle.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of TEVAR for BTAI performed under laparotomy with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) injection in an adolescent patient. The patient was a 13-year-old male who sustained injuries due to a fall and presented with severe hypoxia and shock on admission. Computed tomography (CT) showed a thoracic aortic injury with a pseudoaneurysm (SVS grade III) and bilateral pulmonary contusions. We planned to perform TEVAR after venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO); however, because of the small diameters of the bilateral common femoral arteries, we placed a stent graft through the left common iliac artery under laparotomy. In addition, the proximal landing zone of the stent graft to the thoracic pseudoaneurysm was short, and we filled the pseudoaneurysm with NBCA after deploying the stent graft to prevent endoleaks. Subsequent CTs showed no endoleaks, and the patient was discharged on day 110.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a case of TEVAR in a 13-year-old boy who underwent laparotomy with NBCA injection into a pseudoaneurysm. This method may be useful as an alternative when percutaneous access is not available, and the proximal landing zone cannot be reached.

### PMID 40842740 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: From Pseudocyst to Pseudoaneurysm: A Complex Pancreatic Vascular Emergency Managed With a Multi-stage Interventional Radiology Approach.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.88448 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Acute-on-chronic pancreatitis is frequently complicated by the formation of pancreatic pseudocysts (PPs). Haemorrhage within a pseudocyst is a life-threatening event, typically resulting from the development of a pseudoaneurysm (PA) involving adjacent arterial structures. First-line treatment is endovascular embolization, an interventional radiology (IR) approach. However, if embolization fails, remaining treatment options are severely limited, as surgery is often considered high-risk or unfeasible. We present a case of chronic pancreatitis complicated by a haemorrhagic PP complicated by PA formation of several adjacent vessels within the pancreatic head. The patient was successfully managed with multiple embolization sessions, performed by IR, the only viable treatment option in this scenario. A 43-year-old man with a history of alcohol-related liver cirrhosis (Child-Pugh B), alcoholic hepatitis, and recurrent chronic pancreatitis presented with melaena. Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed a pseudocyst in the pancreatic head containing internal haemorrhage, with active bleeding from multiple arterial feeders within the pancreaticoduodenal arcade (PDAA). Five direct angiography sessions were required. A large amount and combination of coils as well as large volumes of glue (Glubran II; GEM S.r.l., Lucca, Italy), and stent placement were all necessary to achieve complete occlusion of all feeding vessels causing bleeding within the PP. Surgical intervention would have necessitated a pancreaticoduodenectomy in a hostile operative field, with prohibitively high morbidity and mortality. Endovascular embolization remains the treatment of choice for PA in the setting of haemorrhagic pancreatic pseudocysts. This case highlights the life-saving role of IR, particularly when surgical options are unfeasible. It also emphasizes the importance of timely escalation, multidisciplinary decision-making, and advanced embolization techniques. Notably, this is the first reported case of a persistently haemorrhagic PP successfully managed with a multi-stage interventional radiology approach incorporating Glubran II, coils, thrombin, and covered stent deployment. Given the rarity of the condition and the effectiveness of the treatment, this case describes an evolving endovascular strategy finding application in a highly complex clinical scenario.

### PMID 37933541 (2025) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: The Outcome of Sac Filling With Fibrin Sealant and Gentamicin After Endovascular Aortic Repair of Brucella-Related Aorto-Iliac Artery Aneurysms: A Retrospective Single-Center Study.
DOI: 10.1177/15266028231209943 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This study aimed to analyze the experience of our center and assess the efficacy of sac filling with fibrin sealant (FS) and gentamicin after endovascular aortic repair (EVAR) in patients with Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All patients who received sac filling with FS and gentamicin after EVAR for Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysms between March 2019 and September 2022 were reviewed. Before and after sac filling with FS and gentamicin, aneurysm sac thrombosis and endoleak were evaluated using a preloaded catheter to monitor immediate repair outcome. Short- to mid-term outcomes were assessed by the incidence of vascular graft infection (VGI), all-cause mortality, maximum aneurysm diameter, aneurysm sac thrombosis, and other adverse events.
RESULTS: There were 14 patients with Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysms who underwent sac filling with FS and gentamicin after EVAR. Perioperative death due to myocardial infarction in 1 patient resulted in a postoperative all-cause mortality rate of 7.1% (1/14). All patients received anti-Brucella drugs for a median of 6.0 (range: 3-12) months postoperatively. During a median follow-up period of 15.0 (range 0.5-36) months, the absolute and sagittal maximum diameters of the aorto-iliac aneurysm sac were significantly smaller than preoperation (from 46.3 &#xb1; 17.0 to 27.2 &#xb1; 16.3 mm, P&lt;.001, and from 39.2 &#xb1; 13.1 to 24.0 &#xb1; 13.8 mm, P&lt;.001). Two of these patients had a postoperative disappearance of the pseudoaneurysm. One patient was reintervened for bilateral femoral artery bypass surgery. Except for sac filling with gentamicin, all patients received anti-brucella medication for a median of 6.0 (range: 3-12) months. There were no allergic reactions, nephrotoxicity, endoleak, recurrence, VGI, aorta-related or infection-related deaths during the perioperative period and follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Sac filling with FS and gentamicin adjunctive to EVAR, with targeted drug delivery to the sites of Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysm infection lesions, may be an effective solution to control pseudoaneurysm infection and rupture.Clinical ImpactPrevious Brucella-associated aorto-iliac artery aneurysms have been limited to case reports. This study significantly increased the number of Brucella-associated aorto-iliac aneurysms by 19.7% (14/71) and extended the follow-up to 3 years. In this retrospective study of 14 patients with Brucella-associated aorto-iliac aneurysms treated endovascularly with fibrin sealant and gentamicin for sac filling and targeted administration to infection-related aneurysms, there were no aneurysm-related deaths or infection-related complications and may be an effective solution for controlling aneurysm infection and rupture. And, this approach is an attractive treatment for moving away from long-term dependence on antibiotics but still needs further evaluation.

### PMID 39637291 (2025) — Vascular
TITLE: Intercostal bypass graft pseudoaneurysm repaired with percutaneous glue embolization utilizing CT needle guidance: A case report.
DOI: 10.1177/17085381241305177 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: ObjectivesPseudoaneurysm formation in connective tissue patients postoperatively can be a challenging and life-threatening problem to treat. Repair of an aorta to intercostal bypass graft pseudoaneurysm post open thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair by percutaneous glue embolization utilizing Dyna CT Needle Guidance technology is a safe, minimally invasive method with low morbidity and short post-procedural recovery.MethodsA 30-year-old male with suspected connective tissue disorder who developed a Type B aortic dissection complicated by limb threatening right lower extremity ischemia treated with left-to-right fem-fem bypass and RLE fasciotomies. His thoracic aortic dissection subsequently was repaired urgently for persistent chest pain and rapid aortic expansion by open thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm repair with aorta to intercostal bypass graft. Seven weeks postop patient presented with hemoptysis and was noted to have an enlarging T9 intercostal pseudoaneurysm requiring repair.Results and conclusionsPost discharge follow-up thoracic CTA performed showed complete resolution of the T9 intercostal pseudoaneurysm. Therefore, percutaneous NBCA glue embolization with iGuide technology is a viable alternative to open thoracic pseudoaneurysm repair and offers distinct advantages over other imaging modalities for localization.

### PMID 40880675 (2025) — Case reports in gastroenterology
TITLE: Repeated Delayed Bleeding following Treatment for a Pancreatic Pseudocyst during Lumen-Apposing Metal Stent Placement: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1159/000544823 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The lumen-apposing metal stent (LAMS) is a novel prosthesis for fistula formation between the gastrointestinal and cyst walls. Bleeding complications occur in 10% of cases mostly during LAMS placement. We present a case of recurrent bleeding following LAMS placement.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 47-year-old male was admitted to a local hospital for acute pancreatitis and subsequently referred for endoscopic drainage because of an enlarging pseudocyst near the tail of the pancreas. Treatment involved LAMS and endoscopic ultrasound-guided transmural drainage. Posttreatment computed tomography revealed cyst shrinkage; however, upper gastrointestinal bleeding was noted after discharge. Endoscopy identified bleeding within the fistula, which was controlled by spraying an absorbable local hemostatic agent into the cavity. After ensuring the absence of recurrent bleeding for approximately 1 month, the LAMS was removed under endoscopy. Following LAMS removal, arterial bleeding was observed within the cavity, prompting an emergency angiography. Angiography revealed bleeding from a pseudoaneurysm of the splenic artery, which was treated with coil embolization. No rebleeding occurred after the procedure.
CONCLUSION: Bleeding 1 week after placement or during removal is rare. However, following LAMS placement, there is a risk of bleeding until removal, with arterial bleeding often occurring at the time of removal. Therefore, it is necessary to establish a system that allows for prompt vascular embolization treatment.

### PMID 41597314 (2025) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: Ultrasound-Guided Femoral Hemostasis in Peripheral Angioplasty: Real-World Outcomes with Vascular Closure Devices Versus Manual Compression.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina62010028 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: Access-site complications (ASCs) remain clinically relevant after peripheral endovascular procedures, particularly with large femoral sheaths and complex anatomy. While randomized coronary trials show non-inferiority of vascular closure devices (VCDs) versus manual compression (MC), real-world data in peripheral interventions performed under systematic ultrasound-guided access are limited. Materials and Methods: This retrospective single-center cohort included consecutive peripheral arterial revascularizations (2010-2023) performed via common femoral access under real-time ultrasound guidance. Hemostasis was achieved using MC or VCDs, categorized as collagen plug-based, suture-mediated, or clip-based systems. The primary endpoint was 30-day ASCs, defined as hematoma requiring management, pseudoaneurysm, bleeding requiring transfusion, access-site thrombosis/occlusion, arteriovenous fistula, or infection. The secondary endpoint was VCD failure, defined as unsuccessful hemostasis requiring adjunctive measures. Multivariable logistic regression adjusted for prespecified anatomical and procedural covariates, including sheath size &gt; 6 Fr and puncture-site calcification. Results: Among 231 procedures, VCDs were used in 139 (60.2%) and MC in 92 (39.8%). ASC occurred in 28 cases (12.1%), with higher rates in the MC group compared with VCDs (18.5% vs. 9-14% across device types; p = 0.044). In adjusted analyses, MC (vs any VCD) (odds ratio [OR] 2.41, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.06-5.47; p = 0.035), sheath size &gt; 6 Fr, and puncture-site calcification were independently associated with ASCs. VCD failure occurred in 5 cases (3.6%) and was not observed with collagen plug-based devices. Conclusions: In this ultrasound-guided real-world peripheral cohort, VCD use was associated with lower 30-day ASC rates and low device failure rates compared with MC. Given the retrospective and non-randomized design, these findings should be considered hypothesis-generating and support individualized, imaging-guided strategies for femoral closure in peripheral interventions.

### PMID 40765135 (2025) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: A Novel Non-Surgical Treatment for Iatrogenic Radial Artery Pseudoaneurysm: A Case Series.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.70081 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Iatrogenic radial artery pseudoaneurysm (iRAP) is a rare but potentially devastating complication after transradial access. Spontaneous thrombosis rarely occurs in lesions&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;2&#x2009;cm in size, surgery is invasive, and USG-guided thrombin injection risks distal embolisation due to the short necks of most iRAP.
AIMS: We describe a non-surgical approach by Differential Radial Artery Isolation and NEedle Decompression (DRAINED) for treating iRAP. The neck of the iRAP was confirmed by Doppler ultrasound. Two pneumatic hemostatic compression bands (TR band, Terumo) were inflated proximal and disteal to the iRAP to occlude antegrade and retrograde radial flow respectively, mimicking surgical isolation of the iRAP segment. Ultrasound-guided needle aspiration of its content under aseptic technique was followed by an additional compression band placed directly over the iRAP to prevent reaccumulation. After 2&#x2009;h, all three bands were gradually deflated. Digital perfusion was continuously monitored by plethysmography on pulse oximetry.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Medical records of 6 patients (50% female, mean age 72.5) with iRAP treated by DRAINED from 2018 to 2024 were retrospectively reviewed. Patient demographics, procedural details, and ultrasound records were identified. All underwent percutaneous coronary intervention, and 83.3% had 7&#x2009;Fr radial sheath insertion. Fifty percent received double-antiplatelet post-procedure and 50% received anticoagulation. All patients experienced resolution of iRAP after DRAINED, and there were no complications, such as radial artery thrombosis or distal embolisation.
CONCLUSION: DRAINED demonstrated safety and efficacy in our cohort of patients suffering iRAP after transradial access.

### PMID 40761364 (2025) — SAGE open medical case reports
TITLE: An effective method for percutaneous hemostasis of femoral artery by endovascular balloon occlusion via the occluded dorsal pedalis artery approach in a patient with restricted access site.
DOI: 10.1177/2050313X251364131 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemostasis of a large-diameter sheath is sometimes problematic, especially for patients with limited approach sites. Here, we describe an effective and safe endovascular method for hemostasis of the femoral artery via the dorsalis pedis artery. The patient was a 75-year-old man who was performing endovascular therapy via the left common femoral artery. A pseudoaneurysm developed, and it was treated via the right common femoral artery. He developed acute coronary syndrome 1 week later, and an intra-aortic balloon pump therapy was inserted via the right femoral artery. Neither radial artery was available, and the right brachial artery was punctured to perform coronary revascularization. When the intra-aortic balloon pump was to be removed, the right dorsal pedis artery was punctured, and hemostasis was achieved without any complications. We conclude that the trans-ankle intervention may be an effective and less invasive technique for percutaneous hemostatic procedures.

### PMID 40095150 (2025) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: PseuSeal technique: endovascular repair of Iatrogenic pseudoaneurysm using ExoSeal.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-025-00536-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The ExoSeal&#xae; (Cordis, Florida, USA) is a bioabsorbable vascular closure device that facilitates hemostasis by deploying a polyglycolic acid (PGA) plug. This report presents the "PseuSeal technique," a novel approach to seal pseudoaneurysm using ExoSeal in an off-label manner.
METHODS: The PseuSeal technique includes the PseuSeal Snare and PseuSeal Rendezvous, both performed via a contralateral crossover approach. The choice of approach depends on whether a 4-Fr catheter can be advanced into the pseudoaneurysm cavity. If feasible, the PseuSeal Snare is selected; otherwise, the PseuSeal Rendezvous is employed. In the PseuSeal Snare, a snare is deployed from a 4-Fr catheter within the pseudoaneurysm cavity. An 18-gauge needle is then used to retrogradely puncture the snare loop. A 0.035-inch guidewire is passed through the needle lumen, captured by the snare, and externalized. In the PseuSeal Rendezvous, an 18-gauge needle retrogradely punctures the guidewire within the cavity, and the guidewire is advanced into the needle lumen for externalization. After externalizing the guidewire in both approaches, an ExoSeal-specific sheath is inserted over the guidewire through the pseudoaneurysm neck into the main vessel. A balloon is advanced from the crossover sheath into the main trunk to cover the pseudoaneurysm ostium. The ExoSeal system is then inserted through the second sheath. As the ExoSeal's indicator wire is withdrawn, the balloon is inflated to stabilize the indicator wire, ensuring precise deployment of the PGA plug at the pseudoaneurysm neck. Balloon inflation is maintained for 5 minutes, with an additional 5 minutes if necessary. Hemostasis is confirmed by angiography.
RESULTS: The PseuSeal technique was successfully applied in&#xa0;five common femoral artery&#x3000;pseudoaneurysms, all of which had failed ultrasound-guided compression. Each case was treated using a&#xa0;6-Fr ExoSeal device, with no complications or recurrences observed during follow-up. Case 1 involved an 87-year-old female who developed a pseudoaneurysm following a peripheral intervention. The PseuSeal Snare achieved hemostasis in 32 minutes. Case 2 involved a 60-year-old male presenting with a pseudoaneurysm after a coronary intervention. The PseuSeal Rendezvous achieved hemostasis in 50 minutes.
CONCLUSION: The PseuSeal technique provides an effective alternative for pseudoaneurysm closure.

### PMID 39597807 (2024) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Polytetrafluoroethylene Felt Inlay Neomedia and Tissue Glue Do Not Prevent Reoperation in Type A Aortic Dissection.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm13226663 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background/Objectives: Type A aortic dissection repair using Polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE) felt inlay and tissue glue has been proposed as a treatment modality. It remains unclear, if this method performs superiorly to tissue glue only. Methods: Between January 2011 and December 2015, 139 patients underwent surgical repair for type A aortic dissection, and 48 patients were excluded (n = 29 after receiving a composite graft, n = 18 in which no tissue glue was used, and n = 1 due to missing data). In the remaining patients, proximal aortic repair was performed either using PTFE felt inlay and tissue glue or tissue glue only. We analyzed the need for repeated surgery on the aorta during follow-up as a primary endpoint. The secondary endpoint was all-cause mortality at follow-up. Inverse probability of treatment weighting was used to balance the distribution of measured baseline covariates. Results: Sixty-six patients (73%) were treated with a tissue-glue-only approach-the Control Group. Twenty-five patients (27%) underwent proximal PTFE felt inlay and tissue glue-the Intervention Group. In the Intervention Group, 40% (n = 10) underwent reoperation due to re-dissection or pseudoaneurysm vs. 12% (n = 8) in the Control Group. The felt inlay increased the hazard of re-operation by 8.38 (1.63 to 43.0) after IPTW with death modeled as competing risk. Conclusions: Reoperation due to aortic complications was 10 times higher in patients treated with a combination of gluing and PTFE felt inlay vs. gluing only. These results are potentially caused by an interaction of PTFE, tissue glue, and aortic tissue.

### PMID 39248677 (2024) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Innovative Endovascular Management of Giant Superficial Temporal Artery Pseudoaneurysm Presented With Periorbital Ulcerative Mass.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000010594 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Superficial temporal artery (STA) pseudoaneurysms, characterized by arterial wall defects leading to blood leakage into perivascular tissues, present as pulsatile edematous masses, often originating from trauma or iatrogenic causes. Although rare (&lt;1% of vascular lesions), anticoagulation agent use may contribute to their increasing incidence.
METHODS: Traditional surgical ligation and resection have been standard, but the advent of endovascular techniques offers minimally invasive alternatives that mitigate surgical risks, especially in patients with multiple medical comorbidities. This case report details the successful endovascular management of an STA pseudoaneurysm using n-butyl cyanoacrylate (n-BCA) glue embolization.
RESULTS: A 93-year-old female with renal failure, cardiac history, and anticoagulant therapy presented with large periorbital ecchymosis and edema after a fall. Computed tomography revealed a periorbital mass corresponding to her symptoms, and a repeat computed tomography conducted 2 months later indicated mass growth. Doppler ultrasonography suggested a partially thrombosed pseudoaneurysm from the right STA. Considering the patient's age and medical conditions, endovascular embolization using n-BCA glue was chosen over surgical ligation. The patient was discharged uneventfully, and follow-up confirmed spontaneous resolution.
CONCLUSION: This case demonstrates the evolving role of endovascular techniques, particularly in cases unsuitable for surgery. Liquid embolic agents like n-BCA offer precise occlusion capabilities, solidifying their potential as a standalone treatment option for STA pseudoaneurysms.

### PMID 37337453 (2024) — The journal of vascular access
TITLE: Treatment of arteriovenous access pseudoaneurysms using ultrasound guided balloon assisted thrombin injection: Two cases and systematic review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1177/11297298231182158 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Arteriovenous fistula pseudoaneurysm (AVF-PSA) is a common complication, usually caused during dialysis cannulation, which traditionally has been treated with open and less frequently endovascular techniques. Thrombin injection, although established in the treatment of arterial pseudoaneurysms, has barely been used in the treatment of AVF-PSA, due to concerns for AVF thrombosis or proximal embolization.
METHODS: A systematic review was performed according to the PRISMA 2020 guidelines. PubMed and Cochrane Central databases were reviewed and all clinical reports on AVF-PSA balloon assisted percutaneous thrombin injection through July 2022 were included. The electronic search yielded five case reports. Due to between-study differences and small sample size, the findings were summarized from each report, but the results were not pooled. Additionally, we present our own experience on two patients with AVF-PSA that were treated with balloon assisted percutaneous thrombin injection.
RESULTS: A total of five case reports (no of patients: 7, including ours) were included for review. Most of the patients were male (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6) and the mean age was 65.9&#x2009;years. The average size of the PSA was 1.6&#x2009;cm. In all cases a balloon was inflated to prevent thrombin and thrombotic material intrusion into the fistula lumen, prior to thrombin injection. In one patient n-butyl cyanoacrylate and Lipiodol were used, due to thrombin non availability. Recurrence was reported in only one patient, and average follow-up is 16&#x2009;months.
CONCLUSIONS: Thrombin injection with concomitant balloon inflation seems to be a safe and effective treatment for arteriovenous fistula pseudoaneurysms. Future studies should be aimed at evaluating the long-term outcomes of such minimally invasive techniques.

### PMID 38543074 (2024) — Pharmaceuticals (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Synthetic Haemostatic Sealants: Effectiveness, Safety, and In Vivo Applications.
DOI: 10.3390/ph17030288 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Rapid haemostasis during surgery is essential when one wants to reduce the duration of operations, reduce the need for transfusions, and above all when one wants to achieve better patient management. The use of haemostatic agents, sealants, and adhesives improves the haemostatic process by offering several advantages, especially in vascular surgery. These agents vary widely in their mechanism of action, composition, ease of application, adhesion to wet or dry tissue, immunogenicity, and cost. The most used are cyanoacrylate-based glues (Glubran 2) or polysaccharide hydrogel-microsphere powder (AristaTMAH). This work is based on a retrospective study carried out on a sample of patients with different vascular diseases (FAV, pseudoaneurysm, and PICC application) in which two different haemostatic sealants were used. The aim was to assess the safety, the advantages, and the ability of both sealants to activate the haemostatic process at the affected site, also in relation to their chemical-physical characteristics. The obtained results showed that the application of Glubran 2 and AristaTMAH as surgical wound closure systems is effective and safe, as the success achieved was &#x2265;94% on anastomoses of FAV, 100% on stabilization of PICC catheters, and &#x2264;95% on pseudoaneurysms.

### PMID 39280739 (2024) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Intravenous misplacement of the nephrostomy catheter following percutaneous nephrolithotomy: A case report and review of 26 cases in the literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2024.07.147 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intravenous misplacement of the nephrostomy catheter following percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) is severe and extremely rare, and little information is available about this complication. Because the patient's prognosis may be poor, sufficient attention should be paid to early identification and treatment of this complication. We report a case with intravenous misplacement of nephrostomy catheter and severe bleeding from the catheter after PCNL was transferred to our hospital. The patient was successfully managed using a two-step intervention. First, the patient underwent embolization of the pseudoaneurysms in renal parenchyma, then underwent catheter withdrawal under digital subtraction angiography (DSA) and control bleeding by pushing the absorbable hemostatic material (Surgicel) into the tunneled renal drainage. There were no severe complications. Withdrawal could be performed by open surgery or under the supervision of imaging modalities. Some reports showed that minimally invasive management was safer and less invasive than open surgery.

### PMID 38687036 (2024) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Report on Pseudoaneurysm Caused by Injury of Internal Carotid Artery During Endoscopic Pituitary Surgery and Rebleeding After Treatment With Willis Covered Stent.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000010174 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Report on a case of pseudoaneurysm which was caused by injury of the internal carotid artery (ICA) during endoscopic endonasal surgery (EES), which was followed by rebleeding after treatment with a Willis covered stent.
METHODS: A woman, aged 68, underwent EES for the treatment of a pituitary adenoma. During the surgery, the right ICA was injured, and successfully hemostasis by packed with cottonoid and gelatin sponge. Besides, cerebral angiography was performed in the interventional operating room for the purpose of discovering the formation of a pseudoaneurysm in the cavernous sinus segment of ICA, which was treated with a covered stent. After successfully placing the covered stent, the patient was promptly transferred to the general operating room for the removal of the cottonoid and to address the bleeding once again. The authors employ crushed muscles and cottonoid to locally compress and stop bleeding. Owing to concerns about the risk of rebleeding in the patient, after stent implantation, the patient did not utilize antiplatelet drugs. After the surgery, the patient developed occlusion of the right ICA and massive cerebral infarction in the right hemisphere. Dehydration, anti-infection, rehabilitation, hyperbaric oxygen, as well as related treatments, were given. The cottonoid was removed in EES 2 months postsurgery, and no instances of bleeding were observed. Six months after surgery, the patient had clear consciousness and hemiplegia in the left limb, with a Glasgow Outcome Scale score of 4.
RESULTS: The ICA was injured during EES, which resulted in the formation of a pseudoaneurysm, the Willis stent was adopted for treatment, and there was a risk of rebleeding after the nasal packing (cottonoid, crushed muscles) was removed immediately.
CONCLUSIONS: The ICA was injured during EES after bleeding was controlled by packing with cottonoid, crushed muscles, etc, subsequently, the patient was given intravascular treatment, it is advised to make thorough preparations and, after a suitable period, remove nasal packing in the hybrid operating room to address unexpected situations and unforeseen circumstances.

### PMID 39459555 (2024) — Life (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Hemostatic Properties of Aortic Root Preservation versus Root Replacement for Acute Type A Aortic Dissection: A Pooled Analysis.
DOI: 10.3390/life14101255 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We reviewed the available literature on patients undergoing aortic repair for acute type A aortic dissection (ATAAD) with either aortic root preservation (RP) or root replacement (RR).
METHODS: Original research studies that evaluated short- and mid-term hemostatic properties of RP versus RR groups were identified, from 2000 to 2024. Intraoperative transfusions of red blood cells (RBCs), reoperation for bleeding, strategy of hemostatic sealing of the anastomosis in root repair following the reapproximation of the dissected layers of the aortic wall (with/without biological glue), and operative mortality were the primary endpoints. Postoperative morbidity and overall and reoperation-free survival at one and five years were the secondary endpoints. A sensitivity analysis was performed using the leave-one-out method.
RESULTS: Ten studies were included in the qualitative and quantitative synthesis, incorporating data from 6850 patients (RP: 4389 patients; RR: 2461 patients). Root preservation demonstrated a lower median transfusion of RBCs (WMD: -1.00; 95% CI: -1.41, -0.59; p &lt; 0.01) and incidence of reoperation for bleeding compared to root replacement (OR: 0.67; 95% CI: 0.58, 0.77; p &lt; 0.01). The majority of studies did not use biological glue in root repair to avoid the risk of an anastomotic pseudoaneurysm. No difference was found regarding postoperative morbidity, along with mid-term overall and reoperation-free survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Root preservation without the use of biological glue during aortic repair is associated with enhanced hemostatic traits compared to the root replacement approach. A future well-designed Randomized Controlled Trial should further validate our outcomes.

### PMID 38125347 (2024) — Experimental and therapeutic medicine
TITLE: Pseudoaneurysm of the superficial temporal artery after sagittal split ramus osteotomy: A case report.
DOI: 10.3892/etm.2023.12301 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Sagittal split ramus osteotomy (SSRO) is a widely performed orthognathic surgery; however, among the various reported complications of SSRO, pseudoaneurysms are rarely reported. Pseudoaneurysms are rare vascular lesions formed by damage to the arterial wall that can occur after trauma or postoperatively, causing uncontrolled bleeding. The present report describes a case of a pseudoaneurysm that occurred after SSRO in a 22-year-old female patient. Le Fort I osteotomy and bilateral SSRO were performed under general anesthesia to improve the gummy smile and mandibular asymmetry of the patient. While osteotomizing the medial side of the left SSRO, major bleeding occurred from the soft tissue of the posterior margin of the mandibular branch. Direct compression with gauze and a local hemostatic agent stopped the bleeding. Immediately after returning to the ward, bleeding was observed from the left wound site and marked swelling of the left buccal area occurred. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a pseudoaneurysm of the left superficial temporal artery (STA). Subsequently, arterial embolization for the pseudoaneurysm was performed. Overall, the present report describes a rare case of pseudoaneurysm of the STA as a postoperative complication of SSRO.

### PMID 37650514 (2023) — Diagnostic and interventional radiology (Ankara, Turkey)
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of transcatheter arterial embolization for hemodynamically unstable bleeding after percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy.
DOI: 10.4274/dir.2023.232253 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) in controlling hemodynamically unstable bleeding following a percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy (PTNB).
METHODS: A total of seven patients (four men and three women; mean age, 62 &#xb1; 12 years) who received TAE for post-PTNB bleeding between May 2007 and March 2022 were included. The observed types of bleeding were hemothorax (n = 3), hemoptysis (n = 2), and a combination of both (n = 2). In patients with active bleeding, the technical success of TAE was defined as superselective embolization of the target artery with no active bleeding visible on post-TAE angiography. Clinical success was defined as sustained cessation of bleeding without hemodynamic instability, requirement of repeat TAE, or the need for post-TAE hemostatic surgery during the initial admission. The metrics analyzed included technical and clinical success rates, complications, and 30-day mortality.
RESULTS: All seven patients achieved technical success, with a clinical success rate of 86% (6/7). Six patients were discharged alive, while one patient died of respiratory failure accompanied by hemothorax 19 days post-biopsy. The angiographic findings associated with bleeding were contrast media extravasation or pseudoaneurysm (n = 3) and vascular hypertrophy with tortuosity (n = 2). The implicated bleeding arteries included the intercostal artery (n = 2), bronchial artery (n = 2), and internal thoracic artery (n = 1). In two cases, no clear bleeding foci were identified; nonetheless, prophylactic embolization was performed on the right intercostal artery (n = 1) and right intercostobronchial trunk (n = 1). The embolic agents utilized included microcoils (n = 1), gelatin sponge particles (n = 2), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with gelatin sponge particles (n = 1), PVA with microcoils (n = 1), microcoils with gelatin sponge particles (n = 1), and microcoils with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and gelatin sponge particles (n = 1). The 30-day mortality rate was 14% (1/7). No ischemic complications related to TAE were observed.
CONCLUSION: The study suggests that TAE is safe and effective for controlling hemodynamically unstable bleeding following a PTNB.

### PMID 38146409 (2023) — The journal of Tehran Heart Center
TITLE: Vegetation Formation and Aortitis as a Possible Sequela of COVID-19 in a Patient with an Aortic Stent: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.18502/jthc.v18i3.14117 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bacteria, especially staphylococcal groups, cause aortic graft infection. Infection stems from synthetic materials that repair aneurysms or artery blockages. Aortic stent infection and vegetation formation are rare, and heterogeneous presentations and ambiguous findings in routine diagnostic modalities render the diagnosis challenging. A 25-year-old man with a history of catheter-based aortic stenting for hypertension associated with severe aortic coarctation was referred to our tertiary care hospital. Five months before the presentation, the patient had been infected with COVID-19, but he recovered after mild symptoms. Nevertheless, 3 months later, he developed erythematous lesions, progressive anorexia, epigastric pain, fever, and weakness. The results of blood tests, blood cultures, transthoracic echocardiography, plain chest radiography, computed tomography angiography, and electrocardiography were unremarkable. We found severe infectious aortitis, crescent thickness surrounding the aorta, pseudoaneurysm development, and a mass with dimensions of 17 mm&#xd7;8 mm within the aortic stent on transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was initiated, and the patient was transferred to the operating room, where the infected stent and adhesive vegetation were removed. The patient recovered remarkably after the surgery and was discharged. At 6 months' follow-up, he was in good condition. Our findings highlight the significance of maintaining vigilance and a high level of clinical suspicion for the possibility of vegetation formation and aortitis as the possible sequelae of COVID-19, particularly in patients with an implanted stent. Furthermore, we strongly suggest TEE in patients with implanted stents to detect vegetation and aortitis.

### PMID 36299157 (2022) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Giant Anastomotic Aneurysm Associated with Albumin/Glutaraldehyde Sealant as a Late Complication after Acute Aortic Dissection Surgery:Report of a Case].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 74-year-old woman was taken to our hospital with a chief complaint of chest and back pain. She was diagnosed with Stanford type A acute aortic dissection and underwent ascending aortic replacement. Fifteen months after surgery, a giant anastomotic aneurysm was found at the proximal and distal anastomoses on chest computed tomography (CT), and reoperation was indicated. Following sternal re-entry, anastomotic dehiscence was found where BioGlue, albumin/glutaraldehyde sealant, had been applied during the previous surgery, and caused aneurysm. Severe postoperative adhesion precluded extensive surgery, and redo replacement of the ascending aorta was carried out. Histopathological examination revealed extensive necrosis of smooth muscle cells in the aortic wall at the anastomotic site and a marked inflammatory cell infiltration around the aortic wall and the artificial graft, and association of BioGlue use was suggested. The use of appropriate tissue adhesives to reinforce the dissected aortic wall is important, as well as careful long-term follow-up.

### PMID 36187312 (2022) — Journal of cardiology cases
TITLE: BioGlue cerebral embolism following acute type A aortic dissection repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jccase.2022.07.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: Surgical outcomes of acute Stanford type A aortic dissection (ATAAD) have significantly improved in recent decades due to advances in surgical techniques and adhesives such as BioGlue (Cryolife, Kennesaw, GA, USA). However, this convenient material can sometimes cause complications such as thrombotic embolism and pseudoaneurysm. Herein, we present the case of a 61-year-old man with ATAAD who successfully underwent total arch replacement. Five days after surgery, he collapsed due to right-sided hemiplegia. We immediately performed cerebral thrombectomy to remove thrombotic embolism caused by BioGlue, which was used to obliterate the false lumen of the dissected aorta during ATAAD repair.
LEARNING OBJECTIVE: Thanks to surgical techniques and adhesives such as BioGlue, surgical outcomes of acute Stanford type A aortic dissection have significantly improved recently. However, thromboembolic events due to adhesives such as BioGlue use can happen not only during surgery, but also a few days after it.

### PMID 35290529 (2022) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: Treatment of massive hemoptysis after thoracic aortic aneurysm repair.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-022-00293-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Massive hemoptysis after thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) repair is a rare but potentially lethal condition. Endovascular management is a challenging treatment option due to the complexity of culprit vessel access.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 81-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with massive hemoptysis. She had a history of graft replacement and thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) for dissecting TAA. Computed tomography (CT) showed massive atelectasis with hematoma in the left lower lung lobe adjacent to the descending aortic aneurysm treated with TEVAR. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a pseudoaneurysm and proliferation of abnormal vessels at the peripheral side of the left pulmonary ligament artery (PLA) in the atelectasis. The PLA continued to the right subscapular artery via a complex collateral pathway. Diagnostic angiography of the right subcapsular artery revealed a pseudoaneurysm and abnormal vessels at the peripheral side of the left PLA with a systemic-pulmonary artery shunt. Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) for the left PLA via the collateral pathway with N-butyl cyanoacrylate achieved complete embolization. The patient's hemoptysis was controlled and she was discharged.
CONCLUSIONS: Here we presented a case of massive hemoptysis due to PLA disruption that occurred after TAA repair. TAE via a complex collateral pathway is a feasible and effective treatment for hemoptysis, even in patients who have undergone surgical or endovascular TAA repair.

### PMID 35683341 (2022) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Imaging-Guided Percutaneous Puncture and Embolization of Visceral Pseudoaneurysms: Feasibility and Outcomes.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm11112952 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Visceral artery pseudoaneurysms (VAPAs) are the most frequently diagnosed pseudoaneurysms (PSAs). PSAs can be asymptomatic or symptomatic. The aim of our study was to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of percutaneous embolization of VAPAs performed on patients with an unfeasible trans-arterial approach. Fifteen patients with fifteen visceral PSAs, with a median dimension of 21 mm (IQR 20-24 mm), were retrospectively analyzed. No patients were suitable for trans-arterial catheterization and therefore a percutaneous approach was chosen. During percutaneous treatments, two embolic agents were used, either N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) (Glubran II, GEM Milan, Italy) mixed with Lipiodol (Lipiodol, Guerbet, France) or thrombin. The outcomes of this study were technical success, primary clinical success, and secondary clinical success. In our population the 15 PSA were located as follows: 2 in the left gastric artery, 1 in the right gastric artery, 3 in the right hepatic artery, 2 in a jejunal artery, 1 in left colic artery branch, 1 in a right colic artery branch, 1 in the gastroepiploic artery, 1 in the dorsal pancreatic artery, 1 in an ileocolic artery branch, 1 in an iliac artery branch, and 1 in a sigmoid artery branch. 80% of PSAs (12/15) were treated with a NBCA:lipiodol mixture and 20% of PSAs (3/15) were treated with thrombin. Technical, primary, and secondary clinical successes were obtained in 100% of the cases. No harmful or life-threatening complications were observed. Minor complications were registered in 26.6% (4/15) of the patients. Percutaneous embolization of visceral PSA is a safe and effective treatment and should be considered as an option when the endovascular approach is unsuccessful or unfeasible.

### PMID 35019201 (2022) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: Balloon-assisted injection of fibrin sealant for the treatment of postintervention access-site bleeding complications.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.30068 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study sought to evaluate a new method that uses injection of fibrin sealant under simultaneous balloon occlusion for the treatment of postinterventional access site bleeding complications.&#xa0;With the rising complexity of interventional procedures, iatrogenic false aneurysms and active bleeding has become more common. In general, these complications are associated with increased morbidity and mortality, especially if surgical repair is required. Although high success rates are reported for ultrasound-guided compression and ultrasound-guided thrombin injection, these methods are not always feasible.&#xa0;All procedures of fibrin sealant injection under simultaneous balloon occlusion for the treatment of postinterventional access site bleeding complications or pseudoaneurysm were prospectively collected. Additional data were retrospectively obtained and analyzed for all patients treated by this new method.&#xa0;In total, 53 patients were included from 2018 to 2021. Most of the access site complications were related to transcatheter aortic valve replacement (40%) or percutaneous coronary intervention (21%), but also to a wide variety of other procedures. Of the 53 patients, 30 had to be treated for false aneurysms and 23 for active bleeding. A high primary success rate of 94% was achieved. Recurrences of false aneurysms occurred in six patients, of which only one needed open surgical repair. Regarding complications, two&#xa0;peripheral embolisms, thereof one requiring additional stent implantation occurred.&#xa0;Balloon-assisted thrombin injection seems to be feasible and safe. It provides a new alternative to prevent surgery for patients where common techniques are unavailable or have failed.

### PMID 35397405 (2022) — Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials
TITLE: Assessing the aneurysm occlusion efficacy of a shear-thinning biomaterial in a 3D-printed model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmbbm.2022.105156 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Metallic coil embolization is a common method for the endovascular treatment of visceral artery aneurysms (VAA) and visceral artery pseudoaneurysms (VAPA); however, this treatment is suboptimal due to the high cost of coils, incomplete volume occlusion, poor reendothelialization, aneurysm puncture, and coil migration. Several alternative treatment strategies are available, including stent flow diverters, glue embolics, gelfoam slurries, and vascular mesh plugs-each of which have their own disadvantages. Here, we investigated the in vitro capability of a shear-thinning biomaterial (STB), a nanocomposite hydrogel composed of gelatin and silicate nanoplatelets, for the minimally-invasive occlusion of simple necked aneurysm models. We demonstrated the injectability of STB through various clinical catheters, engineered an in vitro testing apparatus to independently manipulate aneurysm neck diameter, fluid flow rate, and flow waveform, and tested the stability of STB within the models under various conditions. Our experiments show that STB is able to withstand at least 1.89&#xa0;Pa of wall shear stress, as estimated by computational fluid dynamics. STB is also able to withstand up to 10&#xa0;mL&#xa0;s-1 pulsatile flow with a waveform mimicking blood flow in the human femoral artery and tolerate greater pressure changes than those in the human aorta. We ultimately found that our in vitro system was limited by supraphysiologic pressure changes caused by aneurysm models with low compliance.

### PMID 34096394 (2021) — Vascular and endovascular surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous Trans-Hepatic Embolization of an Iatrogenic Extra-Hepatic Pseudoaneurysm of the Right Hepatic Artery in a Patient With Previous Occlusion of the Proper Hepatic Artery: An Endovascular Procedure to Avoid a Difficult Surgical Repair.
DOI: 10.1177/15385744211022591 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case of successful percutaneous transhepatic, embolization of an iatrogenic extra-hepatic pseudoaneurysm (PsA) of the right hepatic artery (RHA) under combined fluoroscopic and ultrasonographic guidance. A 73-year-old man underwent percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage placement in another hospital, complicated by haemobilia and development of a RHA PsA. Endovascular embolization was attempted, resulting in coil embolization of the proper hepatic artery, and persistence of the PsA. At this point, the patient was referred to our hospital. Computed tomography and direct angiography confirmed the iatrogenic extra-hepatic PsA of the RHA, refilled by small collaterals from the accessory left hepatic artery (LHA) and coil occlusion of the proper hepatic artery. Attempted selective catheterization of these vessels was unsuccessful due to the tortuosity and very small caliber of the intra-hepatic collaterals, the latter precluding endovascular treatment of the PsA. Percutaneous trans-hepatic combined fluoroscopic and ultrasound-guided embolization of the PsA was performed with Lipiodol&#xae; and cyanoacrylate-based glue (Glubran&#xae;2). Real time fluoroscopic images and computed tomography confirmed complete occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm. Surgical repair, although feasible, was considered at high risk. In our patient, we decided to perform a percutaneous trans-hepatic combined fluoroscopic and ultrasound-guided embolization of the PsA using a mix of Lipiodol&#xae; and Glubran&#xae;2 because of the fast polymerization time of the glue allowing the complete occlusion of the PsA in few seconds, thus eliminating the risk of coil migration, reducing the risk of PsA rupture and avoid a difficult surgical repair.

### PMID 33912264 (2021) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Delayed superior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm following percutaneous radiologic gastrostomy: Treatment by percutaneous embolization with N-butyl cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2021.03.050 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Percutaneous radiologic gastrostomy (PRG) is a widely used procedure with a low rate of serious complications and with comparable short-term outcomes with percutaneous endoscopy. Hemorrhagic complications are rare (1.4%), and occur usually immediately after the procedure due to direct arterial punctures. We report on the case of a 62-year-old male patient with a diagnosis of multi-systemic atrophy disease that was referred to our tertiary center for PRG. The procedure was performed without early complications. He presented a slight bleeding 3 weeks of the procedure. A CT angiogram revealed a pseudoaneurysm of the left superior epigastric artery, in contact with the gastrostomy tube. After a failed surgical treatment, the patient was successfully treated by percutaneous embolization using a mixture of Glubran 2 and Lipiodol, under ultrasound and fluoroscopic control. This case study suggested that a slight hemorrhage following PRG may suggest a pseudoaneurysm and a CT angiogram should be performed.

### PMID 33410706 (2021) — Ear, nose, &amp; throat journal
TITLE: Contribution of Interventional Radiologist in the Management of Pseudoaneurysm and Neck Hemorrhages in COVID-19 patients.
DOI: 10.1177/0145561320987030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Patients with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) may have endothelial inflammation, pseudoaneurysm, and an increasing risk of bleeding, especially during surgical procedures. In this article, we reported 2 cases of COVID-19 patients with neck vascular lesions. The first patient had pseudoaneurysm of the cricothyroid artery, which was treated by percutaneous glue injection through ultrasonography guidance. The second patient presented lateral neck hematoma in front of the left superior thyroid artery, which was managed by coil endovascular embolization. In the context of pandemic, the management of vascular lesions may be performed through interventional radiological procedures that may reduce the risk of virus aerosolization and health care provider contamination.

### PMID 33372208 (2021) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Basilar Artery Injury During Endonasal Surgery: Stepwise to Control Bleeding.
DOI: 10.1093/ons/opaa367 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intraoperative injury during endoscopic endonasal surgery of the carotid artery has been previously described in the literature. However, the accidental damage of the basilar artery in such scenario is not defined.
OBJECTIVE: To define the protocol of action for massive bleeding from an artery in the posterior fossa.
METHODS: The reported patient was diagnosed with a partially calcified clival chordoma featured by a huge intradural component. An endoscopic endonasal transpterygoid transclival approach was selected for the treatment of this tumor. During the surgical procedure, the basilar artery injury was injured, causing intense bleeding. We present and discuss the surgical maneuvers that could save a patient's life after this dramatic complication.
RESULTS: Different techniques were performed in order to control the massive bleeding, including injection of hemotastic matrix with thrombin (Floseal&#xa9;), bipolar coagulation, and vessel reconstruction by means of a vascular clip. Finally, an autologous muscle graft reinforced with an overlying fibrin sealant patch (Tachosil&#xa9;) was chosen and was an effective technique. Afterwards, the patient was treated with a flow diverter device to occlude an iatrogenic pseudoaneurysm. A monoplegia of the right upper limb was the only remarkable sequel 6 mo after surgery.
CONCLUSION: The muscle graft together with the coordinated action with interventional neuroradiology for the reconstruction of the vessel are possibly the best options to try to preserve the neurological function. In such a scenario, the assumption of potential ischemic events prevails over the intraoperative death of the patient.

### PMID 36343285 (2020) — Interventional medicine &amp; applied science
TITLE: Success and reliability of extrafemoral Exoseal vascular closure device: "Off-label" usage.
DOI: 10.1556/1646.11.2019.22 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: The aim of this study is to present the reliability and efficacy of Exoseal vascular closure device (EVCD) for closure of extrafemoral punctures.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All patients who were treated with EVCD following arterial endovascular treatment involving an extrafemoral puncture between April 2013 and January 2014 were examined retrospectively. This study included 11 patients (4 women and 7 men between the ages of 48 and 87 years; average age&#x2009;=&#x2009;65 years). A total of 13 procedures were performed in 11 patients involving the following access routes: brachial artery (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5), popliteal artery (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4), and polytetrafluoroethylene graft (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4).
RESULTS: Twelve out of 13 EVCD procedures achieved technical success and procedural success. One minor and one major complications occurred. Both complications were revealed to be pseudoaneurysms, both in the brachial artery. Pseudoaneurysm of the minor complication was treated by Fibrin Sealant (Tisseel) injection guided by ultrasonography and the other pseudoaneurysm was treated by covered stent placement.
CONCLUSIONS: The femoral artery is an essential access route of arterial endovascular procedures; however, in some cases, the extrafemoral arterial route is necessary. In this study, EVCD was found to be useful for closing extrafemoral arterial routes. This study had a limited number of cases and more large-scale studies are needed.

### PMID 31629637 (2020) — Asian journal of surgery
TITLE: The efficacy of the TachoSil binding suturing technique in laparoscopic partial nephrectomy to prevent the development of pseudoaneurysm.
DOI: 10.1016/j.asjsur.2019.09.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Our specific aim was to introduce the TachoSil binding suturing technique for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients when closing the parenchymal defect after tumor excision during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (LPN), which is a novel technique for reducing the risk of developing subsequent pseudoaneurysm (PA).
METHODS: We identified 113 pT1aN0M0 RCC patients who underwent LPN at our institution. Eighty-one (72%) patients underwent the suturing procedure without binding TachoSil, whereas 32 (28%) patients underwent renorraphy with the renal defect closed together with TachoSil. The vascular complications were evaluated by computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging with enhanced contrast material at the first visit after LPN. We conducted Fischer's exact test to determine risk factors for transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE).
RESULTS: The median age was 55 (36-86) years old and the median follow-up time was 65 (12-147) months. In the overall population, there were 11 (11%) patients who underwent TAE because they developed PA. All 11 patients exhibited the imaging findings of PA, and were all from the conventional suturing group. In contrast, no patients for whom the TachoSil binding method was used had any significant findings on imaging (14% vs. 0%). Based on the analysis to determine risk factors for TAE due to PA development, the TachoSil binding suturing technique was one of the significant indicators for reducing the risk of developing PA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that the TachoSil binding suturing technique might reduce the development of PA after LPN. Prospective randomized study and comparison to the standard 2 or 3-layer renorrhaphy is needed to prove its actual value.

### PMID 31879380 (2019) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Successful Repair of a Blow-out Type Left Ventricular Free Wall Rupture after Acute Myocardial Infarction Using a Viscous Diisocyanate Prepolymer].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report our experience with blow-out type left ventricular free wall rupture after acute myocardial infarction, treated by a sutureless technique using Hydrofit (a viscous diisocyanate prepolymer). A 70-year-old woman suddenly experienced cardiopulmonary arrest during gastrointestinal endoscopic examination. Computed tomography revealed cardiac tamponade, loss of contrast in the posterolateral wall of the left ventricle and contrast medium leakage into the pericardial cavity from the lateral wall of the left ventricle. Under cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the patient was transferred to our hospital. Percutaneous cardiopulmonary support was initiated in the operating room, and median sternotomy was immediately performed. The myocardial tear and necrotic area were sealed with Hydrofit and further covered with BioGlue and TachoSil under cardioplegic heart arrest. Hemostasis was completely achieved, and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was discontinued under intraaortic balloon pumping (IABP) support. At 5 years after surgery, echocardiography showed no pseudoaneurysm formation. This sutureless repair technique using Hydrofit may be useful for a selected case of blow-out type left ventricular free wall rupture.

### PMID 30691971 (2019) — Diagnostic and interventional imaging
TITLE: Interventional treatment of bleeding complications due to percutaneous cannulation for peripheral extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.diii.2019.01.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This study aimed to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of interventional techniques as a treatment for bleeding complications secondary to percutaneous cannulation for peripheral extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (PECMO).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Out of 1264 patients who underwent PECMO at our hospital between January 2009 and September 2018, we reviewed the clinical characteristics and outcomes of eight patients (4 men, 4 women; mean age, 54.9 years [range, 31-77 years]) who underwent percutaneous interventional treatment for bleeding complications secondary to percutaneous cannulation for PECMO.
RESULTS: Both hemodynamic instability and coagulopathy were present in 7 patients who had direct injury during PECMO insertion and absent in one patient with pseudoaneurysm at the PECMO removal site. Percutaneous ultrasound-guided thrombin injection was performed in three patients with pseudoaneurysm of the common or superficial femoral artery, and adjunctive embolization was combined with microcoils or n-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate in two of them. Stent graft was inserted in four patients with contrast extravasation (n=3) from external iliac artery (n=1) or common femoral or iliac veins (n=2) ruptures or the fistula between the superficial femoral artery and vein (n=1). N-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate and coil embolization was performed for pseudoaneurysm from the internal pudendal artery branch in the remaining one patient. Technical success was achieved in all eight patients. There were no procedure-related complications. There was no rebleeding during the follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Interventional treatment is a safe, technically feasible and therapeutically effective modality for treating bleeding complications secondary to a percutaneous cannulation for PECMO.

### PMID 30630391 (2019) — Vascular and endovascular surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous Embolization of an Inferior Mesenteric Artery Aneurysm in a Patient With Type IV Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
DOI: 10.1177/1538574418824185 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) refers to a group of genetic disorders involving the connective tissues. Type IV EDS impairs type III collagen that is responsible for vessel integrity. Patients with type IV EDS are susceptible to vascular and visceral complications, including aortic aneurysms, pseudoaneurysms, dissections, and spontaneous rupture of internal organs. Treating aneurysms with open surgery versus endovascular techniques each carry a unique risk-to-benefit ratio that must be applied to each individual carefully. We present a patient with type IV EDS who presented with a rapidly growing inferior mesenteric artery aneurysm. The patient was treated with a percutaneous endovascular technique using coils and n-butyl-cyanoacrylate glue.

### PMID 31471191 (2019) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Percutaneous Ultrasound-Guided Direct Glue Embolization: A Practical Approach to Iatrogenic Inferior Epigastric Artery Pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2019.05.029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 30878160 (2019) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Sutureless repair for postinfarction left ventricular free wall rupture.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2019.01.124 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Left ventricular free wall rupture is a catastrophic complication of acute myocardial infarction. Sutureless repair has been reported to be an effective surgical procedure for left ventricular free wall rupture. However, the outcomes of sutureless repair remain unclear.
METHODS: Between January 2001 and December 2016, 42 patients were treated for left ventricular free wall rupture at Jichi Medical University. Of them, 35 consecutive patients undergoing sutureless repair using the TachoComb (CSL Behring, Tokyo, Japan) or TachoSil (Nycomed, Zurich, Switzerland) patches were included in this study. No patient required cardiopulmonary bypass. The oozing type of left ventricular free wall rupture was observed in 33 patients (94%), and the blow-out type was observed in 2 patients (6%). The rupture sites were the anterior wall in 16 patients (46%), the posterior-lateral wall in 11 patients (31%), and the inferior wall in 8 patients (23%).
RESULTS: The in-hospital mortality rate was 17% (6 patients). Re-rupture after sutureless repair occurred in 17% (6 patients). Of them, 4 cases (67%) of re-rupture occurred within 24&#xa0;hours after surgery. The 2 patients with blow-out type left ventricular free wall rupture experienced re-rupture. Three patients required mitral valve surgery after sutureless repair during the admission. The overall survivals at 1, 5, and 10&#xa0;years were 71.4%, 68.6%, and 62.9%, respectively. Multivariable analysis revealed that re-rupture was an independent predictor for decreased survival (hazard ratio, 58.6; 95% confidence interval, 4.9-701.6; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.001). Postoperative pseudoaneurysm formation was not detected during the follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Sutureless repair using TachoComb/TachoSil patches can be a viable treatment option for left ventricular free wall rupture. Care should be taken when applying this technique in cases of the blow-out type left ventricular free wall rupture.

### PMID 31278689 (2019) — Neurology and therapy
TITLE: Case Report of a Novel Technique for Repair of the Vertebral Artery During Cranial Surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s40120-019-0142-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgery of complex cranial base lesions carries a high risk of damage to main vessels, often resulting in life-changing or even life-threatening injuries. We describe a rapid, effective, and noninvasive application of a collagen-based hemostatic patch to repair the vertebral artery during cranial surgery. A 61-year-old male patient underwent retrosigmoid craniotomy to remove a foramen magnum meningioma that encased the vertebral artery. A linear incision was made behind the ear and standard retrosigmoid craniotomy was performed with preservation of the transverse and sigmoid sinuses. The dura was opened in a Y-shaped fashion and the cerebellum was retracted with cerebrospinal fluid being released. Removing the exposed tumor from the artery resulted in a small arterial bleed. Two pieces of an N-hydroxysuccinimide-functionalized polyethylene&#xa0;glycol-coated collagen patch (Hemopatch&#xae;, Baxter Healthcare Ltd.) were applied sequentially and were pressed to the bleed site for 2&#xa0;min each. Hemostasis of the vertebral artery was achieved at the patient's regular blood pressure. There was no postoperative bleeding, dissection or pseudoaneurysm. The patient recovered gradually with several cranial nerve deficits. There was no brain stem stroke. Twelve months on, the patient has made an excellent recovery from surgery, is independently mobile and has minimal cranial nerve deficits. Application of the collagen-based hemostatic patch proved to be an efficient, safe, and noninvasive technique that achieved rapid hemostasis, confirming its effectiveness in complicated surgery, where risk of hemorrhage can be critical for the surgery outcome.Funding: There was no funding for this case report. Baxter Healthcare Ltd. provided funding for preparation of this manuscript and the journal's Rapid Service Fee.

### PMID 31063141 (2019) — Diagnostic and interventional radiology (Ankara, Turkey)
TITLE: Transcatheter arterial embolization for postoperative arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery.
DOI: 10.5152/dir.2019.18212 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We aimed to study the technical and clinical outcome of urgent transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) for postoperative arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery, and to accumulate additional experience about the role of embolization for these injuries.
METHODS: Patients who received TAE procedure for arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery between September 1st, 2002 and December 1st, 2014 were screened on medical records and included in the analysis. Angiographic findings included active contrast agent extravasation, pseudoaneurysm formation, arteriovenous fistula, and other suspicious signs such as sighting of coarse margin or distortion of vessels. Embolic agents consisted of coils, gelatin sponge, and polyvinyl alcohol. Technical success was defined as complete occlusion of targeted artery through angiography, and clinical success as sustained resolution of symptoms.
RESULTS: A total of 22 patients (15 males, 19-76 years old) were enrolled. Prior to TAE, 12 patients developed hemorrhagic shock and the remaining 10 patients had hemorrhage-related pain, hematoma, or anemia. Contrast agent extravasation occurred in 12 cases, pseudoaneurysm formation in 5 cases, and other suspicious signs in 5 cases. Injury occurred in the internal iliac artery stem in 6 cases, inferior gluteal artery in 6 cases and superior gluteal artery in 6 cases. Multiple vascular lesions appeared in 5 cases. After TAE, technical success occurred in 22 patients and clinical success in 21 patients (95.5%). A 36-year-old woman died of irreversible multiple organ failure; no other severe procedure-related complications were recorded.
CONCLUSION: TAE is safe and effective for postoperative arterial complications after pelvic or hip surgery.

### PMID 29155949 (2018) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Pseudoaneurysm rupture after acute Type A dissection repair: possible reaction to BioGlue.
DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivx331 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 45-year-old man with acute Type A aortic dissection underwent the ascending aorta replacement with BioGlue (CryoLife Europa, Guildford, Surrey, UK) for anastomotic reinforcement. Postoperatively, he developed descending aortic dilation, a giant mediastinal cyst, Henoch-Schonlein purpura and an anastomotic-site pseudoaneurysm rupture. A BioGlue-induced inflammatory reaction was likely, according to a positive patch test (delayed allergic reaction).

### PMID 30078149 (2018) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Repeat surgical intervention after aortic repair for acute Stanford type A dissection.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-018-0983-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the outcomes of repeat interventions on the aorta and aortic valve after surgery for acute Stanford type A aortic dissection.
METHODS: The hospital records of patients who underwent repeat surgical intervention between April 2011 and March 2017 for late complications after acute type A aortic dissection repair were retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: We identified 17 patients with mean age of 62&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8&#xa0;years; 13 were men. The mean interval from the initial emergency aortic repair to the repeat intervention was 5.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;5.4&#xa0;years (range 133&#xa0;days-16.6&#xa0;years). Ten patients had dilatation or rupture of the residual type B aortic dissection; six of them had retrograde type A aortic dissection at the onset and did not undergo resection of the primary entry. Five patients had a pseudoaneurysm at the anastomosis; four of them were receiving anticoagulation medication. Three patients had aortic regurgitation; two of them were associated with the gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue that was used during the initial surgery. There was no early mortality after repeat intervention and no late death after a mean follow-up period of 3.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.0&#xa0;years.
CONCLUSIONS: Repeat surgical intervention on the aorta and aortic valve after repair of acute type A aortic dissection had favorable early and mid-term outcomes and was not associated with early or late death. Long-term follow-up with imaging and echocardiography was considered to be essential for early detection of residual type B dilatation, anastomotic pseudoaneurysm, and aortic regurgitation after initial aortic repair.

### PMID 29343674 (2018) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: A Spontaneous Abdominal Aortic Pseudoaneurysm Treated with N-butyl Cyanoacrylate and Coil Embolization: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.5761/atcs.cr.17-00040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Pseudoaneurysms are vascular spaces vulnerable to pressure, and expansion or rupture of these spaces may occur during embolization. Here, we describe the case of a transcatheter embolization of a spontaneous aortic pseudoaneurysm, which showed gradual expansion during n-butyl cyanoacrylate embolization. This pseudoaneurysm was successfully embolized with an adjuvant coil.

### PMID 30306060 (2018) — Quantitative imaging in medicine and surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous ultrasound-guided balloon-assisted embolization of iatrogenic femoral artery pseudoaneurysms with Glubran&#xae;2 cyanoacrylate glue: safety, efficacy and outcomes.
DOI: 10.21037/qims.2018.09.12 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Femoral pseudoaneurysm (PA) is a frequent complication of arterial access for endovascular procedures. Surgery has traditionally been considered as the gold standard of therapy. We aimed to report our experience of percutaneous ultrasound (US)-guided balloon-assisted embolization with cyanoacrylate glue for the treatment of iatrogenic femoral PAs.
METHODS: Retrospective two-center study of patients with femoral iatrogenic PAs treated by N-butyl cyanoacrylate-methacryloxy sulfolane (NBCA-MS) Glubran&#xae;2 glue embolization between July 2013 and November 2017. All patients underwent contralateral arterial access with balloon placement of an appropriate size in front of the PA neck before glue/lipiodol embolization in a 1:1 ratio by percutaneous US-guided puncture of the aneurysmal sac under fluoroscopy control.
RESULTS: Twenty-three patients (12 females, 11 males; median age, 79 years; range, 18-93 years) were included. Median PA size was 34 mm (range, 17-60 mm). The median time to treatment was 5 days (range, 1-30 days). Twenty patients (86.9%) were successfully treated by glue injection alone. The three remaining patients (13.1%) with persistent PA or associated arterial-venous fistula were immediately treated during the same procedure by additional stent-graft. Then, overall immediate and 1-month clinical success rates were 100%. No surgical conversion was necessary. No recurrence was reported during the median follow-up of 11 months (range, 2-73 months). Two (8.7%) puncture-related complications occurred at the contralateral arterial access site, which spontaneously resolved. No non-target glue embolization occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: US-guided balloon-assisted glue embolization is safe and effective to treat iatrogenic femoral PAs in most cases, offering complete exclusion of the PA and avoiding the morbidity of open surgery.

### PMID 29738754 (2018) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Closure of a Post-Transplant Bronchial Dehiscence With Endobronchial Fibrin Sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.03.077 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Airway complications after lung transplantation are well described and can lead to significant morbidity and&#xa0;mortality. Treatment options for anastomotic dehiscence include expectant management, placement of endobronchial stents, or surgical repair. The use of fibrin sealant instilled by bronchoscopy to seal a dehiscence has not been well described. Our patient is a&#xa0;57-year-old man who underwent orthotropic bilateral lung transplantation for end-stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He was found to have a partial bronchial anastomosis dehiscence and was subsequently treated with endobronchial fibrin sealant glue instillation. This case illustrates the successful use of endobronchial fibrin sealant for bronchial anastomosis dehiscence.

### PMID 30369220 (2018) — Hinyokika kiyo. Acta urologica Japonica
TITLE: [Off-Clamp, Non-Renorrhaphy Robot-Assisted Partial Nephrectomy : An Initial Experience in a Single Institution].
DOI: 10.14989/ActaUrolJap_64_8_323 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report the surgical procedures and perioperative outcomes of off-clamp, non-renorrhaphy robotassisted partial nephrectomy (RAPN) in 7 out of 76 patients who underwent RAPN with off-clamp and nonrenorrhaphy between February 2015 and August 2017. The approach was chosen depending on the location of the tumor. Tumor enucleation was performed by using sharp incision and blunt dissection. For hemostasis, the soft-coagulation system was used and TachoSil&#x25cb;R was placed on the resection bed. As a rule, renorrhaphy was not performed. Median (range) patient age was 67 years (40-79), tumor size ; 14 mm (12-18), operative time ; 139 minutes (102-166), console time ; 51 minutes (41-75), estimate blood loss ; 10 ml (0-100). No patients required a perioperative blood transfusion. Median (range) tumor intraparenchymal depth was 10.4 mm (4.3-15.5) and distance from urinary collecting system was 9.3 mm (4.1-13.0). Pseudoaneurysm and urine leakage were not observed. No complications classified as Clavien-Dindo grade higher than grade 1 appeared. No cases had a positive surgical margin. Median (range) estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) change rate at 3 months after surgery was 0% (-12.7-14.5). Off-clamp, non-renorrhaphy RAPN with the soft-coagulation system and TachoSil&#xae; is a feasible and safe procedure for patients carefully selected among those with superficial tumors.

### PMID 29397965 (2018) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Short-term outcomes of a simple and effective approach to aortic root and arch repair in acute type A aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2017.11.089 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate short-term outcomes following direct aortic root and arch repair in patients with acute type A aortic dissection (ATAAD) without technical adjuncts.
METHODS: Between 2012 and 2016, 94 consecutive patients with ATAAD underwent surgical repair, including aortic root repair (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;45), root replacement (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;39), or no root procedure (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;10). Aortic root repair was achieved by running approximation of the dissected aortic wall circumferentially at the sinotubular junction and reinforcing the coronary ostia with 5-0 Prolene. The aortic root and arch were anastomosed to the Dacron graft with 5-0 Prolene without Teflon felt or biological glue.
RESULTS: Postoperative new-onset myocardial infarction, stroke, renal failure, and complete heart block occurred in 0%, 4%, 13%, and 0% of patients, respectively, whereas 30-day mortality was 4%. The incidences of permanent neurologic deficit and renal failure were 1% and 2%, respectively. Up to 5&#xa0;years, the aortic root repair group was free from residual or recurrent aortic root dissection, major change in the aortic root diameter, and moderate to severe aortic regurgitation; the entire cohort was free of anastomotic pseudoaneurysm and reoperation for proximal aortic pathology or significant change in diameter of the aortic arch and descending thoracic aorta. Overall survival was 85% at 4&#xa0;years and was significantly enhanced in the aortic root repair group compared with the Bentall group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;24) (93% vs 57%; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.035).
CONCLUSIONS: Direct aortic root and arch repair with approximation of the aortic wall without use of technical adjuncts is safe and effective for patients with ATAAD. If warranted, preservation of the native aortic valve should be considered for a potential survival benefit.

### PMID 28932555 (2017) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Does BioGlue contribute to anastomotic pseudoaneurysm after thoracic aortic surgery?
DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2017.06.120 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Although bovine serum albumin-glutaraldehyde glue (BioGlue&#xae;) has been successfully used as a hemostatic adjunct in aortic surgical procedures, there are reports that it may lead to anastomotic pseudoaneurysm formation. We seek to examine if the use of BioGlue is associated with a high incidence of anastomotic pseudoaneurysm formation following surgical repair of thoracic aortic disease.
METHODS: We reviewed the medical records and follow-up computed tomography (CT) scans of patients from 2001 to 2015 in whom BioGlue was used during surgical repair of thoracic aortic disease to detect postoperative anastomotic pseudoaneurysm formation.
RESULTS: A total of 233 patients with BioGlue use were identified. Mean age was 63.5&#xb1;14.0 years (median 66; range 14-88; 25-75%, IQR 54-74 years) and 149 were male (63.9%). Surgical indication was thoracic aortic aneurysm in 169 (72.5%) patients, aortic dissection in 49 (21.0%), intramural hematoma in 9 (3.9%), penetrating aortic ulcer in 3 (1.3%) and other in 3 (1.3%). Emergency/urgent surgery was performed in 68 cases (29.2%). Operative mortality was 7.3% (17/233). Re-exploration for bleeding and neurologic deficits occurred in 24 (10.3%) and 21 (9.0%) patients respectively. All operative survivors were followed (100%, 216/216) and CT follow-up was available in 81.9% (177/216) for a mean duration of 2.4 years (median 0.6; 25-75% IQR 0.2-3.6 years). Anastomotic pseudoaneurysm was detected in 1 patient (0.6%) at 3 years postoperatively. This was an elderly female with extremely frail tissues who underwent a reoperative ascending and arch replacement for dissection.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of BioGlue in thoracic aortic surgery was not associated with excess incidence of anastomotic pseudoaneurysm formation following surgical repair of thoracic aortic disease. Its use need not be discouraged on this basis.

### PMID 27788941 (2017) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Long-Term Outcomes of External Repair as a&#xa0;Rescue Operation for Atrioventricular Groove Disruption.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.08.024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Atrioventricular groove disruption (AVGD) is an uncommon but lethal complication of mitral valve operations associated with mortality approaching 90%. Traditionally, an "internal" repair is performed requiring prosthesis explantation, complete atrioventricular groove reconstruction using a patch positioned from within the cardiac cavity, and subsequent prosthesis reimplantation. This is a massive undertaking that is usually unsuccessful. We examine the utility of an alternative, "external" approach for rescue of AVGD.
METHODS: A retrospective review was conducted of consecutive patients with AVGD after mitral operations at 3 North American medical centers. All patients underwent external repair as a rescue procedure. The external repair technique was conducted on cardiopulmonary bypass using direct suturing or felt-reinforced suturing, or both, of the atrioventricular groove. This was supplemented as needed with applications of BioGlue (CryoLife, Kennesaw, GA), external bovine pericardial patch, left atrial buttress, and coronary bypass grafting of the circumflex circulation.
RESULTS: Between 1995 and 2015, 3,071 mitral valve operations resulted in 13 AVGDs (incidence, 0.42%). Average patient age was 75.2 years (range, 59-90 years), and 77% (10 of 13) were women. The 30-day mortality was 15.4% (2 of 13), and hospital mortality was 23.1% (3 of 13). Survival rates at 1, 3, and 5 years were 72.7%, 72.7%, and 44.4%, respectively. Seven patients are currently still alive and remain in no greater than New York Heart Association Functional Classification II. A stable pseudoaneurysm subsequently developed in 2 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of AVGD after mitral operations is low. Despite an older population with more tissue fragility, the external approach represents an effective, alternative repair technique for rescue of AVGD with encouraging results.

### PMID 28941519 (2017) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Iatrogenic Pulmonary Pseudoaneurysm Treated with Percutaneous Coil and Glue&#xa0;Embolization.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2017.06.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 28385501 (2017) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous Embolization of Delayed External Carotid Artery Pseudoaneurysm Eight Years after Partial Parathyroidectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2016.12.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: External carotid artery pseudoaneurysm (ECAP) is very rare. The usual mechanism is trauma or iatrogenic. We report a case of a patient with an asymptomatic, chronic ECAP secondary to partial parathyroidectomy. Percutaneous injection of the 2-component Fibrin Sealant (Tisseel; Baxter int, Deerfield, IL) with the 2 active ingredients (Sealer Protein Solution and Thrombin Solution) was carried out with successful occlusion of the pseudoaneurysmal sac. The 6-month follow-up computed tomographic scan confirmed the ECAP thrombosis. The ECAP endovascular approach is less invasive and reduces the complications of the open surgical intervention, especially in high-risk patients or presenting with hostile neck.

### PMID 28466646 (2017) — The British journal of radiology
TITLE: Ultrasound-guided transvaginal thrombin injection of uterine arteries pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1259/bjr.20160913 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the utility of transvaginal ultrasound-guided thrombin injection (UGTI) to treat uterine artery pseudoaneurysms (UAPs) as an alternative to emergency arterial embolization.
METHODS: Two females presenting with heavy vaginal bleeding were diagnosed with UAPs by pelvic CT scan. After UAP identification by transvaginal ultrasound, 2&#x2009;cm3 of thrombin (Tissucol&#xae;; Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Munich, Germany) was slowly injected into the UAPs using a 30-cm long 22-gauge needle through a needle guide attached to the vaginal probe. The same procedure was performed in both cases, and the Doppler sign disappeared immediately and the bleeding stopped.
RESULTS: We describe two cases of UAPs treated with transvaginal UGTI: one after intrauterine tandem and vaginal colpostat insertion for brachytherapy after diagnosis of cervical cancer (Case 1) and the other after the insertion of a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (Case 2).
CONCLUSION: Transvaginal UGTI could be a minimally invasive tool to treat selected cases of UAPs with severe vaginal bleeding. Advances in knowledge: Transvaginal UGTI could avoid the need for uterine embolization and emergency hysterectomy in selected cases of UAPs diagnosed by CT scan.

### PMID 28526037 (2017) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Off-pump sutureless repair for ischemic left ventricular free wall rupture: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-017-0603-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Clinical results of ischemic left ventricular free-wall rupture show high mortality rates.
METHODS: We reviewed studies published after 1993 on PubMed.
RESULTS: A sutureless technique using fibrin glue sheets or patches with/without fibrin glue might contribute to improved clinical results. However, some technique limitations remain for blowout-type ruptures, and the possibility of a pseudoaneurysm formation at the repair site after surgery should be considered.
CONCLUSIONS: The sutureless technique can be a promising strategy for the treatment of ischemic rupture, but serial echocardiographic studies should be mandatory for diagnosing a left ventricular pseudoaneurysm formation thereafter.

### PMID 27047291 (2016) — Texas Heart Institute journal
TITLE: Minimally Invasive Repair of Left Ventricular Pseudoaneurysm after Transapical Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement.
DOI: 10.14503/THIJ-15-5159 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Transcatheter aortic valve replacement is becoming a routine procedure to treat severe symptomatic aortic stenosis. At most transcatheter aortic valve replacement centers, transapical access is a frequent alternative for use in patients whose ileofemoral access is inadequate. Transapical access is increasingly applied to a variety of other structural heart and aortic procedures as well. There is a caveat, however. When performed in elderly patients with friable myocardium, transapical access is associated with such serious sequelae as bleeding and left ventricular apical pseudoaneurysmal formation. Here, we describe the case of a 70-year-old woman who developed a left ventricular apical pseudoaneurysm 3 weeks after transapical transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Our successful repair took a minimally invasive left lateral approach that involved peripheral cardiopulmonary bypass cannulation, Foley catheter occlusion and primary defect closure, and BioGlue reinforcement.

### PMID 26316398 (2015) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: A Novel Use of Direct Platelet Application During Surgery for Clopidogrel-Associated Intracerebral Hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2015.08.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Dual antiplatelet therapy is associated with increased rates of intracerebral hemorrhage, especially in the context of subarachnoid hemorrhage. We present a case of a spontaneous hemorrhage in a patient treated with a Pipeline stent for a ruptured dissecting vertebrobasilar aneurysm and the novel use of direct application of platelets during surgery to control bleeding.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 54-year-old previously healthy woman presented with an intradural right vertebral artery dissection with a ruptured 6-mm pseudoaneurysm. The patient was started on aspirin and clopidogrel and the vessel was reconstructed with 2 Pipeline Embolization Devices. On postbleed day number 14, she became obtunded with a blown right pupil; computed tomography of the head demonstrated a large right temporal intracerebral hematoma. The patient was taken emergently to the operating room for evacuation of the clot. Intraoperatively, satisfactory control of bleeding was not achieved despite transfusing several units of platelets intravenously. Ultimately, a mixture of Floseal and platelets applied directly to the hematoma wall allowed prompt hemostasis. At 3 months the patient was doing extremely well clinically and angiography demonstrated occlusion of the aneurysm.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first reported description of direct application of platelets to achieve intraoperative hemostasis. Platelets are activated by thrombin and collagen and the use of Floseal (a bovine-derived, gelatin matrix and human-derived thrombin) further potentiated the effectiveness of this strategy. With the increased incidence of intracerebral hemorrhage associated with dual antiplatelet therapy, this technique may provide a useful tool in the neurosurgical armamentarium.

### PMID 25820610 (2015) — World journal of urology
TITLE: The use of hemostatic agents does not prevent hemorrhagic complications of robotic partial nephrectomy.
DOI: 10.1007/s00345-015-1537-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To assess the impact of HA on robotic PN (RPN) outcomes.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed data from patients who underwent RPN in eight centers between 2009 and 2013. Hemorrhagic complications were defined as the occurrence of a pseudoaneurysm, arteriovenous fistula or hematoma requiring transfusion. Patients were first divided into two groups: group A (use of at least one HA) and group B (no HA used), and then into five groups to assess the impact of each HA: group 1 (no HA), group 2 (Floseal(&#xae;) only), group 3 (Surgicel(&#xae;) only), group 4 (Tachosil(&#xae;) only) and group 5 (Surgicel(&#xae;) + Floseal(&#xae;)). The impact of HA was evaluated by univariate and multivariate analysis.
RESULTS: Out of 515 RPN, 315 (61 %) were done using at least one HA (group A) and 200 (39 %) were done without any HA (group B). Patients in both groups had similar hemorrhagic complication rates (13 % vs. 15 %, p = 0.42) and postoperative complication rates (19 % vs. 23 %, p = 0.32). In multivariate analysis, the absence of HA was not a risk factor for hemorrhagic complications (OR 0.77, p = 0.54). When each type of HA was considered individually, none was associated with the occurrence of hemorrhagic complication either in univariate or in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: In this multicenter study, the use of HA was not associated with a lower risk of hemorrhagic or global complications.

### PMID 25046623 (2015) — The Journal of urology
TITLE: A combination of hemostatic agents may safely replace deep medullary suture during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy in a pig model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.07.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We assessed whether a combination of the fibrin tissue adhesive Tisseel&#xae; (human fibrinogen and thrombin) plus the hemostatic matrix FloSeal&#xae; (bovine derived gelatin matrix/human thrombin) could safely replace the conventional deep medullary suture without compromising outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Laparoscopic mid pole and one-third partial nephrectomy was performed on the right kidney of 12 female pigs. The only difference between the 2 groups of 6 pigs each was the use of a fibrin tissue adhesive plus hemostatic matrix combination in group 2 instead of the deep medullary running suture in control group 1. Renal scans and angiograms were performed at baseline and before sacrifice at 5-week followup. Retrograde in vivo pyelogram was also done.
RESULTS: No significant difference was seen in operative parameters or postoperative course between the groups. Renal scans revealed a statistically insignificant trend toward greater uptake loss in group 1 and angiograms showed 3 major vessel occlusions in that group. No active bleeding was detected. Those 3 kidneys had significantly poorer postoperative uptake on renal scan than that of other kidneys (18.6% vs 39.4%, p = 0.013). Only 1 small asymptomatic pseudoaneurysm was noted in group 1. No urine leakage was found in either group. No major vessel occlusion, pseudoaneurysm or urinary complications developed in group 2.
CONCLUSIONS: Even after deep one-third partial nephrectomy FloSeal with concurrent Tisseel appeared sufficient to control major medullary vascular injuries and replace the deep medullary conventional suture without compromising operative outcomes. The potential advantages seen during functional and vascular examinations by decreasing the risk of unnecessary segmental vessel occlusion need further clinical evaluation.

### PMID 30363577 (2015) — BJR case reports
TITLE: Endovascular treatment of a pulmonary artery pseudoaneurysm caused by Swan-Ganz catheter deployment in an anticoagulated patient.
DOI: 10.1259/bjrcr.20150064 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a case report of an anticoagulated 78-year old man presenting a pulmonary artery pseudoaneurysm following Swan-Ganz catheter deployment after an aortic valve and aortic root replacement. Diagnosis was established by cone beam CT angiography and catheter angiographyand embolisation was achieved via a combination of plug and glue. This case emphasises the importance of endovascular techniques in the management of iatrogenic pulmonary pseudoaneurysms and shows the benefit of using highly hemostatic polymeric agent in anticoagulated patients to obtain a rapid and effective occlusion.

### PMID 26003458 (2015) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Anaphylactic reaction to bovine thrombin in ultrasound-guided treatment of femoral pseudoaneurysm.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvir.2015.02.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 25468102 (2014) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Free wall rupture after arterial switch operation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.01.072 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A neonate underwent arterial switch operation, supported on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for 3 days. Two weeks later, a pseudoaneurysm was seen on an echocardiogram, and a free wall rupture was suggested. Prompt surgery was performed, a free wall rupture assessed, and a patch with BioGlue was applied successfully. One year later, the child is in good condition.

### PMID 23529257 (2014) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Early pseudoaneurysm formation after the sutureless technique for left ventricular rupture due to acute myocardial infarction.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-013-0234-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Left ventricular free wall rupture is a fatal and catastrophic complication after acute myocardial infarction. The sutureless technique with a fibrin tissue-adhesive collagen fleece is reportedly safe and effective in the oozing type of left ventricular free wall rupture. However, late pseudoaneurysm formation after this technique has been reported. We herein report a 65-year-old male patient who presented with pseudoaneurysm formation 8&#xa0;days after the sutureless technique for the oozing type of left ventricular free wall rupture. Successful repair of the pseudoaneurysm was subsequently performed. Pseudoaneurysm formation should be recognized even early after the sutureless technique.

### PMID 23957708 (2013) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealant patch for repair of acute type a aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1111/jocs.12208 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The use of glues to repair disrupted tissue during acute type-A aortic dissection (TAD) surgery may be discontinuous, and cause embolization and cell necrosis. We report a method of fibrin sealant patch (FSP) to reinforce dissected aortic tissue with a collagen double layer coated with fibrinogen/thrombin on either side (TachoSil&#xae;; Takeda, Konstanz, Germany).
METHODS: In 12 patients (seven male, 66.9 &#xb1; 11.7 years) with acute TAD we performed FSP of the intima-media disruption at the proximal and distal anastomosis of the aorta. We analyzed the perioperative course and echocardiographical, radiological, and clinical outcomes up to one year. Additionally, we investigated the adhesive potential of the FSP in vitro.
RESULTS: In vitro, the adhesive strength of the FSP was 60 N/cm(2). In-hospital mortality was 8.3% (n = 1), recovery was satisfactory with no major neurologic events, mean ICU stay was 13.6 &#xb1; 6.0 days, mean hospital stay was 20.7 &#xb1; 4.4 days. A total of 7.0 &#xb1; 2.6 RBC, 3.4 &#xb1; 1.5 platelets, and 8.0 &#xb1; 4.3 FFP were transfused. One-year survival was 83.3%. In 6/6 DeBakey II dissections the intimal tear was completely resected, in 2/6 DeBakey I dissections the false lumen in the descending aorta completely collapsed. No redissections and no relevant aortic valve insufficiencies were seen during follow-up.
CONCLUSION: This analysis shows that FSP using a collagen matrix double layer coated with fibrinogen/thrombin is feasible, safe, and effective in repairing the dissected aortic tissue. It results in continuous reinforcement of aortic tissue and completely avoids the need for conventional glues.

### PMID 22851331 (2013) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: Ultrasound-guided thrombin-gelatin injection is effective for the treatment of iatrogenic femoral artery pseudoaneurysms: initial results.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.24330 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To describe the technique of ultrasound (US)-guided percutaneous thrombin-gelatin injection for the treatment of femoral artery pseudoaneurysms (FAPs).
BACKGROUND: FAPs are a possible complication from percutaneous angiographic procedures. US-guided thrombin injection is currently the preferential therapeutic option, limited by a low risk of potentially catastrophic femoral thrombosis; transluminal injection of collagen is another effective and safe option, although a more invasive one; surgical repair is associated with significant comorbidity. We hypothesized that US-guided combined thrombin and gelatin injection (UG-TGI) would also be effective while minimizing the risk of limb thrombosis.
METHODS: Review of the results, complications and length of hospital admission after the injection into the FAP sac of combined human-origin thrombin and bovine-origin gelatin matrix (FloSeal(&#xae;), Baxter), under direct US-guidance.
RESULTS: We treated 13 patients (mean age 64 &#xb1; 9.46 years, 38% male), who developed a FAP following a percutaneous procedure: isolated coronariography in five (38%); angioplasty in four (31%); other cardiac procedures in four (31%). Immediate success was obtained in all (100%) patients, assessed by US; no allergic reactions, local infection, or embolic events occurred on 30-day follow-up. Median (interquartile range) admission time after the UG-TGI was 2 days (1.25-2.0); median time of total admission was 8 days (6.5-16.25).
CONCLUSIONS: In this small study, UG-TGI for the treatment of FAP was feasible and had short-term effectiveness, without a learning curve effect. Despite the need for further experience, a trial comparing different therapies for FAP should include this procedure.

### PMID 23476883 (2013) — Case reports in vascular medicine
TITLE: Embolization with Histoacryl Glue of an Anastomotic Pseudoaneurysm following Surgical Repair of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm.
DOI: 10.1155/2013/761384 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a 62-year-old female who had surgical repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm with a bifurcated graft 2 years ago. She presented with a distal anastomotic pseudoaneurysm which was successfully embolized with histoacryl glue. Only one such similar case has been reported in the literature so far (Yamagami et al. (2006)).

### PMID 22872707 (2012) — Journal of clinical pathology
TITLE: Complications of Bioglue postsurgery for aortic dissections and aortic valve replacement.
DOI: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-200809 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIMS: Bioglue is an adhesive used during cardiovascular surgery to improve hemostasis perioperatively and to strengthen and reinforce vascular anastomoses. It has also been used to 'seal' the false lumen in patients presenting with acute aortic dissections. Herein, we examine the complications of Bioglue, which may lead to redo sternotomy in selected patients.
METHODS: A review of pathology records at our institution from 2002 to 2010 found 4 cases of excised aortic tissue and/or aortic valves with previous Bioglue use at initial operation. Excised tissues and valves were examined, looking for the presence of Bioglue, inflammatory cells (acute, chronic, macrophage and giant cells) and micro-organisms. Patient demographics were also reviewed and recorded.
RESULTS: We identified four cases of Bioglue use found at redo surgery, after the formation of pseudoaneurysm (n=3) and aortic stenosis (n=1). Mean interval to redo surgery was 2.28 + 0.32 years (range 2-2.6 years). Pseudoaneurysm formation was thought to be caused by an inflammatory reaction to the Bioglue itself in two cases, while one case found no such reaction. One patient with previous aortic valve replacement had large annular abscesses filled with necrotic debris surrounding the prosthesis and pannus found on the sewing cuff, comprised of Bioglue itself.
CONCLUSIONS: The mechanisms leading to these complications include mechanical strain, inflammation and tissue necrosis. The judicious use of Bioglue when clinically indicated, and close follow-up of these patients with serial imaging, remain an integral part of avoiding future complications.

### PMID 22500618 (2012) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Aorto-pulmonary artery disruption following acute type-A aortic dissection repair with the use of BioGlue&#xae;.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2012.01441.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report an extremely rare complication of a delayed aorto-pulmonary artery wall disruption with false aneurysm formation after repair of acute type-A aortic dissection with BioGlue&#xae;. The potential role of BioGlue&#xae; in this complication is the subject of this report.

### PMID 22544426 (2012) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: A case of ascending aortic pseudoaneurysm in a patient with aortic replacement.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-012-0022-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 59-year-old man with a history of ascending aorta replacement for an aortic dissection using gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue at age of 50 years presented with paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. An echocardiogram showed severe aortic regurgitation associated with aortic root enlargement. Chest computed tomography showed that the ascending aorta was dilated and a pseudoaneurysm was observed around the implanted prosthetic graft. Upon opening the ascending aorta, we found that the posterior wall of the proximal anastomotic portion of the implanted graft was ruptured. After replacement of the aortic root with a composite graft and reconstruction of the orifices of the right and left coronary arteries, total arch replacement by the separated graft technique was performed. The postoperative course was uneventful.

### PMID 22290927 (2012) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Durability of aortic valve preservation with root reconstruction for acute type A aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezr292 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: We evaluated the durability of aortic valve preservation with root reconstruction for acute type A aortic dissection (AAAD).
METHODS: From January 2002 to March 2011, 140 patients [70 males, 68 &#xb1; 12 (SD) years] underwent emergency operation for AAAD. The aortic valve was preserved and one or more Valsalva sinuses were reconstructed. Techniques used for reconstruction were valve resuspension and additional reinforcement of the aortic root with Teflon felt patches, and gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde-glue (GRF-glue) was used for mending the dissection. The mean follow-up period was 44.0 &#xb1; 26.2 months. We classified the degree of aortic regurgitation (AR) into four grades (0, 1+, 2+ and 3+) using echocardiography. Based on a retrospective analysis of pre-operative echocardiographic findings, the 127 survivors were divided into two groups: group 1 (G1) included 98 patients with 0 or 1+ AR, and group 2 (G2) 29 patients with 2+ or 3+ AR. In addition, we measured the post-operative native aortic root dimension of AAAD patients with use of echocardiography or CT scan.
RESULTS: The operative mortality rate was 9.3% (13/140). Freedom from aortic root re-operation was 100%. Aortic root pseudoaneurysm formation and severe AR requiring aortic valve replacement did not occur. Pre-operative AR of 0.2 &#xb1; 0.4 in G1 did not deteriorate (0.5 &#xb1; 0.5 at discharge, 0.4 &#xb1; 0.4 at follow-up). Meanwhile, pre-operative AR of 2.4 &#xb1; 0.5 in G2 improved to 0.6 &#xb1; 0.5 (P &lt; 0.05) at discharge and 1.0 &#xb1; 0.6 (P &lt; 0.05) at follow-up. The native aortic root dimension in G2 at follow-up was significantly larger than G1 (36.0 &#xb1; 4.7 vs. 33.9 &#xb1; 5.0 mm).
CONCLUSIONS: Aortic valve preservation and root reconstruction appear to be an appropriate surgical approach to AAAD.

### PMID 23098956 (2012) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Successful application of subcutaneous adipose tissue with fibrin glue in conservative treatment of tracheobronchial rupture.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.03.100 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 84-year-old woman underwent aortic and mitral valve replacement. After weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass, hemorrhage was observed in the endobronchial tube. The bleeding bronchus was isolated to protect the airway using the blocker cuff of a Univent tube (Fuji Systems Corp, Tokyo, Japan). Computed tomography showed a pulmonary pseudoaneurysm in the left upper lobe. She underwent selective pulmonary angiography and embolization of the pseudoaneurysm. Bronchoscopy revealed a 5-mm bronchial rupture at the left upper lobe bronchus. The laceration was filled with adipose tissue and fibrin glue. Bronchoscopy showed a completely reepithelialized membrane, and she was discharged 38 days postoperatively.

### PMID 21638854 (2011) — Rozhledy v chirurgii : mesicnik Ceskoslovenske chirurgicke spolecnosti
TITLE: [Effect of biological glues on vascular wall in an experimental model of aortic dissection].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The use of biological glues and their application between the two dissection layers and into the anastomosis region is a common integral part of surgical management of thoracic aortic dissections.
AIM: The aim of the experimental study was to assess and evaluate histopathological changes of vascular wall following deposition of the following three types of glue--GRF, Tissucol, Bioglue, based on qualitative and quantitative parameters. The secondary aim of the study was to assess dynamics of these changes depending on the glue effect duration and to formulate expected behaviour of the vascular wall during the time beyond the experimental period.
METHODOLOGY: The dissection model was performed with pigs of the same gender and age, assigned to four groups. Different glues were used to close artificial infrarenal aortic dissections in Group 1-3, while direct suturing and no glue was used to close false lumini in Group 4. Samples of the dissected aorta were then collected at Month 1, 6 and 12 and then histologically examined.
RESULTS: Upon assessment of the whole group of qualitative and quantitative parameters, the most significant changes in the smooth muscle histological picture were observed with the use GRF glue. The smooth muscle changes following the Bioglue application and, in particular, Tissucol glue application, are similar to changes observed in Group 4, where no glue was used.
CONCLUSION: Based on the results, the authors present a hypothesis that, in a long-time horizont, vascular wall destructions, eventually redissections, are likely to occur more frequently in patients, in whom GRF glue is used.

### PMID 21114528 (2011) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Role of bovine serum albumin-glutaraldehyde glue in the formation of anastomatic pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2010.01162.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Questions exist concerning the safety of bovine serum albumin-glutaraldehyde (BSAG) glue in thoracic aortic surgery, vis-&#xe0;-vis embolization and pseudoaneurysm formation. We examined clinical experience with BSAG glue to determine if such problems were detected.
METHODS: We studied 99 consecutive patients (25 female and 74 male, age range 27 to 86 years) in whom BSAG glue or similar product was used for reinforcement of thoracic aortic suture lines (n = 87 BSAG glue, 12 GRF [French] glue). BSAG glue was used selectively and sparingly for acute aortic dissection or tissue fragility. Cases included 81 ascending/arch procedures, 15 descending/thoracoabdominal procedures, and 3 combined. Clinical outcome and postoperative computed tomography (CT) scans were reviewed. Follow-up ranged from 1 to 90 months (mean: 15.1 months). We also examined the records of 78 controls in which BSAG glue was not used. The two groups were statistically similar except for rate of aneurysm versus dissection and percentage of emergent surgery.
RESULTS: Perioperative survival was 95/99 (96.0%). Six patients (6.0%) required reexploration for bleeding. There were five early postoperative neurological events and no late strokes or peripheral embolic events. CT scan follow-up identified two pseudoansuerysms, both not perianastomic, which were likely unrelated to BSAG glue use. There was no statistically significant difference in the occurrence of pseudoaneurysms between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Isolated problems associated with BSAG glue have been reported. In this relatively large experience, we identified no obvious problems directly related to judicious use of BSAG glue. BSAG glue appears a safe and effective adjunct in thoracic aortic surgery.&#x2002;

### PMID 20593750 (2010) — Annali italiani di chirurgia
TITLE: Left ventricle perforation and pseudoaneurysm with an unusual presentation of a patient with stomach ache. Case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 49-year-old man admitted with a 3 weeks history of stomachache and without any cardiac symptoms and diagnosed as pseudoaneurysm of the left ventricle is reported. The repair was performed with the aid of cardiopulmonary bypass, defect was repaired with Gore-tex patch and myocardial tissues were approximated and closed by using two Teflon stripes. BioGlue was applied on the sutures and between the stripes. We report this unusual case because rarity and high clinical index of suspicion is needed to make correct diagnosis in such patients. Although there is a significantly high mortality of the pseudoaneurysm cases their repair can and should be performed as an urgent procedure.

### PMID 20131552 (2009) — Annali italiani di chirurgia
TITLE: An uncommon cause of pulsation on the left side of the thorax. Case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 70-year-old man affected by clinical findings of congestive heart failure eight months after aneurysmectomy of a true left ventricular aneurysm, presented with actual pseudoaneurysm of the left ventricle. There was a 5 x 5 cm soft tissue mass on the left side of the chest, synchronously pulsating with heart beating. The repair was performed with the aid of cardiopulmonary bypass. Myocardial tissues were approximated and closed by using two Teflon stripes. BioGlue was applied on the sutures and between the stripes. Although there is a significantly high mortality of the pseudoaneurysm cases their repair can and should be performed in an urgent procedure.

### PMID 18940833 (2009) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Type A aortic dissection involving the carotid arteries: carotid stenting during open aortic arch surgery.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2008.186023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Aortic dissection involving the arch can be complicated by extension to the supra-aortic branches. Carotid dissection may be symptomatic or asymptomatic at the time of surgery. Dissection or re-dissection of repaired carotid may happen later, with symptoms occurring days after the surgical repair, increasing the morbidity and mortality of those patients. We report a case of a patient with type A aortic dissection involving the aortic arch and extending to the supra-aortic branches. During surgery the dissection was seen extending to the distal carotid arteries with tears in the inner wall. After use of surgical glue as a sealant, seeing the persistent fragility and the presence of spiral form tears in the internal wall of the carotid arteries, intraoperative stenting of the common carotid arteries was performed using two stents to prevent carotid re-dissection and ischemic stroke in the postoperative period. In patients with aortic dissection and extension into the carotid arteries, especially with presence of tears of the inner wall, after use of a glue as a sealant of the two dissected layers, if the repaired artery wall results are still fragile, use of intraoperative carotid stenting may be of help in preventing late re-dissection.

### PMID 18805547 (2009) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Sutureless pancreatojejunal anastomosis using an absorbable sealant: evaluation in a pig model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.04.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Leakage from pancreatojejunal anastomosis continues to be a major source of morbidity in pancreatic surgery. In the present study, we test the hypothesis that a safe, sutureless pancreatojejunal anastomosis can be constructed using a synthetic surgical sealant.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ten pigs weighing 20 to 25 kg underwent distal pancreatectomy and anastomosis of the pancreatic remnant with a jejunal limb with the use of an absorbable surgical sealant. Integrity of the anastomosis was checked on the 10th postoperative d by means of an autopsy study and histological examination.
RESULTS: One animal died on the 3rd postoperative d of peritonitis. The remaining 9 animals had an uneventful postoperative course. Gross and microscopic pathological examination revealed intact pancreatojejunal anastomosis in all surviving animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Following distal pancreatectomy in pigs, pancreatojejunal anastomoses with the use of sealant are technically feasible. During a 10-d observation period, the sealant appeared to prevent anastomotic dehiscence and allow normal anastomotic healing.

### PMID 18989255 (2008) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Aortic root reimplantation using a Valsalva graft for postoperative pseudoaneurysm after acute aortic dissection.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a reoperative case in which a Valsalva graft was utilized on a 64-year-old woman who had previously undergone emergency repair of a DeBakey type I acute aortic dissection. On follow-up computed tomography (CT), she was found to have pseudoaneurysms of both proximal and distal anastomoses. We performed valve-sparing aortic root replacement (VSRR) with the reimplantation technique and total arch replacement, since we felt that a graft with pseudosinuses helps to prevent torsion of the coronary arteries. The postoperative course was uneventful, and postoperative echocardiography revealed no significant aortic valve regurgitation. The pathology results raised the hypothesis that pseudoaneurysm formation might have been related to the use of gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde (GRF) glue at the time of the initial intervention.

### PMID 18323193 (2008) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysm due to gelatin-resorcin-formalin (GRF) glue after replacement of ascending aorta for acute aortic dissection; report of a case].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 78-year-old man had previously undergone replacement of ascending aorta using gelatin-resorcin-formalin (GRF) glue for acute aortic dissection. Five years later, a follow-up computed tomography (CT) showed an aortic root pseudoaneurysm. Ultrasound cardiography revealed moderate aortic regurgitation and pseudoaneurysm of aortic root. Aortic root replacement was planned based on a clinical diagnosis of an anastomotic pseudoaneurysm of the aortic root. The patient was discharged without complication 26 days after surgery. In the histopathological examination, the necrotic change of smooth muscle cells in the aortic media was revealed. Previous reports suggests that the use of GRF glue for reconstructing the dissected aorta results in higher rates of postoperative redissection or pseudoaneurysm. Therefore, careful postoperative follow-up is necessary in such cases and further improvements in the quality of glue or alternative methods will be necessary to prevent problems in the first place.

### PMID 18023675 (2007) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Sutureless anastomoses of rabbit carotid arteries with BioGlue.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2007.08.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Sutureless anastomoses for coronary artery surgery are being investigated for a minimally invasive setup because they are easy to perform and less time-consuming than are sutured anastomoses. The short-term effects of the biocompatible adhesive BioGlue on vascular tissue have been described as potentially unfavorable. The present study investigates the medium-term macroscopic and histologic effects associated with the use of BioGlue on rabbit carotid arteries.
METHODS: Thirty-four carotid arteries of 17 New Zealand White rabbits were available. Nine carotid arteries were left unmanipulated and free of glue, 9 carotid arteries had BioGlue applied as a control, and 16 carotid arteries were transected and reanastomosed with the aid of BioGlue and an endovascular balloon. Of the 16 transected arteries, 4 had to be excluded from further evaluation. Angiographic scanning was performed 60 days postsurgery, after which the animals were euthanized and tissue samples were obtained for macroscopic and histologic examination.
RESULTS: The application of BioGlue resulted in a marked invasion of inflammatory cells. The glue partially degraded and was replaced with connective tissue. Obvious calcification of the arterial wall and the capsule that had formed around the glue was present. Stenoses, thrombi, and pseudoaneurysms were predominantly noted in the glued anastomosis group.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study raise concerns about the safety of BioGlue in coronary artery surgery. In light of our results, the use of BioGlue in large-vessel vascular surgery should be considered with great care for each individual patient.

### PMID 17669825 (2007) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Devastating late complication for repair of type A acute aortic dissection with usage of gelatin-resorcinol-formalin glue.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2006.146647 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: We review cases of pseudoaneurysm formation of the graft anastomosis sites following repair of type A acute aortic dissection by our original leak-proof technique for dissected aortic wall reinforcement with xenopericardium and gelatin-resorcinol-formalin (GRF) glue.
CASES: A 47-year-old male presented inferior acute myocardial infarction with bradycardia and cardiogenic shock 34 months after the initial total arch replacement for acute aortic dissection. The patient underwent reoperation with total arch replacement and coronary artery bypass grafting to the right coronary artery. There was rupture of the proximal anastomosis with clotted pseudoaneurysm formation extending over the right ventricle. The right coronary artery was compressed by the pseudoaneurysm. The distal anastomosis also ruptured with localized pseudoaneurysm formation. Twenty-two patients with type A acute aortic dissection underwent aortic repair by our original leak-proof technique for dissected aortic wall reinforcement with xenopericardium and gelatin-resorcinol-formalin glue between 1997-2003. Four patients developed redissection of the anastomosis sites, which required reoperation, including the current case.
DISCUSSION: The cause of redissection was unclear, however, use of GRF glue itself might develop tissue damage and redissection of the aorta, and also glued xenopericardium strip reinforcement in our original technique might accelerate damage to the aortic wall.
CONCLUSION: Follow-up examination is mandatory for the patient of aortic repair with the use of GRF glue.

### PMID 17462368 (2007) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Late complications of gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue in the repair of acute type A aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2007.01.025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: During surgical treatment for acute type A aortic dissection, gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue is generally applied and its efficacy has been reported. However, some late complications that are potentially associated with this glue have also been reported. In the present study, we reviewed our experiences of treatment for acute type A aortic dissection and late complications that occurred in the anastomotic site, which needed a reoperation.
METHODS: From October 1994 to August 2005, 68 patients underwent emergency surgery for acute type A aortic dissection. Gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue was applied to 56 (82.4%) of these patients at one or both of the distal and proximal anastomosis sites.
RESULTS: Eight (11.8%) patients died in hospital within 30 days after the operation, among which two patients already had cerebral complications prior to the surgery. There were five late deaths from causes unrelated to cardiac events. Five patients developed an aortic pseudoaneurysm at the anastomotic site and underwent a late reoperation. All of these patients had been treated with gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue during the previous operation. Histologic examination of the resected aortic wall after the reoperation revealed tissue necrosis, severe local inflammation, and organization of old thrombi at the site of the glue application.
CONCLUSIONS: Late complications after the use of gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue may occur with a certain amount of risk, suggesting its toxicity for aortic tissue. Therefore, proper use of this glue and close follow-up of the patients are strictly required.

### PMID 17215739 (2007) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: The potential utility of fibrin sealant dressing in repair of vascular injury in swine.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000251595.45451.d0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A previous study in which fibrin sealant dressing (FSD) secured hemostasis in major arterial hemorrhage for 96 hours suggested the applicability of this dressing in damage control operations after severe trauma. The objective of this study was to determine the effective duration of FSD hemostatic function in vivo and to examine its potential utility for definitive repair of a major arterial injury in swine.
METHODS: High pressure bleeding in an infrarenal aortotomy was controlled by placing FSD on the wound with 4-minute compression (n = 15). If hemostasis was achieved, the abdominal cavity was closed. Surviving animals were killed at 2, 4, 6, and 8 weeks and aortotomy sites collected for histology.
RESULTS: FSD stopped arterial hemorrhage after 4-minute compression in 14 of 15 (93%) pigs. Dressings failed in two pigs at 36 and 53 minutes after treatment. Twelve (80%) animals recovered and resumed normal activities. Of the remaining 12, two developed rebleeding at the aortotomy site on days 8 and 11 and were killed; another was killed because of idiopathic low hematocrit on day 10. Nine pigs survived until scheduled to be killed, maintaining hemostasis with stable hematological values. In the surviving animals, serial computed tomography scans showed formation of a pseudoaneurysm at the aortotomy site, which resolved after 2 to 3 weeks. The initial vascular defect and pseudoaneurysm were filled with fibroblast-myoblast collagen rich tissues covered by endothelium.
CONCLUSION: FSD can seal an arterial injury, stop high pressure bleeding, and prevent rebleeding for at least 7 days. The dressing may be most beneficial in damage control operations. If combined with an elective interventional radiologic procedure (e.g. embolization or stenting), it may also offer an alternative to suture repair of vascular injuries in cases where profuse bleeding obstructs visualization.

### PMID 17669945 (2007) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Surgical management of penetrating cardiac injuries using a fibrin glue sheet.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2007.156372 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A penetrating cardiac injury is among the most lethal of all injuries. We present a case of penetrating cardiac injuries to both ventricles. A laceration on the right ventricle was repaired using buttressed sutures, while an injury to the left ventricle was repaired using a collagen mesh dressing covered by fibrin glue (TachoComb patch) without employing cardiopulmonary bypass. The patient recovered uneventfully without a ventricular pseudoaneurysm. Our results demonstrate the usefulness of a TachoComb patch for penetrating cardiac injuries occurring adjacent to the large coronary artery in the posterior wall of the heart.

### PMID 17980288 (2007) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous embolization of a lumbar pseudoaneurysm in a patient with type IV Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2007.05.053 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a rare hereditary connective tissue disorder. Patients with type IV EDS are prone to develop visceral pseudoaneurysms and aortic aneurysms. Surgical and endovascular interventions are fraught with complications and high morbidity. We present a case of a patient with type IV EDS who presented with a new psoas pseudoaneurysm arising from a hypertrophied lumbar artery which was treated with percutaneous embolization by using n-butyl cyanoacrylate glue and coils.

### PMID 17099975 (2006) — The heart surgery forum
TITLE: Use of BioGlue in aortic surgery: proper application techniques and results in 92 patients.
DOI: 10.1532/hsf98.20061066 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Surgery for pathology of the proximal aorta requires aortic wall reconstruction, re-approximation of the graft to native vessels, and potentially root replacement and valve resuspension or replacement. The purpose of this study is to describe proper application techniques and the results obtained with the adjunctive use of BioGlue Surgical Adhesive in this challenging patient population.
METHODS: Between August 1998 and June 2002, 92 consecutive patients underwent ascending/arch repairs, ascending/root repairs, Ross procedures, or ascending/arch repairs with a concomitant Ross procedure using BioGlue as an adjunct for anastomotic hemostasis.
RESULTS: Twenty-six patients (28.3%) in this series required no postoperative blood products. The mortality rate for this single-surgeon series was 3.3%. No device-related complications were observed. The incidence rate for postoperative pseudoaneurysm formation was 3.3%.
CONCLUSIONS: This series demonstrates the safety and effectiveness of BioGlue as a hemostatic adjunct in proximal aortic surgery. Use of the product helped to facilitate a minimal reliance on blood products and a low mortality rate.

### PMID 17670621 (2006) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Rapid formation of the left ventricular pseudoaneurysm after sutureless repair of a subacute left ventricular free wall rupture.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2005.127001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We report a rare, rapid, huge formation of the left ventricular pseudoaneurysm after sutureless repair with GRF glue.
METHODS: The case was a 70-year-old male, who received an emergency operation for a subacute left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) complicated by acute myocardial infarction. At that time the left ventricle was wrapped with equine pericardium by using gelatin resorcin formaldehyde (GRF) glue (sutureless repair). The patient had been stable for 13 months but suffered acute heart failure. The left ventricular angiogram (LVG) revealed a huge left ventricular aneurysm and 75% stenosis in the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). He had received the LVG one month before. There was a small concavity in the inferior wall of the left ventricle. A huge pseudoaneurysm had formed within one month.
RESULTS: A left ventricle direct patch closure, and coronary artery bypass were performed. In the pathological findings, the wall of the aneurysm was almost elastic collagen tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Sutureless repair is an effective technique for subacute left ventricular free wall rupture, a left ventricular pseudoaneurysm has to be cared for the late period.

### PMID 17095975 (2006) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Aortic root necrosis after surgical treatment using gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde (GRF) glue in patients with acute type A aortic dissection.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Although gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde (GRF) glue is used for surgical repair of acute type A aortic dissections, late complications possibly ascribed to toxic effects of GRF glue have been reported. We analyzed the benefits and risks of using GRF glue.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between January 1990 and August 2003, 269 consecutive patients underwent emergency operations for acute type A aortic dissection. GRF glue was not used in 47 patients (non-GRF group) who were operated on until May 1995 and was used in the 222 (GRF group) who underwent operation subsequently.
RESULTS: The rate of in-hospital mortality was significantly higher in the non-GRF group (31.9%) than in the GRF group (12.6%) (p&lt;0.0001). In the GRF group, false aneurysms were found in 31 patients (31/194 survivors, 16.0%) 1-65 (mean, 30+/-18) months after initial operation. Reoperation was done in 24 of these patients. At reoperation, the site to which GRF glue was applied had degenerated, and the anastomosis between the aortic root and prosthesis had opened widely, creating a false aneurysm and resulting in aortic regurgitation with prolapse of the coronary cusps. The mortality rate of reoperation was 4.2% (1/24).
CONCLUSION: The use of GRF glue improved the short-term outcome of surgery for acute type A aortic dissection, but was associated with a high incidence of false aneurysms forming at the site of proximal anastomosis, where GRF glue had been applied. Patients in whom GRF glue has been used should be carefully followed up after surgery.

### PMID 17101608 (2006) — Journal of investigative surgery : the official journal of the Academy of Surgical Research
TITLE: Assessment of the thrombogenic effect of fibrin sealant dressing in a vascular surgery model in rabbits.
DOI: 10.1080/08941930600985744 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: This study's objective was to investigate the potential thrombogenic effects of thrombin-containing fibrin sealant dressings (FSD) in a vascular repair model. Oval-shaped pieces of the rabbit abdominal aorta and vena cava were excised, the injuries were repaired with FSD, and animals were allowed to recover. Thrombus formation was examined by (1) an infusion of indium-labeled platelets into the rabbits following FSD application and estimation of total number of platelets attached to the wounds at 2, 4, and 6 h later (short-term effect, n = 12); and by (2) morphological and histological examinations of the vessels and dressings on days 1, 3, and 7 after repair operation in another group of rabbits (long-term effect, n = 12). Application of FSD sealed the vascular injures and produced immediate hemostasis that was stable up to 1 week. The highest numbers of platelets (both native and labeled) adhered to the arterial and venous repair sites were 6.5 x 106 and 4.4 x 107, respectively, 6 h after operation. The adhered platelets, however, did not form a visible and clinically significant thrombus. In long-term experiments, no evidence of thrombus was found in the lumens of the repaired vessels or on the dressings, and no microthrombi were detected histologically in other tissues at any time point. Although vena caval injuries showed signs of healing at day 7 postoperatively, the aortic wounds expanded progressively (pseudoaneurysm) and were prone to rupture at later times. Thus, direct exposure of FSD does not cause intravascular thrombosis or thrombotic events in rabbits. The dressing appears to be safe and effective for short-term repair of vascular injuries. It may also allow healing of minor venous defects, but cannot replace conventional surgical techniques (suturing) for permanent repair of arterial damages.

### PMID 16476614 (2006) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: The wrapping method using biodegradable felt strips has a preventive effect on the thinning of the aortic wall: experimental study in the canine aorta.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2005.09.044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Wrapping methods have been widely used to reinforce the anastomotic site in vascular surgery; however, postoperative changes in the aortic wall wrapped by nonbiodegradable felt have not been well characterized. The purposes of this investigation are to elucidate the sequelae of wrapping with nonbiodegradable felt on the aortic wall and to modify those changes by using biodegradable felt with or without basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF).
METHODS: The descending thoracic aortas of 15 beagles were wrapped with three different materials: nonbiodegradable polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) felt, biodegradable polyglycol acid (PGA) material, and PGA with 100 microg bFGF (n = 5 in each group). The descending thoracic aorta was resected after 3 months. The thickness of the aortic wall, vessel density in the media and the adventitia, and the wall strength were assessed. Untreated native aortic wall served as a normal control.
RESULTS: The thickness of the media of the PTFE group was lower than that of the PGA + bFGF group (66% +/- 5% vs 85% +/- 6% of control, P &lt; .05). The adventitia-media ratio in the PTFE group decreased compared with controls (59.1% of normal, P &lt; 0.05), whereas those in the PGA and PGA + bFGF groups increased (172.1% and 189.6% of normal, respectively, P &lt; .01). The collagen-smooth muscle ratio in the media was higher in the PTFE group than in the controls (0.14 +/- 0.02 vs 0.07 +/- 0.01, P &lt; .01). The number of vessels in the adventitia was higher in the PGA + bFGF group than those in PTFE or PGA groups (29.6 +/- 2.5/mm2 vs 6.4 +/- 0.8/mm2, 19.0 +/- 1.1/mm2, P &lt; .01). The PGA + bFGF group demonstrated larger failure force than the PTFE group (4.0 +/- 0.3 kgf vs 1.6 +/- 0.3 kgf, P &lt; .01). The failure stress in the PGA and PGA + bFGF groups was larger than that in PTFE group (PTFE:PGA + bFGF = 5.3 +/- 0.9 x10(2) kPa:11.7 +/- 1.7 x 10(2) kPa, P &lt; .01; PTFE:PGA = 5.3 +/- 0.9 x 10(2) kPa:11.2 +/- 1.2 x 10(2) kPa, P &lt; .05).
CONCLUSION: The aortic wall wrapped with nonbiodegradable PTFE felt showed a reduced thickness and diminished vessels in the adventitia. Biodegradable felt (PGA), with or without bFGF, modified these histologic changes. The vessel-rich thickened adventitia, after wrapping by PGA with bFGF, was associated with increased aortic wall strength.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: This investigation was conducted in an attempt to elucidate mechanisms underlying the occurrence of late postoperative false aneurysm after aortic surgery. We hypothesized that sustaining compression of the aorta by the felt strip may cause structural derangement and local ischemia on the aortic wall. We used a simple wrapping of the aorta with a felt strip rather than a felt strip at anastomotic sites to simplify the experimental model and to exclude confounding factors brought by technical inconsistency on the surgical anastomosis. We further attempted to find a clue for preventing adverse effects of wrapping with a conventional felt strip. Practically, we pursued a possible application of a biodegradable felt strip to aortic wrapping in our experimental model before we proceed in a clinical application of the new material.

### PMID 17213297 (2006) — The British journal of radiology
TITLE: Embolisation of proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysm developing after surgical repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm with a bifurcated graft with n-butyl cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1259/bjr/97367208 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a 60-year-old man who after undergoing surgical repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm with a bifurcated graft subsequently developed a proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysm, which was successfully treated by embolisation with n-butyl cyanoacrylate.

### PMID 17144598 (2006) — The Japanese journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official publication of the Japanese Association for Thoracic Surgery = Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai zasshi
TITLE: Aorto-right atrial fistula following acute type A aortic dissection repair.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-006-0024-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This report describes a rare case of aorto-right atrial fistula caused by rupture of a huge pseudoaneurysm that developed at the proximal aortic anastomotic site after total aortic arch replacement for acute type A aortic dissection. Preoperative aortography revealed that the fistula communicated with the right heart, but it was intraoperative Doppler transesophageal echocardiography that confirmed its course into the right atrium. Repeat total aortic arch replacement with concomitant direct closure of the fistula was performed successfully. The underlying cause of the pseudoaneurysm was the dehiscence of sutures at the proximal aortic anastomotic site, probably due to gelatin-resorcin-formaldehyde glue.

### PMID 17057010 (2006) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Embolization of an aortic arch pseudoaneurysm with coils and N-butyl-cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1097/01.RVI.0000240739.17833.60 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Endovascular treatment strategies are evolving as viable alternatives for the treatment of aortic pseudoaneurysms. The present report describes an enlarging aortic arch pseudoaneurysm that was successfully treated with a combination of embolization with detachable coils and N-butyl-cyanoacrylate.

### PMID 16249861 (2005) — Surgery today
TITLE: Late complications following surgery for type A acute aortic dissection using gelatin-resorcin-formaldehyde glue: report of two cases.
DOI: 10.1007/s00595-005-3062-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Gelatin-resorcin-formaldehyde (GRF) glue has been widely applied during operations for acute aortic dissection (AAD). At our institution, GRF glue was applied in 40 patients who underwent surgical procedures for AAD from 1995, two of whom needed a reoperation because of the development of a redissection and/or a pseudoaneurysm at the anastomotic sites. The operative findings and histological examinations suggested that the application of GRF glue during the initial operations might be related to the development of a redissection and/or a pseudoaneurysm.

### PMID 15854990 (2005) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Effective use of fibrin glue for acute aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2003.12.059 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The use of gelatin-resorcine-formalin (GRF) glue for reconstruction of the vascular wall in the context of acute aortic dissection has become more common. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that use of the GRF glue results in higher rates of postoperative redissection. We describe an alternative method of reinforcing the dissected aorta with fibrin glue that may avoid this complication. A fabric sheet is presoaked in fibrinogen solution and then placed within the false lumen. Thrombin solution is then applied to the fabric sheet. That results in obliteration of the false lumen and effective reinforcement of the dissected wall.

### PMID 15674490 (2005) — Surgery today
TITLE: Influence of gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue on mid-term redissection after aortic repair.
DOI: 10.1007/s00595-004-2911-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To determine whether the development of mid-term redissection after surgery for acute type A aortic dissection using gelatin-resorcin-formalin (GRF) glue could be prevented by applying less formalin.
METHODS: Between 1995 and 1999, 59 patients underwent surgery with GRF glue to repair acute type A aortic dissection. Forty-one patients underwent surgery before October 1998, and 18 patients underwent surgery after November 1998. An excessive amount of formalin was used in the former period and less was used in the latter period.
RESULTS: Follow-up computed tomography was done for 34 patients in the former period (Former group) and for 16 patients in the latter period (Latter group). This showed redissection in 19 of the 34 patients in the Former group and in 6 of the 16 patients in the Latter group. There was no significant difference in the frequency of mid-term redissection between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: The development of mid-term redissection of the aortic root was not prevented by applying less formalin in the GRF glue. Thus, we conclude that the cause of redissection is not entirely the result of too much formalin.

### PMID 16096535 (2005) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Hemostatic efficacy of two advanced dressings in an aortic hemorrhage model in Swine.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000171458.72037.ee | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An effective hemostatic agent capable of stopping severe arterial bleeding and sustaining hemostasis over a prolonged time is required. The U.S. Army recently distributed fibrin sealant (under an Investigational New Drug-approved protocol) and chitosan dressings among deployed medics for treating severe external hemorrhage on the battlefield. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of these dressings, as compared with the standard gauze army field dressing, to provide initial and sustained hemostasis up to 96 hours in a lethal uncontrolled arterial hemorrhage model.
METHODS: Anesthetized pigs were splenectomized and chronically instrumented for fluid/drug administration and continuous monitoring of vital signs. An infrarenal aortotomy was created using a 4.4-mm aortic hole punch and free bleeding was allowed for 5 seconds. While bleeding profusely, a dressing was applied and pressed into the wound for 4 minutes (occluding the distal flow) and then released. If hemostasis was not obtained, the dressing was replaced with a new one (maximum, two dressings per experiment) with another 4-minute compression. If hemostasis was achieved, the abdomen was closed; the animal was then recovered and monitored up to 96 hours. Initial hemostasis, duration of hemostasis, survival time, blood loss, and other variables were measured.
RESULTS: Application of army field dressing (gauze) did not stop the arterial hemorrhage and led to exsanguination of all the pigs (n = 6) within 10 to 15 minutes of the injury. Chitosan dressing produced initial hemostasis in five of seven pigs. However, the dressings failed to maintain hemostasis for more than 1.6 hours (range, 28-102 minutes), resulting in secondary bleeding and death of the animals. Fibrin sealant dressing produced initial hemostasis in all the pigs (n = 6) and maintained hemostasis in five cases, with one failure at 2.2 hours. These pigs resumed normal activities and lived for the 96-hour experiment duration. Computed tomographic images and histologic sections of the aortas from surviving fibrin sealant dressing-treated animals showed formation of pseudoaneurysms and early granulation tissue at the aortotomy site. The posttreatment blood loss, duration of hemostasis, and survival time were significantly different in the fibrin sealant dressing group than the chitosan dressing and army field dressing groups.
CONCLUSION: Both chitosan dressing and fibrin sealant dressing stopped initial arterial bleeding that could not be controlled by the standard army field dressing. However, although the fibrin sealant dressing secured hemostasis for up to 4 days, the chitosan dressing consistently failed within 2 hours after application. There may be a risk of rebleeding for high-pressure arterial wounds treated with chitosan dressings, particularly in situations where definitive care is delayed substantially.

### PMID 16095240 (2005) — The Japanese journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official publication of the Japanese Association for Thoracic Surgery = Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai zasshi
TITLE: Pitfalls of sutureless repair of a blow-out type left ventricular free wall rupture.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-005-0055-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 55-year-old man was admitted for acute myocardial infarction. Cardiac catheterization revealed total occlusion of the left circumflex artery. During catheterization, he suffered cardiogenic shock. Percutaneous cardiopulmonary support was established, and the patient was transferred to the operating room. A blow-out left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) with an epicardial tear, 1 mm in diameter, was found, and sutureless repair with a collagen hemostat (TachoComb) was performed. However, on postoperative day 7, echocardiography revealed an echo-free space resembling a pseudoaneurysm. A second operation was performed immediately for impending re-rupture. An epicardial tear, 2 x 10 mm in diameter, was found at the previous bleeding point where hemostasis had been achieved with only one sheet of TachoComb. The defect was closed with mattress sutures buttressed with Teflon felt. We conclude that even if the risk of re-rupture is low, sutureless repair with a collagen hemostat alone should be avoided in treating blow-out LVFWR.

### PMID 15995463 (2005) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Therapeutic endovascular treatments for traumatic carotid artery injuries.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000171550.01402.ed | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The diagnosis and management of traumatic carotid vessel injuries continue to be controversial, with direct surgical repair with parent artery preservation still presenting difficulties. The purpose of this report is to review the endovascular therapy of patients with traumatic carotid vessel injuries for preservation of the parent artery, and to determine the safety and efficacy of endovascular therapy.
METHODS: Ten patients with traumatic carotid lesions were treated using therapeutic endovascular methods. Endovascular therapy was accomplished by implanting balloons, porous or polytetrafluoroethylene-covered stents, and/or embolic materials including coils or glue.
RESULTS: All fistulas and pseudoaneurysms were successfully embolized with no periprocedural complications including vessel disruption/rupture, distal embolization, or new neurologic deficits. The parent arteries of all patients except one were preserved. The reason for the parent artery sacrifice was a thrombus formation due to coil migration into the parent artery. No additional surgical procedures for vascular lesions were required. There were no delayed neurologic or vascular complications, and no lesions recurred during the follow-up periods (mean 20.3 months).
CONCLUSION: The goal of endovascular therapy is the selective elimination of the vascular pathology with the normal patency of the cerebral arteries. The authors' experience demonstrates that endovascular therapy using stents, balloons, and coils is both feasible and safe for treatment of traumatic carotid injuries. Of these endovascular methods, the stent can be used to exclude the aneurysm or fistula from the circulation and preserve the parent artery in selective cases. Long-term follow-up review of these repairs will be necessary to provide a full evaluation of the safety and efficacy of these devices.

### PMID 15473471 (2004) — The Journal of heart valve disease
TITLE: 'BioGlue' for the repair of aortic insufficiency in acute aortic dissection.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE STUDY: Concern has been raised regarding the late effects of tissue glues. Herein is described the authors' experience with a new bioadhesive (BioGlue; Cryolife) for repair of the aortic root in acute dissection.
METHODS: BioGlue is composed of bovine serum albumin (BSA) and glutaraldehyde. Glutaraldehyde exposure causes the lysine molecules of BSA, extracellular proteins and cell surfaces to bind to each other, creating a strong scaffold. Between January 2001 and January 2003, BioGlue was used to repair the aortic root in 22 patients with acute aortic dissection. Moderate or severe insufficiency was present in 16 cases, and mild insufficiency in six. The mechanism of insufficiency was commissure detachment in 15 cases, penetration of the intimal flap into the valve in three, and dilatation of the sinotubular junction in four. The aortic valve was resuspended to the aortic wall using pledgeted sutures. BioGlue was used to glue the dissected layers of the aortic root and create stronger tissue for sewing. Two patients required complete resection of the sinuses and aortic root remodeling with a Dacron graft.
RESULTS: There were two operative deaths. Postoperative transesophageal echocardiography showed mild or no aortic insufficiency in 18 patients, and moderate insufficiency in two. During follow up (mean 16 months), none of the patients required reoperation for proximal redissection, delayed rupture, or aortic insufficiency.
CONCLUSION: BioGlue is useful for aortic valve repair in aortic dissection. It is less toxic and has a stronger adhesive effect than the older surgical glues, and is expected to have better long-term results.

### PMID 15609661 (2004) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Aortic root redissection associated with the use of gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue following surgical treatment for acute type A aortic dissection; report of a case].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A late redissection case of the aortic root after total arch replacement for acute Stanford type A aortic dissection was reported. A 55-year-old male was treated with total arch replacement for acute Stanford type A aortic dissection. The aortic valve was bicuspid valve, and the right coronary leaflet was prolapsed because of the dissection of right and non coronary cusp. Resuspension of the commissure and the fixation of the dissected aortic wall with gelatin-resorcin-formalin (GRF) glue was performed during the operation. The initial postoperative course was uneventful and the patient discharged 52 days after the operation. Redissection of aortic root was pointed out on the computed tomography (CT) 3.5 years after the operation. As the second operation, the aortic root replacement was performed. Coronary artery bypass for right coronary artery was simultaneously performed with right internal thoracic artery because the right coronary ostium was stenotic and showed ischemic change on electrocardiogram monitor during the operation. The redissection was seen on the right coronary sinus, which was fixed by the GRF glue during the first operation. The pathological study showed the migration of macrophages and the tear of the fibrous tissue. These findings was thought to be associated with the use of the GRF glue. Careful use of the GRF glue for the fixation of the dissected aorta during the surgical treatment for the Stanford type A aortic dissection was thought to be important.

### PMID 15526133 (2004) — Surgery today
TITLE: Repair of delayed left ventricular rupture after mitral valve replacement: report of a case.
DOI: 10.1007/s00595-004-2844-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Rupture of the left ventricle (LV) after mitral valve replacement (MVR) is a devastating complication, associated with high mortality. A 64-year-old woman with a type I delayed LV rupture, which occurred after MVR with a 27-mm St. Jude Medical mitral prosthesis for mitral stenosis, was successfully treated by a combination of intracardiac and extracardiac surgical repair techniques. The extracardiac repair involved approximating the edges of myocardium around the tear with large sutures bolstered by strips of Teflon felt, then covering the epicardial hematoma with another porcine pericardial patch, using gelatin resorcinol formaldehyde glue and collagen sheets. The intracardiac repair involved suturing the edges of an oval piece of porcine pericardium to the endocardium around the laceration. No LV pseudoaneurysm was detected postoperatively on echocardiography or computed tomography scans. The patient is well 2 years after the operation.

### PMID 15337005 (2004) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Type A acute aortic dissection: immediate and mid-term results of emergency aortic replacement with the aid of gelatin resorcin formalin glue.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2004.03.061 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to assess the mid-term results of operation for type A acute aortic dissection with the aid of gelatin resorcin formalin glue.
METHODS: Emergency operation was carried out in 84 patients during the last 8 years. Fifty-five patients (65.5%) had mild-to-moderate aortic regurgitation. Gelatin resorcin formalin glue was applied to both the proximal and distal aortic stumps. We evaluated the presence of aortic regurgitation and the patency of the distal false lumen at the time of this study. The survival and reoperation-free rates were also assessed. In case of late reoperation, aortic wall samples of the glued area were examined histologically.
RESULTS: Ascending to hemiarch replacement were performed in 71 patients (84.5%). Total aortic arch and root replacement were required in 13 and 7 patients, respectively. Overall hospital mortality was 6.0% (5 patients). Late death was observed in 12 patients (14%). Reoperation for redissection in the aortic root, development of aortic regurgitation, and enlargement of the distal false lumen occurred in 1, 3, and 1 patient, respectively. Histologic examination showed no evidence of infiltration of inflammatory cells in the glued area. Computed tomography scan revealed a patent distal false lumen in 8 (14%) of 58 patients. Echocardiography detected moderate aortic regurgitation in 2 patients. The actuarial survival rate at 1, 5, and 8 years was 85.5%, 80%, and 60.0%, respectively. The reoperation-free rate at 8 years was 89%.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of emergency aortic replacement with gelatin resorcin formalin glue have shown reasonable early and late mortality and reoperation rates. There was no histologic evidence of adverse tissue reactivity by gelatin resorcin formalin glue.

### PMID 14762381 (2004) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Pathologic findings of aortic redissection after glue repair of proximal aorta.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2003.09.021 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 15195752 (2004) — The Japanese journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official publication of the Japanese Association for Thoracic Surgery = Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai zasshi
TITLE: Sutureless patch repair for small blowout rupture of the left ventricle after myocardial infarction.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-004-0123-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Rupture of the left ventricular free wall is one of the most serious complications of myocardial infarction. A 73-year-old man with severe chest pain visited our hospital. Coronary angiography revealed acute myocardial infarction in the territory of the diagonal branch. About six hours after successful percutaneous coronary intervention, the patient fell into cardiogenic shock with chest pain. Echocardiography showed moderate pericardial effusion with a subepicardial hematoma, and percardioentesis led to the diagnosis of free wall rupture. Emergency surgery was performed with the use of intra-aortic balloon pumping. The rupture was a blowout type in a small tear at the anterolateral wall of the left ventricle. We repaired the tear with an off-pump sutureless patch using collagen fleece with fibrinogen-based impregnation (TachoComb) and equinous pericardium with fibrin spray. The patient was free of both re-rupture and pseudoaneurysm postoperatively, and was discharged 20 days after the operation. Considering previously reported various procedures for surgical repair, this technique may be useful if the tear is small.

### PMID 16933382 (2004) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Traumatic dissection of the internal maxillary artery associated with isolated glossopharyngeal nerve palsy: case report.
DOI: 10.1227/01.neu.0000134467.39340.55 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE AND IMPORTANCE: Spontaneous or traumatic dissection of the internal carotid artery with resultant lower cranial nerve palsies is well documented. However, dissection of the external carotid artery with lower cranial palsies has not been reported previously.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A 42-year-old man experienced an epidural hematoma as the result of a fall and underwent a craniotomy and hematoma removal. Subsequently, he developed dysgeusia and difficulty in swallowing. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a dilated linear structure, with isosignal intensity on T1-weighted images and hyperintense signal intensity on T2-weighted images. Strong enhancement was seen on postcontrast T1-weighted images, indicating a dissected internal maxillary artery. This was confirmed on selective angiography of the left common carotid artery.
INTERVENTION: Guglielmi detachable coils were introduced into the false lumen of the dissected artery. Subsequently, 0.5 ml of glue mixed with Lipiodol (Lafayette Pharmacal, Lafayette, IN) was packed into the remnant of the false lumen. Repeat angiograms demonstrated complete occlusion of the dissected vessel. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and the neurological deficits gradually improved.
CONCLUSION: We describe the first reported case of internal maxillary artery dissection and pseudoaneurysm presenting with isolated glossopharyngeal nerve palsy. The association between cranial nerve palsy and dissection of the external carotid artery branch may be the result of a compressive mechanism, as suggested by its anatomic relationships, the characteristics of the dissection, and the good prognosis. Endovascular embolization of the external carotid artery dissection and pseudoaneurysm is suggested as an effective therapeutic method for improving or alleviating neurological deficits produced by mass effect.

### PMID 15622380 (2004) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Combined endovascular stent grafting and endoscopic injection of fibrin sealant for aortoenteric fistula complicating esophagectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2004.08.044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 67-year-old man with previous total gastrectomy and roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy had hematemesis 4 weeks after esophagectomy performed because of carcinoma of the esophagus. Investigation showed an aortojejunal fistula with a thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm. Endovascular stent grafting of the pseudoaneurysm, followed by endoscopic injection of fibrin sealant for the fistula, was performed, and the infection was controlled with broad-spectrum antibiotic agents together with drainage and daily irrigation of the pseudoaneurysm sac. The fistula subsequently healed. The patient remained well 14 months after the procedure; follow-up computed tomograms at 12 months did not show any pseudoaneurysm, and there was no evidence of reopening of the fistula.

### PMID 14759427 (2004) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Application of biological glue in repair of intracardiac structural defects.
DOI: 10.1016/S0003-4975(03)01533-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: BioGlue (Cryolife Inc, Kennesaw GA) was introduced as an alternative tissue sealant. Its most common application has been in repairs of acute dissections of the aorta. There is no reported experience with its use in the repair of intracardiac structural defects.
METHODS: In 5 patients BioGlue was used as an adjunct in repairs of complex intracardiac structural defects. It was used during patch repair of posterior mitral annular defects in 2 patients and aortic annular defect in 1 patient in the presence of active endocarditis. It was also used in 1 patient with a chronic atrioventricular groove pseudoaneurysm following mitral valve replacement, and in 1 patient during repair of a postinfarction posterior ventricular septal rupture.
RESULTS: There were no hospital or late deaths. Immediate intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography and late follow-up echocardiography documented complete and durable repair of all defects without recurrence. At follow-up all patients are in New York Heart Association class I-II, 6 to 29 months postoperatively. No patient has suffered late complications or exhibited signs of glue embolization.
CONCLUSIONS: BioGlue was found to be an effective adjuvant to the standard techniques used for the repair of intracardiac structural defects of various etiologies. Long-term follow-up is recommended to determine its long-term safety in this application.

### PMID 12649913 (2003) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Re-dissection of aortic root without gelatin-resorcin-formalin (GRF) glue effect one year after aortic repair].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 58-year-old man, who had undergone emergency graft replacement of ascending and total aortic arch using gelatin-resorcin-formalin (GRF) glue 1 year before, complained of progressive shortness of breath. Ultrasound cardiography revealed severe aortic regurgitation and dissecting aneurysm of aortic root. He underwent composite graft replacement with the aid of the right axillary artery perfusion and deep hypothermic circulatory arrest. The redissected brownish intima was identified in the area of noncoronary cusp. There was no special finding in the subsequent histopathological examination. The use of GRF glue for reconstructing the dissected aortic root is associated with a certain amount of risk of aortic wall redissection. Therefore, care should be taken to ensure proper use of GRF glue.

### PMID 17669999 (2003) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: A huge pseudoaneurysm of the left ventricle after simple gluing of an oozing-type postinfarction rupture.
DOI: 10.1016/S1569-9293(02)00112-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Left ventricular free wall rupture is a major complication after myocardial infarction. Simple gluing for a rupture site, without a cardiopulmonary bypass, has been reported useful.
METHODS: We experienced a left ventricular pseudoaneurysm, of 8 cm in size, emerging at a previous rupture site 1 year after gluing with TachoComb for an oozing-type rupture due to an acute anteroseptal myocardial infarction.
RESULTS: The pseudoaneurysm was successfully extirpated, under a cardiopulmonary bypass, with induction of ventricular fibrillation.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients, after simple gluing for a left ventricular free wall rupture, should be carefully followed up regarding the occurrence of a pseudoaneurysm at the repair site.

### PMID 12048911 (2002) — The Japanese journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official publication of the Japanese Association for Thoracic Surgery = Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai zasshi
TITLE: Late aortic root redissection following surgical treatment for acute type A aortic dissection using Gelatin-Resorcin-Formalin glue.
DOI: 10.1007/BF03032285 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Although Gelatin-Resorcin-Formalin (GRF) glue is widely used in surgery for acute aortic dissection, late complications possibly due to the glue, such as late aortic root redissection, have also been reported. We have experienced similar complications, some of which required redo surgeries, and these cases are reviewed.
METHODS: Twenty-six consecutive patients who underwent surgery for acute type A aortic dissection using GRF glue, from December 1996 to February 2001, were retrospectively studied, with a special focus on any late complications and any reoperation.
RESULTS: Of the 21 patients who survived and were followed as outpatients, false aneurysms were found in 5 patients (21%) at 24-42 (mean 34) months following the initial surgery. Of these, 2 patients required resternotomy because of the increasing aneurysm diameter. In both cases, the aortic root was redissected at the site of the GRF glue use where the anastomosis between the aortic root and the prosthesis had widely opened and had become the aneurysm entry point. Significant aortic regurgitation was noticed in 3 patients (14%, 1 of whom showed a false aneurysm), and 2 of these underwent reoperation for aortic root redissection.
CONCLUSIONS: A high incidence of aortic root redissection with false aneurysm and/or aortic insufficiency was found following the surgery for acute aortic dissection using GRF glue. These patients should be carefully followed for years after surgery.

### PMID 12173825 (2002) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: BioGlue Surgical Adhesive--an appraisal of its indications in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(02)03689-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The recent emergence of BioGlue Surgical Adhesive has widened the field of surgical adhesives for the cardiac surgeon. We believe the present series, in a wider spectrum of cardiac conditions, is the first larger scale evaluation of the use of this new adhesive.
METHODS: BioGlue was used in 115 consecutive patients (90 male and 25 female, age range 5 days to 87 years) from September 9, 1998 to March 12, 2001. Preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative data were examined to establish its use, indications, and outcomes in patients undergoing cardiac surgical procedures.
RESULTS: The most common underlying pathologic conditions were aortic dissections (30 patients) and aortic aneurysms (39 patients). The procedures carried out were aortic root replacement (36 patients), aortic wall replacement (39), ascending aorta repair (2), coronary artery bypass grafting (28), valve procedures (11), ventricular aneurysm repair (6), repair of postinfarct ventricular septal defect (2), and correction of congenital conditions (13 patients). The indications for BioGlue use were hemostasis in 79 patients, tissue adherence in 21, and tissue strengthening in 30. The hospital mortality was 10.1% (11 patients). Only 1 patient required a late reoperation for dehiscence of a suture line with formation of a false aneurysm. The mean postoperative blood loss at 12 hours was 702 mL. Ten patients developed a cerebrovascular accident postoperatively, which was considered to be unrelated to the use of BioGlue.
CONCLUSIONS: All surgeons in this study believed that BioGlue facilitated the operation. Future follow-up of patients is required to validate our early promising results and to assess the long-term outcome of patients treated with BioGlue.

### PMID 11743861 (2001) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Left ventricular pseudoaneurysm after sutureless repair of subacute left ventricular free wall rupture: a case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 65-year-old woman presenting with a left ventricular pseudoaneurysm 27 months after sutureless repair of a subacute left ventricular free wall rupture complicating acute myocardial infarction is described. An autologous pericardial patch and gelatin resorcin formaldehyde (GRF) glue were used in the repair. A small pseudoaneurysm bulged out over the true aneurysm of the left ventricle. We performed a Dor operation and concomitant bypass grafting to the right coronary artery. Although sutureless repair is an effective procedure for subacute left ventricular free wall rupture, left ventricular pseudoaneurysm in the late postoperative period may be a rare problem after this repair.

### PMID 11515890 (2001) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Role of biologic glue repair of proximal aortic dissection in the development of early and midterm redissection of the aortic root.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(01)02777-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Redissection of the aortic root after supracommissural aortic graft replacement with reapproximation of the layers of the dissected aortic root is relatively rare. Causes and surgical treatment of this lesion remain controversial.
METHODS: From January 1983 to September 2000, 130 patients had emergency operation for acute type A aortic dissection. Of them, 57 patients underwent root reconstruction using biologic glues and 4 patients (7.0%) developed redissection of the aortic root associated with moderate to severe aortic regurgitation 5 to 27 months after the initial operation. In all patients, the proximal false lumen was obliterated with infusion of gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde (GRF) glue or BioGlue and the aorta was reinforced with Teflon felt strip or Surgicel placed on its outside wall.
RESULTS: During reoperation, the noncoronary aortic sinus was found to be redissected in all patients with the dissection extending retrogradely to the aortic annulus. This resulted in aortic regurgitation with prolapse of the noncoronary cusp because the proximal suture line dehisced. Histopathology showed disappearance of the nuclei of the medial smooth muscle cells, suggesting tissue necrosis at the site of GRF glue application. The lesions were treated successfully with full root replacement using a freestyle heterograft bioprosthesis or a composite graft prosthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of biologic glues for reapproximating the layers of the dissected aortic root is associated with a certain amount of risk of aortic wall necrosis. Therefore, care should be taken to ensure proper use of these glues. Full root replacement could be a preferable technique for treating redissection of the aortic root.

### PMID 10973541 (2000) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Late complications after prosthetic replacement of the ascending aorta: what did we learn from routine magnetic resonance imaging follow-up?
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(00)00512-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Advances in surgical technique have improved early survival after surgery of the ascending aorta. However, follow-up data document serious late complications, mainly evolutive peri-prosthetic false aneurysms. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has proved to be highly effective for monitoring these complications. This study evaluates 10 years of experience with routine MRI for follow-up.
METHODS: Since January 1988, 114 patients with replacement of the ascending aorta either for type A acute dissection (group I, 45 patients) or aneurysms (group II, 69 patients) were followed up with annual MRI. Prosthetic replacement was either limited to supra-coronary ascending aorta (45%, 51/114) or extended to the aortic root and/or the aortic arch (55%). Biological glue was always utilized. MRI focused on peri-prosthetic haematoma, analyzing signal intensity changes and volume augmentation for early detection of false aneurysms, and on persistent residual dissection with or without evolutive aortic aneurysm distant to the prosthesis.
RESULTS: Peri-prosthetic hematomas were almost equally found in both groups (26 (58%) in group I and 42 (61%) in group II) and were detected within the first year. Peri-prosthetic false aneurysms developed in 15 patients (group I, seven; group II, eight) as a complication of pre-existing hematomas and were indicated for elective reoperation. Forty-three (96%) of patients in group I had persistent residual dissection. Five patients in group I and two in group II needed reoperation for evolutive aortic aneurysm. In total, 22 of 114 (19%) patients were reoperated on during follow-up (12 (27%) in group I and ten (15%) in group II). Operative mortality was 13% (3/22). Freedom from reoperation at 1 year/5 years was: group I, 93%/84%; group II, 98%/88%.
CONCLUSION: Peri-prosthetic haematoma occurs equally after aneurysm or dissection repairs and is a pre-existing condition for peri-prosthetic false aneurysm; biological glue or extended repair do not prevent late complications. Long-term MRI follow-up allows successful elective reoperation for life-threatened but asymptomatic patients.

### PMID 10969678 (2000) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Mediastinal false aneurysm after thoracic aortic surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(00)01300-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative mediastinal false aneurysm is associated with a substantial morbidity and mortality. Surgical treatment is mandatory, although the individual approach varies according to the type of pathologic process, infection status, and site of origin of the aneurysm.
METHODS: Between April 1993 and February 1999, we treated 10 patients, aged 25 to 73 years, with anastomotic mediastinal false aneurysm originating from the proximal thoracic aorta. Nine had undergone prior operations on the ascending aorta (7, type A dissection repair; 1, aortitis; 1, root abscess) with a Dacron conduit (n = 5) or valved conduit (n = 4). The last patient had undergone valve replacement for excavating aortic root sepsis. False aneurysms were detected from 2 to 70 months after the most recent operation. Three patients had positive tissue cultures. The surgical procedure was direct suture repair of the disrupted anastomosis in 5, root or ascending aortic replacement with an aortic homograft in 4, and Dacron graft interposition in 1. Hypothermic low-flow perfusion with or without circulatory arrest was used in all patients.
RESULTS: There was one hospital death caused by staphylococcal mediastinitis. A false aneurysm recurred after direct suture repair in 2 patients with underlying type A dissection or aortitis. This resulted in one late death. One patient experienced a neurologic event during removal of an infected vascular graft. All 8 surviving patients are alive and well after a mean follow-up of 2 years. Three patients with mycotic false aneurysms remain free from infection after aortic homograft replacement.
CONCLUSIONS: Mediastinal false aneurysms are surgically taxing. Low-flow hypothermic perfusion with or without circulatory arrest allows safe reentry. Radical surgery provides a satisfactory outcome in infected patients. Local repair of suture dehiscence in pathologic tissues may predispose to recurrence. We suspect that excessive use of formalin in gelatin-resorcin-formol glue may predispose to tissue necrosis.

### PMID 10386398 (1999) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: The use of gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue in acute aortic dissection type A.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(99)00084-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The Gelatin-resorcin-formalin (GRF) glue is widely used in the surgical treatment of dissecting aneurysms. This paper is focused on our experience with the GRF glue in cases, operated for acute aortic dissection type A.
METHODS: Between September 1990 and December 1997, 164 patients were operated on for acute aortic dissection type A. In 148 patients GRF was used to reinforce the dissected layers proximal (n = 106) or distal (n = 144) of the grafted aortic segment. An intervention at the aortic valve was necessary in 93 instances. In 111 patients, an open distal anastomosis for replacement of the proximal aortic arch was performed. Thirty-seven additional patients underwent subtotal or total aortic arch replacement.
RESULTS: Early postoperative mortality was 26.2% (43/164 patients). Another 16 patients died late postoperatively. Actuarial survival rates are 69.9% at 1 year, 62.5% at 3 years, 59.4% at 5 years and 56.1% at 7 years, post-operatively. Twenty-two reoperations were performed in 20 patients (16.5%). Nine of these patients had developed complications in aortic segments that underwent reconstruction by use of GRF during the primary intervention. Aortic root redissection was found in 7/9 patients intraoperatively, whereas 1/9 patients presented with a rupture near the distal graft to aortic anastomosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The introduction of GRF glue has greatly facilitated the reconstruction of dissected aortic wall layers adjacent to the vascular graft. However, the use of the adhesive for aortic root reconstruction in acute aortic dissection type A may bear a significant risk of late postoperative proximal aortic redissection. Complications associated with the GRF glue are likely to be due to the toxic effects of the formalin component. Therefore, care should be taken that the amount of formalin administered to the glue components remains as low as possible.

### PMID 10587389 (1999) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Thrombin injection versus compression of femoral artery pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1016/s0741-5214(99)70043-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The compression of femoral artery pseudoaneurysms is a time consuming, painful, and sometimes unsuccessful procedure. Thrombin injection has been advocated as a superior alternative. In this study, we compare our experiences with both techniques.
METHODS: All the records of femoral artery false aneurysms that were treated in the vascular laboratory from January 1996 to April 1999 were retrospectively reviewed. Treatment with ultrasound scan-guided compression was compared with treatment with dilute thrombin injection (100 U/mL).
RESULTS: Both groups had similar demographics and aneurysm sizes (P &gt;.2). Of the pseudoaneursyms, 88% were caused by cardiac catheterization and the others were the results of femoral artery access for cardiac surgery (6%), arteriography (5%), and renal dialysis (1%). Compression was successful in 25 of 40 patients (63%). Nine persistent aneurysms necessitated operation, and six were treated successfully with thrombin injection. Primary thrombin injection successfully obliterated 21 pseudoaneurysms in 23 patients. Overall, 27 of 29 pseudoaneurysms were treated successfully with thrombin injection (93%). Thrombosis occurred within seconds of the thrombin injection and required, on average, 300 units of thrombin (100 to 600 units). The patients who underwent successful compression required an average of 37 minutes of compression (range, 5 to 70 minutes) and required analgesia on several occasions. No patients in the thrombin group required analgesia or sedation. Neither group had complications. A cost analysis shows that thrombin treatment results in considerable savings in vascular laboratory resource use but not in overall hospital expenditures.
CONCLUSION: Ultrasound scan-guided thrombin injection is a safe, fast, and painless procedure that completely obliterates femoral artery pseudoaneurysms. The shift from compressive therapy to thrombin injection reduces vascular laboratory use and is less expensive, although it does not significantly impact hospital costs.

### PMID 9468396 (1998) — Journal of vascular and interventional radiology : JVIR
TITLE: Embolization of perigraft leaks after endovascular stent-graft treatment of distal arch anastomotic pseudoaneurysm with coil and n-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate.
DOI: 10.1016/s1051-0443(98)70483-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 8857239 (1995) — Hiroshima journal of medical sciences
TITLE: A case of traumatic pseudoaneurysm of the ascending aorta occurring in a postoperative patient who underwent arch replacement and Bentall's operation.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A case of traumatic pseudoaneurysm of the ascending aorta occurring in a postoperative patient who underwent an arch replacement and Bentall's operation was reported. A bleeding point was clear at the graft of the ascending aorta, and a pseudoaneurysmal formation was suspected following an echocardiogram. An aortogram demonstrated the presence of an aneurysm approximately 8 cm by 4 cm in size originating 5 cm above the right coronary ostia. An emergency operation was carried out. A Trans-femoral bypass was established before sternotomy. The Operative findings showed that adhesive connective tissue covered a pseudoaneurysm 8 cm by 4 cm in size, and that there was a tear in the anastomosis of the grafts between the ascending aorta and the arch 5 cm above the coronary ostia. Direct suture was performed, using hypothermic circulatory arrest. In this paper, We discuss the mechanism, classification, and operative strategy of traumatic pseudoaneurysm.

### PMID 8541171 (1995) — British heart journal
TITLE: Pseudoaneurysm following aortic homograft: clinical implications?
DOI: 10.1136/hrt.74.6.645 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of pseudoaneurysm formation after aortic (left ventricular outflow tract) homograft implantation and to evaluate predisposing factors.
METHODS: Echocardiographic data were analysed in 30 patients for evidence of pseudoaneurysm formation after homograft implantation. Pseudoaneurysm was characterised as a perfused echo-free space between the homograft and the native aortic wall communicating with the left ventricular outflow tract. Clinical data were analysed for potential predisposing factors for pseudoaneurysm formation.
RESULTS: Pseudoaneurysms were found in 22 of 30 patients. Mean age, length of follow up after surgery, aortic systolic pressure gradient (15 (SD 12) v 10 (4) mm Hg), aortic root diameter, and size of the homografts were comparable in patients with and without pseudoaneurysm. preoperative infection, operating techniques, and whether first or reoperation did not affect pseudoaneurysm formation. However, pseudoaneurysms were often localised at the site of an abscess or a paravalvular leak after eradicated prosthetic valve endocarditis.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) Doppler echocardiography demonstrates that pseudoaneurysm formation is common after aortic homograft implantation. (2) A prospective study is needed to clarify the prognostic importance of pseudoaneurysms. (3) The high incidence of pseudoaneurysm formation may lead to an improvement of surgical technique (application of fibrin glue).

### PMID 7824456 (1994) — Presse medicale (Paris, France : 1983)
TITLE: [Post-infarction rupture of the heart into the pericardium. Surgical treatment combining synthetic patch and biological fibrin glue].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 66-year old man was hospitalized with chest pain and acute ischaemia of the lower limbs highly suggestive of dissection of the aorta. Computed tomography and aortography however showed pericardic effusion and thrombosis situated in the iliac bifurcation of the aorta. During the emergency operation, acute tamponade required sub-xyphoid drainage. The haemodynamic situation was reestablished and the operation continued but within minutes a cataclysmal haemorrhage occurred through the drainage tube due to ischaemic rupture of the lateral wall of the heart into the pericardium. Extra-corporal circulation was installed immediately and a large polytetrafluoroethylene patch was sutured to the epicardium, distally from the necrosed area, in healthy tissue. A biological fibrin glue was injected under the patch. The operation was terminated with an axillo-bifemoral bypass. The postoperative period was satisfactory and the patient was discharged. At the six months examination, the patient was in NYHA class II and the echography showed moderate left ventricular dysfunction with grade II mitral regurgitation and a false aneurysm facing the area of necrosis. This technique allowed us to patch the rupture without excessive tension on the sutures in the fragile tissue which would have increased the risk of secondary rupture. In addition, the large patch avoided excessive reduction in volume of the left ventricular cavity and saved the mitral chordae which would have been destroyed by direct suture. This method can be an effective salvage technique for heart rupture during the acute phase of myocardial infarction and offers the possibility of a second look in case of a secondary false aneurysm.

### PMID 2201786 (1990) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Fibrin glue-antibiotic suspension in the prevention of prosthetic graft infection.
DOI: 10.1097/00005373-199008000-00009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: The following study was done to assess whether fibrin glue-antibiotic suspension (FGAS) can prevent infection of a PTFE vascular graft in a contaminated wound.
METHODS: FGAS was made by combining cryoprecipitate with a mixture of bovine thrombin, aminocaproic acid, and tobramycin (5 mg/cc thrombus). Antibiotic activity was documented by in vitro kinetics which revealed initial elutions to be greater than 8,000 mu gm/cc and elutions at 4 days to be greater than 2 mcg/cc. Twelve dogs had a 1-cm section of infrarenal aorta replaced with a PTFE graft that had been bathed in a 2-cc solution of E. coli 3 x 10(8) CFU/ml and S. aureus 3 x 10(8) CFU/ml. Both organisms were sensitive to tobramycin and cefonicid. Dogs were divided into three groups of four. Group I had a contaminated PTFE graft placed and no further therapy. Group II had a contaminated PTFE graft placed and sealed with fibrin glue. Group III had a contaminated PTFE graft placed and sealed with FGAS. All three groups received daily IV cefonicid.
RESULTS: Group I: Four of four dogs were reoperated on the fourth day for suspected sepsis and all four had pseudoaneurysms (one ruptured). Three of four were culture positive for S. aureus and two of four positive for E. coli. Group II: Four of four died of anastomotic disruption by the third day. Four of four were culture positive for S. aureus and E. coli. Group III: All four dogs survived and were sacrificed on Day 17: all anastomoses were normal. Animal survival was significantly associated with the treatment given (p = 0.0025). Three of four tissue cultures of the grafts were weakly positive for S. aureus and one of four for E. coli and Pseudomonas. Serum tobramycin levels were negligible at 12, 24, 72, and 96 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: The data show that FGAS was associated with a reduction in vascular graft infection and pseudoaneurysm formation after exposure to a standardized bacterial inoculum. Whether complete eradication of all organisms can be achieved with higher doses of tobramycin is as yet undetermined.

### PMID 2685469 (1989) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Tobramycin-adhesive in preventing and treating PTFE vascular graft infections.
DOI: 10.1016/0022-4804(89)90125-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: The present study was designed to determine the effectiveness of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate as a vehicle to deliver antibiotics locally to contaminated vascular graft sites and to grafts with established infections. Phase I--Contaminated wound model: Sixteen dogs had a 1-cm section of infrarenal aorta replaced with a PTFE graft. Prior to placement, the graft was immersed in solutions of Escherichia coli 3 X 10(8) CFU/ml and then Staphylococcus aureus 3 X 10(8) CFU/ml. After anastomosis, 1 cc of each solution was placed directly over the graft. Eleven dogs served as controls and 5 as treatment dogs. Parenteral cefonecid was given preoperatively and daily until sacrifice. Treatment animals had the anastomoses and graft sealed with a suspension of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and 1.2 g tobramycin powder (antibiotic glue, ANGL) after contamination. All dogs were reoperated on the third postoperative day.
RESULTS: Eleven of 11 control dogs had positive cultures for S. aureus and 9 of 11 had positive cultures for E. coli. Seven of 11 had pseudoaneurysms, 1 exsanguinated. None of the 4 treatment dogs had positive cultures (P = 0.0002), pseudo-aneurysms (P = 0.017), or local signs of sepsis. Phase II--Infected graft model: The 10 surviving infected control dogs served as the established graft infection model. These dogs were randomized into two groups; Group 1 control (N = 5) had the graft replaced; Group 2 treatment (N = 5) had the graft replaced and ANGL treatment. Dogs were sacrificed after 2 weeks.
RESULTS: Graft cultures were positive in all 4 control dogs and negative in the 4 treatment dogs (P = 0.005). One dog in each group was eliminated secondary to failure to obtain graft culture. The data show that ANGL can be effective in the prevention and treatment of prosthetic graft infection.

