# SLICE: complication_infection  (390 records)

### PMID 41809965 (2026) — European journal of case reports in internal medicine
TITLE: The Use of Bovine Serum Albumin and Zephyr Endobronchial Valves for Managing a Bronchial-Biliary Fistula: A Novel Approach.
DOI: 10.12890/2026_005801 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: A bronchobiliary fistula (BBF) is a rare pathological communication between the biliary tract and the bronchial tree. It is most often associated with hepatic tumours, infections or trauma. The diagnosis can be challenging; management strategies vary and include conservative, surgical and endoscopic approaches.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 61-year-old woman with metastatic colorectal cancer to the liver -managed with hepatic resections and ablation - presented with progressive dyspnoea and a productive cough. She had a recent history of pyogenic liver abscess treated with antibiotics. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a persistent hepatic abscess with a fistulous tract to the right middle lobe. Bronchoscopy confirmed bilious secretions from the right middle lobe. Initial management with endobronchial BioGlue application resulted in temporary improvement; however, recurrence occurred within eight days. A bronchoscopy was then repeated with additional BioGlue applied, and a 5.5 Zephyr endobronchial valve was deployed into the right middle lobe. The proximal orifice of the valve was sealed with BioGlue to ensure occlusion. This combined approach resulted in improved oxygenation and cessation of air leak from the biliary drain. Despite successful fistula closure, the patient succumbed to candida fungemia.
CONCLUSION: BBF remains a challenging condition with no standardised management guidelines. This case represents the first reported use of BioGlue&#xae; in combination with a Zephyr&#xae; endobronchial valve for successful endobronchial closure of a bronchobiliary fistula. Our experience highlights the potential of innovative bronchoscopy interventions as minimally invasive alternatives to surgery in select patients.
LEARNING POINTS: The differential diagnosis of pneumonia in patients with hepatic malignancy and/or abscess should include bronchobiliary fistula.BioGlue&#xae; and Zephyr&#xae; valves are an option for treating bronchobiliary fistulas.Innovative bronchoscopy therapy is an option for treating bronchobiliary fistulas.

### PMID 41237590 (2026) — International dental journal
TITLE: Multifunctional Thermal-responsive Bioglue Targeted at Suppurative Infection in Oral Cavity.
DOI: 10.1016/j.identj.2025.104004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: This study aims to develop a novel thermal-responsive bioglue against suppurative infection in the oral cavity, to overcome the current conventional therapeutic strategies, encompassing localised irrigation and systemic pharmacotherapy, which are constrained by transient therapeutic duration, suboptimal drug bioavailability, delayed therapeutic onset, and adverse systemic effects.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Multifunctional bio-adhesive platform comprising tannic acid-iron ion chelate (TA-Fe) with thermal-responsive poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogel (PPP) (TA-Fe@PPP) was designed for spatially confined photothermal therapeutic intervention with the use of a near-infrared (NIR) laser. Furthermore, comprehensive performance, including gel transformation, degradation behaviour, adhesive and photothermal properties, drug release, and antibacterial activity in vitro and in vivo, was assessed.
RESULTS: The TA-Fe@PPP system showed porous morphology, ideal adhesive performance, and thermal-responsive behaviour. Favourable biocompatibility and antimicrobial and soft tissue regeneration ability were also confirmed both in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: TA-Fe@PPP's sustained efficacy with minimised off-target effects holds significant localised therapeutic potential, highlighting a long-lasting in situ platform for oral suppurative infection.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: TA-Fe@PPP can be utilized as a durable in situ platform to treat oral suppurative infections as a versatile carrier system. This novel system addresses critical needs across multiple therapeutic scenarios in clinical practice.

### PMID 41823721 (2026) — Journal of neurosurgical sciences
TITLE: Post-market safety patterns of hydrogel dural sealants: a comparative manufacturer and user facility device experience analysis.
DOI: 10.23736/S0390-5616.26.06744-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel dural sealants (DuraSeal, Adherus) reinforce dural closure, but case reports describe cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak, infection, and swelling-related neurologic injury. We characterized post-market safety in the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) database, comparing structured problem codes with negation-aware narrative review.
METHODS: MAUDE reports from January 1, 2015, to June 30, 2024, mentioning either device were extracted and deduplicated by unique identifiers (MDR_REPORT_KEY, REPORT_NUMBER). Structured FDA patient and device problem codes were mapped to clinical categories (CSF leak, infection, wound dehiscence, neurologic deficit, swelling/mass effect, polymerization/application issue, adhesion, reoperation/hospitalization). Narratives underwent deterministic, negation-aware screening for the same categories, and for each device we calculated event proportions.
RESULTS: After deduplication, 279 reports were analyzed (256 DuraSeal, 23 Adherus). Most were coded as injury or malfunction; deaths were rare. CSF leak was the most frequent signal (DuraSeal 26.2% structured vs. 27.0% narrative; Adherus 52.2% vs. 47.8%). For DuraSeal, narrative review nearly doubled infection reports (8.2% vs. 19.9%) and identified swelling/mass effect (9.4%), neurologic deficit (4.3%), and reoperation/hospitalization (7.8%) largely absent from structured codes. For Adherus, narrative review identified isolated reports of infection, swelling/mass effect, and reoperation.
CONCLUSIONS: PEG hydrogel dural sealants show post-market safety patterns dominated by CSF leak, suspected infection, and swelling-related neurologic events. Exclusive reliance on structured MAUDE codes underestimates key complications. Integrating structured fields with negation-aware narrative review yields a more complete safety profile and supports cautious use in constrained intracranial spaces.

### PMID 42362980 (2026) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: Periaortic inflammation after endoleak repair: a risk to watch.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-026-00718-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the occurrence of periaortic inflammation, including abscess formation, as a complication following endoleak repair after endovascular aortic repair.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This retrospective single-center study analyzed 88 EVAR revisions for endoleak treatment performed in 59 patients between 2015 and 2025. Patients underwent one to three revision procedures. Endoleaks were classified by type, and treatment was performed via transarterial access or direct sac puncture with a posterior/translumbar access route. Embolization materials for type II endoleaks included n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate, ethylene vinyl alcohol, and coils, while stent-graft extensions and transmural fixation were used for type I and III endoleaks.
RESULTS: Of the 59 patients, 38 (64.4%) underwent one revision, 13 (22.0%) two revisions, and 8 (13.6%) three revisions. Treated endoleaks included type I (19.3%), type II (77.3%), type III (2.3%), and combined type II/III (1.1%). A total of 73 procedures (83.0%) were performed via transarterial access and 15 (17.0%) via direct sac puncture. Follow-up CT identified 6 cases of periaortic inflammation after type II endoleak repair, presenting with soft tissue mantle, fat stranding, or abscess formation. Symptom onset ranged from 33 to 108&#xa0;days after the most recent intervention. No significant association was found between periaortic inflammation and access route or embolic material.
CONCLUSION: Periaortic inflammation and abscess formation are possible severe complications after endoleak repair following endovascular aortic repair. To date, these inflammatory changes have not been described systematically in the literature and warrant further investigation.

### PMID 42355742 (2026) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Open-Window Thoracostomy Closure Using a Free Musculocutaneous Flap, Fascia Patch Graft, and Postoperative Compression Guided by Near-Infrared Spectroscopy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm15124574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchopleural fistula is a rare but severe complication of lung resection, associated with significant morbidity and mortality, especially when an open-window thoracostomy is required. The clinical and surgical management is complex and becomes even more challenging in the presence of underlying conditions such as recurrent infections or malignancy. Postoperative management is equally demanding, as local compression may help prevent fistula recurrence but can compromise flap perfusion. A 65-year-old male with a history of right upper lobectomy and subsequent sublobar resection for lung adenocarcinoma presented with an 8 &#xd7; 4 cm open-window thoracostomy complicated by chronic bronchopleural fistula and empyema. Extensive fibrosis of the surrounding tissues, including the ipsilateral latissimus dorsi muscle, limited the available reconstructive locoregional options. Reconstruction was performed using primary fistula closure reinforced with a contralateral free latissimus dorsi musculocutaneous flap and a fascia patch graft secured with cyanoacrylate-based bioadhesive. Postoperatively, continuous near-infrared spectroscopy monitoring enabled safe application of compressive bandage while minimizing the risk of flap perfusion compromise. Complete fistula closure was achieved. Apart from a surgical site abscess requiring debridement on postoperative day 7, no further complications occurred. At the 2-year follow-up, the patient remains free of fistula recurrence, wound dehiscence, or oncological relapse. We describe a novel approach for open-window thoracostomy closure combining a free musculocutaneous flap with a fascia patch graft reinforced by bioadhesive, together with postoperative perfusion monitoring using near-infrared spectroscopy. This strategy may help address both the reconstructive and postoperative challenges associated with complex bronchopleural fistulas.

### PMID 42297210 (2026) — Journal of vascular surgery. Venous and lymphatic disorders
TITLE: Network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials evaluating long-term outcomes of interventional approaches for great saphenous vein insufficiency.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvsv.2026.102553 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Great saphenous vein (GSV) insufficiency is a major contributor to chronic venous disease, associated with substantial morbidity and reduced health status. Although various surgical and minimally invasive interventions are available, their long-term efficacy, safety, and recovery profiles remain uncertain. Therefore, this study aims to provide comprehensive evidence to guide clinical decision-making and optimize interventional strategies for GSV insufficiency.
METHODS: This network meta-analysis (NMA) was performed following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses-NMA checklist of items. Comprehensive searches were conducted on PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, ProQuest, and Web of Science from inception to July 11, 2025. Data analyses were performed using RStudio version 4.5.1 (Posit Software). Kaplan-Meier (KM) and log-rank test were applied to evaluate freedom from failure, with individual patient data reconstructed from published KM curves. Clinical outcomes were synthesized using a Frequentist NMA with DerSimonian-Laird random-effects model. Complications were analyzed using meta-proportions with a generalized linear mixed model at the latest follow-up.
RESULTS: A total of 7913 cases of GSV insufficiency from 47 reports from 33 randomized controlled trials were included. KM and log-rank analyses revealed that high ligation and stripping (HL&amp;S) had a significantly higher long-term freedom from failure compared with cyanoacrylate closure [hazard ratio (HR), 1.98; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.24-3.16; P &lt; .001], endovenous laser ablation (EVLA)-1470 nm (HR, 2.37; 95% CI, 1.38-4.06; P &lt; .001), and radiofrequency ablation (HR, 2.64; 95% CI, 1.69-4.12; P = .002) among patients with Clinical-Etiology-Anatomy-Pathophysiology C2-C5 Classification. Regarding clinical outcomes, electrocoagulation (mean difference, -0.59; 95% CI, -1.11 to -0.06; P = .03) showed lowest Venous Clinical Severity Score at 6 months among interventions. Minimally invasive interventions (EVLA-1470, P &lt; .001; EVLA-810, P = .02; electrocoagulation, P = .006) demonstrated a faster return to normal activities compared with HL&amp;S. In terms of complications, HL&amp;S showed higher proportion of ecchymosis (76.37%) and infection (2.35%), whereas ablation procedures demonstrated higher proportion of skin pigmentation (4.34%-11.41%) across interventions.
CONCLUSIONS: In individuals with Clinical-Etiology-Anatomy-Pathophysiology stages C2 to C5 disease, HL&amp;S offer higher long-term freedom from failure and Venous Clinical Severity Score improvement, whereas minimally invasive interventions offer faster short-term recovery. These findings provide evidence to ensuring recommendations address both long-term efficacy and patient-centered short-term outcomes.

### PMID 41468008 (2026) — Surgical infections
TITLE: Late Recurrence of Empyema More Than a Decade after Window Thoracostomy: Secondary Aspergillus Infection Superimposed on Prior MRSA Empyema, Successfully Managed by Stepwise Surgical and Endobronchial Definitive Closure.
DOI: 10.1177/10962964251407580 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fungal empyema is uncommon and has worse short-term outcomes than bacterial disease, particularly when a bronchopleural fistula (BPF) sustains contamination.
CASE: A previously healthy male developed BPF and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) empyema after right upper lobectomy at age 17, managed by open-window thoracostomy (OWT). An apical residual space persisted and formed a fungus-ball-like nodule. At age 30, he re-presented with fever and nodule growth, with elevated Aspergillus IgG; voriconazole was started.
MANAGEMENT: Computed tomography-guided catheter placement and re-OWT exposed air leaks and recurrent MRSA. Staged fistula control with endobronchial Watanabe spigots, n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate, and cavity-side suturing achieved cessation.
OUTCOME: After irrigation, sterilized cultures, negative-pressure therapy preceded latissimus dorsi flap obliteration. He was discharged on postoperative day 149 without recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: A stepwise plan-source control, fistula control, sterilization, and obliteration-can achieve durable cure in mixed Aspergillus-MRSA empyema with BPF after prior OWT.

### PMID 41877070 (2026) — BMC infectious diseases
TITLE: Endovascular aneurysm repair combined with local and systemic antibacterial treatment for infected aorto-iliac artery aneurysms caused by Brucella.
DOI: 10.1186/s12879-026-13056-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Brucella-induced aorto-iliac aneurysms (with &lt;&#x2009;200 documented cases globally) present unique therapeutic challenges due to their dual pathology of structural fragility and persistent bacteremia. Despite their life-threatening nature, no consensus exists on optimal management, particularly for patients unsuitable for open surgical reconstruction. This single-center case series provides critical insights into endovascular salvage strategies for this orphan disease. METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted on 16 consecutive patients with Brucella-infected aorto-iliac aneurysms undergoing endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) with adjunctive local and systemic antimicrobial therapy at our institution between January 2019 and June 2025. RESULTS: The cohort demonstrated a 30-day mortality rate of 6.3% (1/16) and all-cause mortality of 31.3% (5/16) during a mean follow-up of 31.1 months. Notably, one patient (6.3%) without local gentamicin-fibrin sealant application developed distal aneurysm recurrence leading to fatal hematemesis at 48 months. In this cohort, Three patients died as a consequence of self-discontinuation of antibiotic therapy: two patients (12.5%) succumbed to infectious shock, while one patient experienced fatal aneurysm recurrence and rupture. Among 15 patients receiving standardized protocol (EVAR with intracavitary gentamicin instillation and prolonged antimicrobial therapy), satisfactory aortic remodeling was achieved with significant aneurysm diameter reduction (39.7 vs. 44.5&#xa0;mm, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). Reintervention rate was 6.3% (1 / 16) for iliac occlusion. CONCLUSIONS: Although radical open repair with complete debridement should remain the preferred approach for physiologically eligible patients, our findings suggest that EVAR combined with intracavitary antibiotic delivery and rigorously monitored antimicrobial therapy may be a viable alternative in select cases. This hybrid strategy requires meticulous patient selection, sustained infection control, and strict therapeutic compliance to mitigate long-term reinfection risks. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

### PMID 41508572 (2026) — The American journal of case reports
TITLE: Technical Approach to Repair of Tracheogastric Conduit Fistula Following Minimally Invasive Esophagectomy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.950499 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND Tracheogastric conduit fistula (TGCF) is a rare but life-threatening complication of esophagectomy, particularly in high-risk patients with comorbidities or prior chemoradiotherapy. It typically develops in the setting of anastomotic leakage, ischemia, or infection. There is no standardized treatment, and outcomes vary depending on timing and surgical approach. We report a delayed TGCF after thoracolaparoscopic esophagectomy and describe the operative technique and key perioperative considerations. CASE REPORT A 78-year-old man with diabetes, hypertension, and a heavy smoking history underwent thoracolaparoscopic esophagectomy for Siewert type I adenocarcinoma following neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. On postoperative day 54, persistent coughing prompted imaging and endoscopy, which revealed a tracheogastric fistula between the gastric conduit and posterior membranous trachea. Surgical repair was performed via right thoracotomy, involving debridement, closure of the gastric and tracheal defects, and interposition of a vascularized intercostal muscle flap. Reinforcement with fibrin sealant and a bovine pericardial patch was applied. Initial bronchoscopy confirmed airtight repair. However, the patient later developed recurrent pneumonia and septic shock, ultimately dying to multiorgan failure on postoperative day 108. CONCLUSIONS This case illustrates the complex management of TGCF and reinforces the value of early recognition and aggressive surgical intervention. Despite the fatal outcome, the absence of fistula recurrence confirmed the technical success and offers insight for managing similar high-risk cases. Intercostal muscle flap remains a reliable option for fistula closure in irradiated and infected fields. Meticulous surgical planning and perioperative management are essential for optimizing outcomes in this rare complication.

### PMID 41960497 (2026) — Bioinformation
TITLE: Comparative evaluation of tissue adhesives and conventional sutures in periodontal flap surgery: A randomized clinical study.
DOI: 10.6026/973206300220241 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Post-surgical discomfort, delayed soft tissue healing and risk of infection remain significant challenges associated with conventional suturing methods in periodontal flap surgeries. Therefore, it is of interest to evaluate four different groups (n=10 each); Group 1 - silk sutures, Group 2 - vicryl sutures, Group 3 - fibrin sealant (Tisseel) and Group 4 - isoepoxy 2-cyanoacrylate adhesives (Amcrylate) and compared effects on wound healing, postoperative discomfort and clinical outcomes in periodontitis patients. Phase I therapy was followed by full-thickness mucoperiosteal flaps elevation, debridement and closure conducted as specified. The measurement of healing was done at 1, 2, 4 and 12 weeks by the use of Landry Healing Index, Visual Analog Scale (VAS) of pain, Plaque and Gingival Indices, Probing Pocket Depth (PPD) and Clinical Attachment Level (CAL). Tissue glues, especially fibrin-based sealants, provided periodontal flap closure with clinically reliable, biocompatible and patient-friendly option which enhances faster hemostatic and early healing.

### PMID 41677405 (2026) — Cornea
TITLE: Autologous Glue: Novel Use of Injectable Platelet-Rich Fibrin With Tranexamic Acid to Achieve Graft Adhesion in Pterygium Surgery.
DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000004125 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To study the use of autologous injectable platelet-rich fibrin (iPRF) and tranexamic acid (TA) for conjunctival autograft (CAG) adherence during pterygium surgery.
METHODS: This case series report included 212 primary nasal pterygiums from 205 patients who underwent pterygium excision with conjunctival autograft fixation using iPRF and TA operated by a single surgeon at 1 center. Surgical time, postoperative graft stability, and recurrence were assessed, and outcomes were compared with literature reports of autologous blood (ATB) and commercial fibrin glue (FG).
RESULTS: The average age was 57.8 years (range 33-75 years). The average surgical duration was 15.3 minutes (12.2-21.4 minutes). Graft dislodgement was noted in 1 eye (0.47%) on day 1, requiring reprocedure. Recurrence was observed in 2 patients (0.94%), mild graft edema in 68 eyes (32.07%), late spontaneous hemorrhage under CAG in 34 eyes (16%), and graft retraction in 2 eyes (0.94%). No postoperative infections, local inflammation, thrombotic complications, or systemic adverse effects were observed. The recurrence rates were lower than those reported for ATB. Unlike FG, iPRF contains platelets and leukocytes, which contribute to angiogenesis and wound healing. The addition of TA stabilizes the fibrin network by inhibiting fibrinolysis, thereby enhancing the adhesion. The cost incurred when using iPRF was 50x lower than that of Baxter Tisseel.
CONCLUSIONS: iPRF combined with TA is a safe, autologous, and cost-effective alternative to ATB, sutures, and FG for CAG fixation in pterygium surgery. Larger randomized controlled trials are required to validate the findings of this novel method.

### PMID 41023173 (2026) — International journal of impotence research
TITLE: Zero infection protocol in inflatable penile prosthesis surgery: a prospective cohort study using chlorhexidine-alcohol skin preparation and fibrin sealant hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1038/s41443-025-01174-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgical site infections remain a devastating complication of inflatable penile prosthesis (IPP) implantation. We evaluated a novel surgical protocol combining chlorhexidine-alcohol skin preparation with fibrin sealant-mediated hemostasis and no drain placement, hypothesizing that it would reduce infection and hematoma rates. Between January 2020 and December 2023, 103 men underwent primary IPP placement with a protocol of 2% chlorhexidine gluconate/70% isopropyl alcohol (ChloraPrep&#xae;) skin antisepsis and intraoperative application of Evicel&#xae; fibrin sealant to corporotomy suture lines, subcutaneous tissues, and pump pocket. This group was compared with 115 historical controls who received povidone iodine skin preparation only and routine surgical drains between January 2015 to December 2019. The primary endpoint was IPP infection at 12 months; secondary endpoints included hematoma rate, operative time, length of stay, and patient satisfaction. No infections occurred in the study cohort (0/103), compared to 3.5% (4/115) of controls (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Hematoma incidence was 1.0% (1/103) versus 5.2% (6/115) in controls (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.03). Mean operative time (52.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;13.8&#x2009;min vs. 58&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;18&#x2009;min, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.12) was similar between groups, while same-day discharge rates were higher in the study cohort (94.7 vs. 88.0%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.03). Combining chlorhexidine-alcohol skin antisepsis with fibrin sealant hemostasis and eliminating drains is a viable option to reduce infections and hematomas in IPP surgery.

### PMID 42306951 (2026) — Journal of biomaterials applications
TITLE: Epidural thickness of the dura sealants HEMOPATCH&#xae; and TACHOSIL&#xae; after elective supratentorial craniotomy: A comparative retrospective monocentric cohort study.
DOI: 10.1177/08853282261462277 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study compares the in vivo behavior (epidural thickness and complication rate including the development of cerebrospinal fluid fistula, CSF-fistula) of the newer dura sealant HEMOPATCH&#xae; (HP) with that of the well-established patch TACHOSIL&#xae; (TS) in early postoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and during the clinical course after supratentorial cranial surgery. This retrospective cohort study included 58 patients with complete datasets (HP group n = 39, TS group n = 19). Inclusion criteria were supratentorial surgery, use of one dura sealant (HP or TS), re-implantation of the bone flap, and MRI within 3&#xa0;months after surgery. We measured the thickness of the used dura sealant in axial T1-weighted sequences of postoperative MRI on the area of suture (central) and on two peripheral spots. Additionally, we examined the incidence of surgical revisions due to hemorrhage, infection, and wound healing disorders. The mean central thickness of HP and TS were 0.49&#xa0;cm and 0.55&#xa0;cm, respectively. This difference in size was not statistically significant (p = 0.066). The peripheral epidural thickness of HP (d = 0.36&#xa0;cm) was significantly smaller than of TS (d = 0.42&#xa0;cm; p = 0.014) in one of two points of peripheral measurement. Similarly, the two groups did not differ significantly in the complication rate needing surgical revision, including CSF fistula (HP 3/39 vs TS 3/19; p = 0.34). The biological behavior in terms of growth, swelling, induction of wound healing disorders, hemorrhage, and development of CSF-fistula showed no statistically significant difference within this small descriptive cohort.

### PMID 41178305 (2026) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: Development of a Novel Synthetic Hydrogel Sealant for Effective Prevention of Liver Resection-Associated Bile Leakage.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202503518 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bile leakage is a major complication following hepatectomy; these often lead to surgical site infections, liver failure, and even death. Biomaterials, including fibrinogen-based collagen fleece (TachoSil) and fibrin glue, are ineffective for bile sealing. Synthetic sealants, including cyanoacrylate and polymer-based materials, independent of coagulation, are inadequate for bile leakage management. Therefore, in the present study, a novel hydrogel-based sealant (DCSN_100_25) is developed using 3 types of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) with a dual-stage cross-linking mechanism, termed the delayed cross-linked single network (DCSN). This design facilitates rapid initial solidification followed by gradual network formation, ensuring immediate sealing and stable adhesion to the amputated liver tissue surface. Experiments using in vivo rat hepatectomy models demonstrated that DCSN_100_25 achieved hemostasis within 1 min, outperforming conventional sealants, such as SURGICEL and TachoSil, and effectively preventing both bleeding and bile leakage. Furthermore, in vivo safety assessments confirmed its safety profile, with PEG brushes remaining on the liver tissue and exhibiting minimal inflammation and no chronic liver damage. These findings suggest that DCSN_100_25 is a promising surgical sealant that effectively manages bile leakage and enhances hepatectomy safety.

### PMID 42275610 (2026) — Neurological research
TITLE: Post-market surveillance of gelatin-thrombin hemostats in neurosurgery: a 10-year MAUDE Analysis.
DOI: 10.1080/01616412.2026.2686943 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Flowable gelatin - thrombin matrix hemostats (Floseal&#xae; and Surgiflo&#xae;) are ubiquitous in cranial and spinal surgery, yet neurosurgical post-market safety data are limited. We describe adverse-event signals in a 10-year FDA Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) cohort.
METHODS: All MAUDE reports referencing Floseal or Surgiflo from January 2015 to December 2024 were ingested, deduplicated, and classified through the MAUDE-DASH pipeline. Structured event codes and deterministic narrative screening were mapped to pre-specified clinical categories and stratified.
RESULTS: Of 254 Floseal and 194 Surgiflo reports identified, 77 of 254 Floseal (30.3%) and 98 of 194 Surgiflo (50.5%) reports described neurosurgical use; spinal procedures predominated in both cohorts (Floseal 48/77, 62.3%; Surgiflo 82/98, 83.7%). Injury was the predominant MAUDE event-type designation. Within the Floseal cohort, neurologic deficit was described in 14/77 (18.2%) and CSF obstruction in 4/77 (5.2%); within the Surgiflo cohort, infection was described in 23/98 (23.5%) and mass effect in 40/98 (40.8%).
DISCUSSION: MAUDE narratives describe distinct within-cohort distributions of clinical categories. Reports of compressive neurologic deficits accounted for a larger proportion of the granular bovine-derived Floseal cohort, biologically consistent with the matrix's volumetric expansion in confined corridors. Reports of postoperative infection and mass-effect accumulation accounted for a larger proportion of the flowable porcine-derived Surgiflo cohort, biologically consistent with broader spread along surgical planes and a larger retained substrate surface. These hypothesis-generating findings reinforce the importance of meticulous intraoperative matrix removal and washout in anatomically constrained neural corridors and support continued post-market surveillance.

### PMID 41836977 (2026) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Delayed hypersensitivity reaction to Floseal after anterior cervical discectomy and fusion surgery: a case report and review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1097/RC9.0000000000000167 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Allergic reactions against the hemostatic agent Floseal during or after spine surgery are very rare, with six cases reported in the literature so far. We present a case of type IV hypersensitivity reaction against Floseal after an anterior cervical discectomy and fusion surgery. We also review the literature of reactions against Floseal for patients who have undergone spinal surgeries.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 25-year-old male patient was admitted to our center with images revealing a C5 teardrop fracture and rupture of the upper and lower discs. C5 corpectomy was performed successfully without any intraoperative adverse events. On the morning of the third day post-op, the patient developed respiratory distress accompanied by swelling beneath the surgical wound. We performed an urgent exploration of the wound and evacuation of the collection. The collection was watery and clear with Floseal remnants visible. Histopathological analysis of the fluid revealed no evidence of infection but showed inflammatory changes with leukocytosis. Symptoms resolved after the second surgery and the patient recovered with no further complications.
DISCUSSION: The delayed onset of localized swelling following surgery and rapid resolution after irrigation and removal of Floseal remnant particles is highly suggestive of a delayed-hypersensitivity reaction to Floseal. Delayed-hypersensitivity reaction should be considered in the differential diagnosis of delayed post-op swelling where Floseal was used.
CONCLUSION: We believe this is the first reported case of delayed-hypersensitivity reaction to Floseal, which occurred after anterior cervical discectomy and fusion surgery.

### PMID 42148845 (2026) — Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.)
TITLE: Versatile Nano-Crosslinker Enhanced Injectable Hydrogel Toward Rapid Hemostasis and Efficient Trauma Repair.
DOI: 10.1002/adma.73277 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Uncontrolled traumatic hemorrhage, often complicated by infection and poor healing, accounts for over 30% of trauma-related deaths worldwide. Injectable hydrogels with robust multi-bond crosslinked networks, integrating fluidity and in situ stability, are promising for efficient hemostasis, but their crosslinkers' relatively single structures limit the multifunctionality required for effective trauma management in resource-scarce environments. Herein, a new class of versatile &#x3b5;-polylysine grafted manganese dioxide (EPL-g-MnO2) nano-crosslinkers is synthesized to construct an injectable hydrogel (i.e., OSEG hydrogel). Driven by EPL-g-MnO2, OSEG hydrogel rapidly achieves stable wet adhesion and efficient hemostasis in critical injuries (e.g., 24.9 s in a rabbit model of cardiac hemorrhage) via imine, hydrogen, and ionic bonds, which form a robust and multifunctional crosslinked network upon full gelation.&#xa0;In the microenvironment of traumatic wounds, OSEG hydrogel undergoes accelerated degradation to further expose EPL-g-MnO2 and spermidine, thereby providing sufficient antibacterial and pro-healing effects. As a result, OSEG hydrogel achieves a bone volume/total volume 3.3 times that of commercial hemostat SURGIFLO in a rat model of infected cranial defect. This work may inspire the design of advanced injectable hydrogels for synergistic trauma management.

### PMID 42395219 (2026) — Cureus
TITLE: Use of Cyanoacrylate (Superglue) for the Repair of Incidental Durotomy During Lumbar Spine Surgery: A Low-Cost Technique in a Resource-Limited Setting.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.110108 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background Incidental dural tears are a recognized complication of lumbar spine surgery and can lead to significant postoperative morbidity if not properly managed. Standard repair techniques often rely on specialized grafts and sealants that may be costly or unavailable in low-resource settings. This study reports our experience with the use of cyanoacrylate adhesive (superglue) for intraoperative repair of dural tears in a resource-limited environment. Methods We retrospectively reviewed patients who sustained incidental dural tears during lumbar spine surgery at a tertiary spine centre in a resource-limited setting between January 2022 and June 2025. All tears were identified intraoperatively and repaired immediately. In six cases, cyanoacrylate adhesive was used as part of the dural repair strategy. In two patients, lumbar fascia grafts were used to cover inaccessible tears and reinforced with Surgicel&#x2122; (Ethicon, Inc., Raritan, New Jersey) before application of cyanoacrylate adhesive. In four patients, autologous fat grafts and Surgicel&#x2122; were similarly used prior to cyanoacrylate application. Postoperative outcomes, including cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage, wound infection, pseudomeningocele formation, and need for reoperation, were reviewed. Results Among 68 patients who underwent lumbar spine surgery, nine (13.2%) sustained intraoperative dural tears, and six of these were managed using cyanoacrylate-assisted repair. Watertight closure was achieved intraoperatively in all cases. One patient developed a mild superficial wound infection that resolved with antibiotics, while another developed a pseudomeningocele following revision surgery that was managed conservatively. There were no cases of persistent CSF leakage, meningitis, or reoperation. Conclusion Cyanoacrylate-assisted repair appeared to provide a feasible and low-cost adjunct for dural repair in this limited case series. When used in conjunction with autologous grafts and Surgicel&#x2122;, satisfactory short-term outcomes were observed without major complications. Further prospective studies are needed to better establish long-term safety and effectiveness.

### PMID 42100549 (2026) — Neurosurgery practice
TITLE: Intraoperative Agents for Hemostasis and Dural Reconstruction in Neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.1227/neuprac.0000000000000236 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative hemostasis and dural closure are critical components of neurosurgical procedures, directly affecting operative time, blood loss, neurological outcomes, and the risk of cerebrospinal fluid leak, infection, and reoperation. Over the past 2 decades, there has been rapid expansion in the availability of hemostatic adjuncts, dural substitutes, and liquid sealants. Despite widespread adoption, product selection is frequently guided by surgeon preference and institutional practice rather than a detailed understanding of material composition, mechanism of action, and product-specific limitations. This qualitative review provides a neurosurgery-focused, product-level comparison of commonly used intraoperative hemostatic agents, dural substitutes, and dural sealants, with emphasis on composition, mechanism of action, indications, advantages, limitations, safety considerations, and cost. A comprehensive literature search was conducted using PubMed, Embase, United States Food and Drug Administration device summaries, manufacturer instructions for use, and key clinical trials and observational studies. Products were categorized into 3 groups: intraoperative hemostatic adjuncts, dural substitutes and graft materials, and liquid dural sealants and adhesives. The review encompasses gelatin-based products, oxidized regenerated cellulose, collagen-based agents, flowable gelatin-thrombin matrices, topical thrombin preparations, autologous and nonautologous dural grafts, and fibrin- and polyethylene glycol-based sealants. Selection of these materials should be guided by anatomic considerations, patient-specific factors, and best available evidence. This review serves as a practical reference to support informed intraoperative decision-making in neurosurgical practice.

### PMID 42076721 (2026) — Veterinary sciences
TITLE: Considerations About the Antimicrobial Activity of Oxidized Cellulose and Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose and Their Potential Application in Veterinary Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/vetsci13040349 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Oxidized cellulose (OC) and oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) are bioabsorbable polysaccharide-based materials widely used in surgery for topical hemostasis. Beyond their established hemostatic role, increasing attention has been directed toward their potential antimicrobial activity, primarily attributed to local acidification following carboxyl group dissociation. Discussing the possible implications of the antibacterial properties of OC/ORC in veterinary surgical practice, this review critically examines the existing evidence. In vitro studies show that viable bacterial counts are significantly reduced in both Gram-positive and Gram-negative pathogens, including antibiotic-resistant strains. Historical in vivo animal models further support a reduction in bacterial recovery in contaminated tissues treated with OC. However, contemporary veterinary clinical trials specifically evaluating surgical site infection (SSI) outcomes remain limited. Documented limitations include variability in formulation, quantity-dependent degradation kinetics, and the potential for foreign body reactions when excessive material is retained. Current evidence suggests that OC may provide adjunctive antimicrobial effects under controlled experimental conditions, primarily in vitro and in standardized animal models, but these properties should be interpreted with caution, and its role should be integrated within comprehensive infection prevention strategies rather than considered a substitute for established perioperative protocols.

### PMID 41832320 (2026) — European archives of oto-rhino-laryngology : official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS) : affiliated with the German Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
TITLE: Skull base CSF leak repair in the outpatient Arena: Pushing the boundaries of modern endoscopic surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00405-026-10126-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Skull base defects with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak have been a significant clinical challenge due to the risk of life-threatening complications such as meningitis, pneumocephalus and intracranial abscess formation. Traditionally, these defects have been managed in the operating room under general anesthesia, using either open craniotomy or endoscopic endonasal approaches. However, with advances in high-definition endoscopy, specialized instruments and biomaterials for reconstruction, there is a growing chance of performing selected repairs in an outpatient setting under local anesthesia. This approach has the potential to reduce healthcare costs, shorten recovery times, and enhance patient comfort without compromising safety or effectiveness. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the outcomes, safety profile, and feasibility of office-based endoscopic endonasal skull base repair in a series of patients at King Faisal Specialist Hospital &amp; Research Center, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. METHODS: This retrospective case series included nine patients with postoperative CSF rhinorrhea who underwent office-based skull base repair between April 2024 and May 2025. All skull base repair procedures were performed under local anesthesia following a standardized protocol that involved defect identification, silver nitrate cauterization of defect margins, and multilayer overlay and/or underlay grafting using biomaterials such as oxidized regenerated cellulose, human fibrinogen, bovine serum albumin/glutaraldehyde, and/or surgical glue. In selected cases, nasal packing was used to reinforce the graft. Follow-up evaluations were performed at multiple intervals to assess leak resolution and identify any complications. RESULTS: Seven of nine patients (77.78%) experienced complete leak resolution after a single procedure. Two patients (22.22%) required a second in-clinic intervention, which successfully closed the defect. No postoperative infections, neurological deterioration, or surgical reinterventions were observed. Follow-up ranged from 2 to 43 months, with no signs of recurrence. CONCLUSION: Office-based endoscopic endonasal skull base repair is a safe, effective, and resource-efficient option when applied to carefully selected patients with low-volume postoperative CSF leaks. These findings support minimally invasive management of CSF leaks and highlight the importance of refined patient selection criteria, surgeon expertise and long-term follow-up for optimal outcomes.

### PMID 41798513 (2026) — Cureus
TITLE: A Comprehensive Review of SURGICEL&#xae;: Efficacy, Applications, and Radiological Insights in Surgery.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.103048 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: SURGICEL&#xae; is a widely used hemostatic material designed to control capillary, venous, and small arterial bleeding. Introduced in 1960, it functions by producing cellulosic acid, which promotes platelet aggregation and activation of the coagulation pathway. This bioabsorbable material has been utilized in various surgical procedures to manage perioperative bleeding. The objective of this article is to review the mechanism of action, clinical applications, and imaging characteristics of SURGICEL&#xae;, as well as its role in differential diagnosis in surgical contexts. This article serves as a comprehensive review of SURGICEL&#xae; in various surgical fields, including neurosurgery, urology, orthopedics, and maxillofacial surgery, while also examining SURGICEL&#xae;'s hemostatic mechanism, clinical efficacy, and bioabsorbable properties. The review also evaluates its radiological appearance in ultrasound, CT, and MRI, and addresses its role in differential diagnosis and potential complications, such as granuloma formation and infections, based on existing literature. SURGICEL&#xae; has proven effective in achieving hemostasis in a wide range of surgical procedures, including maxillofacial and neurosurgical operations. As a bioabsorbable material, it induces minimal tissue reactions and is gradually absorbed over time. On imaging, it appears as echogenic masses, radiopaque bands, or alterations in signal intensity, particularly on MRI. MRI can differentiate SURGICEL&#xae; from adjacent tissues, aiding in the identification of hematoma-like masses or complications such as granulomas and infections. Overall, SURGICEL&#xae; offers significant utility in surgical hemostasis with minimal side effects. However, careful monitoring is required to avoid complications, and knowledge of its radiological appearance is essential for accurate differential diagnosis. This review highlights its coagulation-promoting properties, imaging features, and potential complications to guide its effective clinical use.

### PMID 41718291 (2026) — Reports (MDPI)
TITLE: Non-Woven Haemostatic Agent Mimicking Perigraft Abscess Following Thoracic Aortic Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/reports9010040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Clinical Significance: Absorbable haemostatic agents such as Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar are useful adjuncts to control post-surgical bleeding in cardiac surgery. The material is purposefully left in situ and it slowly degrades over time. Previous publications, mainly in general and gynaecological surgery, have demonstrated that these materials can mimic gangrenous infection, abscesses, anastomotic leak, and early tumour recurrence in imaging studies. These findings can often lead to unnecessary re-interventions or re-operations. The number of reports in the cardiothoracic surgical field is limited. Case Presentation: We report a 45-year-old man who underwent aortic valve replacement and ascending aorta and hemiarch replacement. In this case, Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar was used to optimise graft contouring, contributing to postoperative imaging appearances that initially raised concern for infection. The patient was conservatively managed given his stable clinical picture and focused review of CT images with the knowledge of location of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar. Repeat CT scan after 2 weeks showed a significant reduction in collection size and complete resolution of air bubbles within the collection. Conclusions: It is important for cardiothoracic surgeons and radiologists to be aware of the early CT appearances of haemostatic agents to minimise erroneous diagnosis of postoperative complications leading to unnecessary interventions. This case highlights a diagnostic pitfall in postoperative imaging, where retained absorbable haemostatic material may mimic serious infective complications and lead to unnecessary re-intervention if operative and radiological findings are not carefully correlated.

### PMID 41344477 (2026) — International journal of biological macromolecules
TITLE: Sandwiched ceftriaxone-impregnated oxidized regenerated cellulose within electrospun gelatin/polylactic acid fibers for enhanced wound management.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2025.149457 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study introduces a novel sandwich-structured wound dressing composed of ceftriaxone-loaded oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) integrated within electrospun gelatin (Gel) and polylactic acid (PLA) nanofibers to enhance hemostasis, antibacterial activity, and wound healing efficiency. ORC, derived from cotton cellulose, was chemically modified and validated by FTIR and XRD analyses, revealing increased carboxyl content (1637&#xa0;cm-1), reduced crystallinity, and an 18&#xa0;% enhancement in hemostatic functionality. Optimized electrospinning conditions produced uniform, bead-free Gel, PLA, and Gel/PLA fibers, as confirmed by SEM images showing continuous fibers with embedded ORC microfibrils in an organized sandwich structure. Contact angle and water absorption studies demonstrated the composites' hydrophilic nature and excellent swelling capacity (1655&#xa0;%). The water vapor transmission rate (190&#xa0;g/m2/day) indicated adequate breathability and protection for wound environments. Mechanical testing revealed significant improvements in tensile strength (~3.2&#xa0;MPa) and modulus (~32&#xa0;MPa), maintaining flexibility favorable for wound applications. Drug release evaluation followed Fickian diffusion behavior, fitting the Korsmeyer-Peppas model (R2&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.97), ensuring controlled and sustained ceftriaxone release. Antibacterial tests showed strong inhibition against Staphylococcus aureus (96&#xa0;%) and Escherichia coli (85&#xa0;%). Overall, the ceftriaxone-embedded Gel/PLA nanofibrous composite demonstrated high biocompatibility (&gt;90&#xa0;%) and multifunctional performance. By integrating effective hemostasis, sustained antibacterial delivery, and structural support for tissue regeneration, this advanced wound dressing offers a promising approach for accelerating wound healing and preventing infection in biomedical applications.

### PMID 41218831 (2026) — The Journal of small animal practice
TITLE: Encapsulated granuloma (surgiceloma) caused by retained Surgicel&#xae; following liver lobectomy in a dog: a case report.
DOI: 10.1111/jsap.70051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: A 12-year-old dog underwent liver lobectomy for hepatocellular carcinoma, and Surgicel&#xae; was used intraoperatively for haemostasis. Three months after surgery, computed tomography revealed a solitary abdominal mass, which was surgically removed. Histopathology identified the mass as retained Surgicel&#xae; surrounded by granulomatous inflammation. Although Surgicel&#xae; is generally considered safe, retained material may mimic abscess, haematoma or tumour recurrence on imaging. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first veterinary case describing an encapsulated granuloma caused by retained Surgicel&#xae; in a dog. This case highlights that Surgicel&#xae; may persist and induce granulomatous inflammation, mimicking significant postoperative complications on imaging. Accurate intraoperative documentation and awareness of this potential pitfall are essential to prevent misdiagnosis and avoid unnecessary procedures.

### PMID 41384912 (2026) — Annals of plastic surgery
TITLE: Use of Plant-Based Absorbable Hemostatic Powder and Intravenous Tranexamic Acid in Breast Reduction Patients Reduces Hematoma Rates.
DOI: 10.1097/SAP.0000000000004586 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Reduction mammaplasty is an effective treatment for symptomatic macromastia but is associated with postoperative complications, such as hematoma, seroma, and infection. Tranexamic acid (TXA) has been shown to reduce blood loss and hematoma formation across surgical specialties, whereas the efficacy of adjunctive topical agents like Arista, a microporous polysaccharide hemostat, remains uncertain in breast surgery. This study evaluates whether combining TXA with Arista confers additional benefit in reducing postoperative complications following reduction mammaplasty.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted on patients undergoing bilateral reduction mammaplasty at a single institution from January 1, 2020, to April 1, 2025. Patients were divided into 3 groups: those receiving both IV TXA and topical Arista (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;120), TXA alone (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;133), and neither agent (control, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;211). The primary outcome was hematoma incidence, stratified into major (requiring reoperation) and minor. Secondary outcomes included seroma, infection, and delayed wound healing. Statistical analyses included ANOVA and chi-squared tests with significance set at P &#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05.
RESULTS: A total of 464 patients were included in this study; 120 consecutive breast reduction patients received both Arista and TXA, 133 patients received TXA only, and 211 controls received neither. Combined use of TXA and Arista resulted in the lowest total hematoma rate (2.5%), compared to TXA alone (3.8%) and control (10.0%; P &#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Major hematoma rates were significantly reduced in both treatment groups compared to control but did not differ significantly between TXA (2.3%) and TXA&#x2009;+&#x2009;Arista (1.7%). Infection rates were lowest in the combination group (0.8%) versus TXA alone (6.8%) and control (2.8%; P &#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). Delayed wound healing was also reduced with combined treatment (1.7%) compared to TXA alone (16.5%) and control (11.4%; P &#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.0005). Seroma rates and estimated blood loss showed no significant differences across groups.
CONCLUSIONS: IV TXA significantly reduces postoperative hematoma rates following reduction mammaplasty, with the addition of Arista providing a modest incremental benefit. Although TXA remains the primary agent for hematoma prophylaxis, Arista may be selectively useful in patients contraindicated for TXA. Further prospective studies are warranted.

### PMID 41673833 (2026) — BMC surgery
TITLE: Life-threatening spinal cord injury and occult intercostal artery rupture following low-energy trauma in a patient with ankylosing spondylitis: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-026-03594-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) significantly increases vulnerability to severe spinal injuries from minor trauma due to rigid "bamboo spine" morphology and secondary osteoporosis. Isolated intercostal artery rupture without rib fractures is extremely rare in general trauma populations. The concurrent occurrence of multilevel spinal fractures with complete spinal cord injury and occult intercostal artery hemorrhage following low-energy blunt trauma in AS patients has rarely been documented, and the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms remain unclear.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 43-year-old male with previously undiagnosed AS sustained a low-velocity bicycle collision, resulting in cervical and thoracic fracture-dislocation (C6-C7 and T11 bilateral laminae fractures) with complete spinal cord injury (ASIA Grade A, complete paraplegia), massive hemothorax, and active intercostal artery bleeding without significant rib fractures. Due to the patient's hemodynamic instability and altered consciousness on admission (hemorrhagic shock with SBP 63/40 mmHg), formal assessment of the bulbocavernosus reflex was not performed initially. The ASIA Grade A classification was based on complete absence of motor function (lower limbs 0/5) and sensory function below the T3 level, including absence of sacral sparing. Computed tomography angiography revealed active contrast extravasation from the right T10-level intercostal artery. Emergency transcatheter arterial angiography and embolization using coils and gelatin sponge particles successfully controlled the hemorrhage and stabilized the patient's hemodynamics. Following stabilization, staged posterior cervical (C5-C7) and thoracolumbar (T9-T12, L3-S1) pedicle screw-rod internal fixation with anterior cervical discectomy and fusion were performed. Despite postoperative complications including hospital-acquired pneumonia, pulmonary fungal infection (Candida albicans isolated from bronchoalveolar lavage, treated with intravenous fluconazole), and deep vein thrombosis, the patient demonstrated partial neurological recovery, with ASIA grade improving from Grade A (complete paraplegia) on admission to Grade C (incomplete paraplegia) at discharge on day 59. Serial neurological examinations documented the evolution from complete to incomplete injury (Table&#xa0;1). The patient was subsequently transferred to a specialized rehabilitation center for long-term functional training.
CONCLUSIONS: This case illustrates the heightened and often unrecognized risk of complex, multisystem injuries in AS patients following seemingly minor trauma. Early recognition of hemothorax without rib fractures should raise high suspicion for intercostal artery injury, necessitating a lowered diagnostic threshold for computed tomography angiography. Transcatheter arterial embolization should be considered the first-line treatment for confirmed intercostal artery bleeding rather than a last resort. Prompt diagnosis, individualized multidisciplinary management, and early referral to specialized centers with interventional and spine surgical capabilities are essential for optimizing outcomes in these high-risk patients.

### PMID 40909211 (2026) — DEN open
TITLE: Endoscopic Closure Combined With the Endoscopic Submucosal Dissection Technique and Over-the-scope Clip for Chronic Aortoesophageal Fistula: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1002/deo2.70202 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Aortoesophageal fistula (AEF) is a rare but life-threatening condition. Initial management typically includes thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) or aortic graft replacement to achieve hemostasis, followed by esophagectomy with aortic graft replacement and greater omentum wrapping to eliminate the source of infection. We report a case of successful endoscopic closure of a chronic esophageal fistula secondary to AEF. A 63-year-old man presented with hematemesis. He had a history of two ascending aortic replacements and one descending aortic replacement for aortic dissection. Computed tomography revealed a pseudoaneurysm at the graft anastomosis site and perforation into the esophagus. He was diagnosed with AEF and underwent TEVAR for hemostasis. Although the bleeding was stopped, follow-up imaging confirmed a residual fistula. Because of his poor general condition, surgery was contraindicated, and endoscopic closure was attempted. Initial treatment with hemostasis clips was ineffective. A second attempt using polyglycolic acid sheets, fibrin glue, and hemostasis clips with endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) achieved closure, but the fistula reopened after 5 months. Finally, the combination of ESD and over-the-scope clip (OTSC) achieved complete and sustained closure. The patient was discharged after 3 months but died 8 months postoperatively owing to idiopathic splenic rupture. This case demonstrates that the combination of ESD and OTSC may be an effective treatment option for chronic esophageal fistulas caused by AEF.

### PMID 41723098 (2026) — European annals of otorhinolaryngology, head and neck diseases
TITLE: When routine turns rare: Massive hematemesis unveiling hypopharyngeal perforation caused by a redon suction drain.
DOI: 10.1016/j.anorl.2026.02.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Hypopharyngeal perforation is a rare but potentially life-threatening complication that can follow cervical or aerodigestive procedures. Its deep anatomical location and often subtle symptoms make early recognition difficult, increasing the risk of mediastinitis and sepsis. Massive hematemesis as the initial manifestation is exceptionally uncommon and diagnostically challenging.
CASE SUMMARY: A 49-year-old man underwent elective C4-C5 anterior cervical discectomy for degenerative canal stenosis. Shortly after extubation, he developed massive hematemesis. Endoscopy revealed a perforation of the right pyriform sinus, with a Redon suction drain traversing the hypopharyngeal wall into the laryngeal lumen. Emergency direct pharyngolaryngoscopy was performed; the drain was carefully removed and the defect closed endoscopically with interrupted sutures reinforced by biological fibrin sealant. The postoperative course was uneventful, and at three-month follow-up the patient showed complete recovery without stenosis or fistula.
DISCUSSION: This case describes an exceptionally rare iatrogenic hypopharyngeal perforation caused by a Redon suction drain after anterior cervical discectomy, presenting atypically with massive hematemesis. It highlights the diagnostic challenge and potentially dramatic presentation of hypopharyngeal perforation following anterior cervical spine surgery. The report underscores the importance of meticulous drain placement, intraoperative vigilance, and postoperative airway and swallowing surveillance in preventing aerodigestive complications after cervical or transoral procedures.

### PMID 40681029 (2026) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Aortic Root Reconstruction With Pledgeted Sutures in Patients With Acute Type A Aortic Dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2025.06.047 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The aortic root is invariably dissected in patients with acute type A aortic dissection (ATAD). We have used an aortic root reconstruction technique using pledgeted sutures to reattach the dissected wall without surgical glue. We reviewed our 2-decade experience to evaluate the results of aortic root reconstruction with pledgeted sutures in ATAD.
METHODS: All open ATAD repairs from our institution from January 1999 to December 2024 were reviewed, and early and late outcomes of supracoronary aortic repair with aortic root reconstruction were evaluated. Outcomes of adverse aortic root events were defined by aortic-related death, proximal aortic reoperation, aortic root dilation (&gt;55 mm), severe aortic insufficiency, endocarditis, or graft infection.
RESULTS: Type A aortic repair was performed in 841 patients. After 83 patients (9.9%) who underwent aortic root replacement were excluded, 758 (90.1%) who received aortic root reconstruction were included. The preoperative mean aortic root diameter was 41.8 (SD, 6.2) mm, with organ malperfusion developing in 294 (38.8%), including 44 (5.8%) with coronary malperfusion. Total arch replacement was performed in 76 (10.0%) and aortic valve replacement in 21 (2.8%). Operative mortality was 14.1% (n = 107). Overall survival was 72.2% at 5 years and 56.5% at 10 years. Freedom from proximal reoperation was 96.0% at 5 years and 88.4% at 10 years. Freedom from adverse aortic root events was 93.2% at 5 years and 81.1% at 10 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Aortic root reconstruction with pledgeted sutures may be performed with reasonable early and late outcomes for ATAD, including patients with a moderately dilated aortic root.

### PMID 41740735 (2026) — Journal of minimally invasive gynecology
TITLE: Topical Hemostatic Agents and the Risk of Pelvic Infection in Gynecologic Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2026.02.023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY OBJECTIVE: As hemostatic agent use becomes routine, adverse effects must be assessed, including infection. This study compared pelvic infection after the use of different hemostatic agents.
DESIGN: Pelvic infection within 6 weeks of surgery was assessed in a retrospective cohort study, with a subanalysis for hysterectomies. Fisher's exact test was used to compare cases.
SETTING: This study was conducted at a large midwestern hospital.
PATIENTS: Patients who underwent benign gynecologic surgeries where a hemostatic agent was used from 2009 to 2019, excluding those who were younger than 18 years, were pregnant, had coagulopathies, had malignancies, or had plasma allergies.
INTERVENTIONS: This study evaluates benign gynecologic surgeries with hemostatic agent use.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Among 3206 surgeries, biologic agents were used most frequently (54.7%), followed by mechanical (41.7%) and combined agents (3.6%). Biologic agents had the lowest infection rate (0.3%) compared with mechanical (1.0%) and combined agents (1.8%; p = .023). Absorbable gelatin sponge use was associated with the highest infection rate overall (7.8% vs 0.5%; p &lt;.001) and in hysterectomy cases (4.3% vs 0.3%; p = .003). Thrombin-fibrinogen agents were associated with lower infection rates overall (0.4% vs 1.1%; p = .018), although this was not significant in the hysterectomy subanalysis (p = .22). After adjusting for patient and surgical factors, laparoscopic, robotic, and hysterectomy procedures were associated with lower infection odds than open and nonhysterectomy approaches. Operative time was independently associated with infection.
CONCLUSION: Careful use of hemostatic agents may lower infection risk. Risk appears higher with mechanical and combined agents than with biologic agents. The absorbable gelatin sponge may carry a higher risk of infection.

### PMID 41654768 (2026) — BMC nephrology
TITLE: Acquired factor V deficiency in an elderly hemodialysis patient: a case report and literature review.
DOI: 10.1186/s12882-026-04782-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Acquired factor V deficiency (AFVD) is a rare hemorrhagic disorder caused by autoantibodies against coagulation factor V. Clinical manifestations vary widely, ranging from asymptomatic cases to severe hemorrhage or even thrombosis, and diagnosis is often challenging due to its rarity and nonspecific presentation. Reported triggers include bovine thrombin, antibiotics, surgery, autoimmune diseases, infections, and malignancy, although up to 20% of cases are idiopathic. We report a case of AFVD in an elderly hemodialysis patient, in whom corticosteroid therapy was effective but ultimately complicated by fatal gastrointestinal bleeding. CASE PRESENTATION: An 87-year-old woman on hemodialysis for diabetic nephropathy was admitted with acute cholecystitis and treated with ceftriaxone. On day 16, she developed bleeding from a gastrostomy site with markedly prolonged prothrombin time (69.3&#xa0;s) and activated partial thromboplastin time (260.4&#xa0;s). Cross-mixing studies showed inhibitor patterns, and factor V activity was reduced to 1.3%, with an inhibitor titer of 33.3 Bethesda units/mL, confirming AFVD. Despite no bleeding from vascular access sites, she developed progressive anemia and gingival bleeding. Intravenous prednisolone (40&#xa0;mg/day) was initiated, resulting in normalization of coagulation parameters and recovery of factor V activity to 111.7% within 30 days. However, on day 57, she developed massive melena. Endoscopy revealed hemorrhagic duodenal ulcers with exposed vessels, requiring endoscopic hemostasis. Recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding occurred on day 61, and she died of hemorrhagic shock. CONCLUSIONS: This case illustrates the diagnostic process and therapeutic challenges of AFVD in a hemodialysis patient. Corticosteroid therapy was effective in eradicating the inhibitor and restoring factor V activity, but fatal gastrointestinal bleeding occurred as a severe treatment-related complication. Clinicians should be aware of AFVD as a rare but important cause of acquired coagulopathy, and careful monitoring for corticosteroid-associated adverse effects is crucial, especially in elderly and critically ill individuals.

### PMID 41768304 (2026) — Journal of the Saudi Heart Association
TITLE: From Compression to Closure: Efficacy and Safety of Vascular Closure Devices (VCD) Versus Manual Compression: A Comparative Analysis of Hemostatic Strategies of Obtura, Angioseal, and ProGlide VCD.
DOI: 10.37616/2212-5043.1477 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Use of vascular closure devices (VCDs) for femoral artery puncture site hemostasis has increased but their safety and efficacy have remained unclear. This study was designed to compare safety and efficacy of Obtura, Angioseal, and Proglide VCD to manual compression (MC) and also between for femoral artery haemostasis.
METHODS: This was prospective, randomized controlled study where patients were randomly assigned on 1:1:1:1 basis. Primary endpoints were time to hemostasis (TTH) and ambulation time (AT) while secondary endpoints were deployment success, device related adverse events and technical success rate. ANOVA and Tukey HSD was conducted to draw significant difference between individual strategies. P &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: Total of 1000 patients (250 in each arm) who underwent transfemoral intervention at LPS Institute of Cardiology, Kanpur, India between January 2025 and March 2025 were evaluated. Sheath size, common femoral artery diameter and device size did not differ significantly across all the groups. Mean TTH was shortest for Angioseal (1.30 min) followed by Obtura (2.58 min), Perclose (3.97 min), and MC (17.61 min). Similarly, mean AT was shortest for Angio-Seal (123.06 min) followed by Perclose ProGlide (162.56 min), Obtura (185.42 min) and MC (743.23 min). Technical success in Angio-Seal, Obtura and Perclose ProGlide were 99.1%, 97.4% and 94.6% respectively. No access site complications (re-bleeding, infection, arteriovenous fistula, and transient access site nerve injury) were noted. There were 2(0.8%), 5(2%), 7(3.2%) and 12 (4.8%) cases of haematoma in Angio-Seal, Obtura, Perclose ProGlide and MC arm respectively. There were 2(0.8%), 2(0.8%), and 4 (1.6%) case of arterial pseudoaneurysm Obtura, Perclose ProGlide and MC arm respectively while none in Angio-Seal arm.
CONCLUSION: Vascular closure devices showed significantly faster haemostasis and shorter ambulation time compared to manual compression highlighting their clinical efficiency and Angio-Seal was superior safety and efficacy over Obtura and Perclose ProGlide.

### PMID 41330796 (2026) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Evaluating Topical Antifibrinolytics in Cardiac Surgery: A Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, and Trial Sequential Analysis.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2025.10.040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, Review, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Lysine analog antifibrinolytics (LAAF) like tranexamic acid (TXA) and aminocaproic acid (EACA) reduce intraoperative blood loss, especially in cardiac surgery where bleeding risks are high. These LAAFs inhibit fibrinolysis and have been proven to decrease bleeding and transfusion volume. In cardiac surgery, frequent transfusions raise the risk of infections, extend hospital stays and reoperations, and carry higher morbidity and mortality. Current guidelines recommend intravenous antifibrinolytics; however, the objective of this review was to determine whether topical administration in cardiac surgery reduces blood loss, with or without intravenous LAAF.
METHODS: PubMed, Embase, MEDLINE, Cochrane CENTRAL, and Clarivate WoS were searched from inception to August 31, 2024, for randomized controlled trials and observational studies comparing topical TXA or EACA to placebo in cardiac surgery. Data extraction was done independently, and RoB2/ROBINS-I was used for quality assessment. A derSimmonian-Laird random-effects model was applied. Mean differences were used for continuous outcomes, and OR/RR was used for binary. I&#xb2; statistics measure heterogeneity. Sensitivity analysis and GOSH plotting assessed heterogeneity; trial sequential analysis was performed. The certainty of the evidence followed GRADE guidelines.
RESULTS: The meta-analysis included 26 studies with 2,624 patients, 24 focused on adults. Given the pragmatic approach to this meta-analysis, a wide variety of surgical procedures were included, with coronary artery bypass grafting and valvular procedures being the most prevalent. LAAF administration reduced postoperative blood loss by 174 mL (MD -173.99, 95% CI -238.20 to -109.78, p &lt; 0.00001), and the effect remained constant through subgroup analysis (coronary artery bypass grafting, high- v low-dose, dual-route administration). No significant differences were found in transfusion rates for packed red blood cells (PRBC) and platelets, though LAAF reduced PRBC volume (MD -0.6 units, 95% CI -0.88 to -0.24, p = 0.00006) and fresh frozen plasma requirements (RR 0.69, 95% CI: 0.5 to 0.95, p = 0.03). No differences in hematological change scores or complication rates were observed. The analysis showed high heterogeneity, but the overall effect remained consistent. A trial sequential analysis suggests there is enough data to confirm this effect.
CONCLUSION: Topical LAAF administration reduces postoperative blood loss up to 24 hours postoperatively. Secondary analyses showed reductions in PRBC transfusion volume and fresh frozen plasma transfusion rate, without increased complications.
REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42024579777, August 27, 2024.

### PMID 40726858 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: A Delayed Sterile Abscess Following a Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (PCI)-Related Myocardial Injury Successfully Treated With an Omental Flap: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.86890 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic agents are commonly used in cardiac surgery to achieve rapid hemostasis in fragile myocardial tissue, particularly following myocardial infarction or mechanical injury during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). While effective in the acute setting, retained hemostatic materials can lead to delayed complications, including sterile abscess formation. We present a case of a 77-year-old man who developed a sterile abscess one year and nine months after emergency surgical hemostasis for myocardial oozing following PCI. The abscess presented as localized swelling and discharge from the lower end of the sternotomy scar. Laboratory tests showed no signs of systemic inflammation, and cultures were negative. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a fluid collection extending from the pericardial space to the subcutaneous tissue. Conservative treatment, including antibiotics and drainage, was ineffective. Surgical removal of the foreign material was performed under cardiopulmonary bypass. Due to dense adhesions and uncertainty regarding complete removal, a pedicled omental flap was transposed through the diaphragm into the pericardial space. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and follow-up imaging confirmed complete resolution of the fluid collection. This case highlights the diagnostic challenge of sterile abscesses related to retained surgical materials and demonstrates the utility of omental transposition when complete removal is not feasible.

### PMID 41185940 (2025) — ACS biomaterials science &amp; engineering
TITLE: Reduced Keratin-Based Bioadhesives for Peri-Implant Soft Tissue Sealing around Transcutaneous Metallic Prostheses.
DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.5c01430 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: When a percutaneous metallic implant breaches the skin barrier, the lack of peri-implant soft tissue sealing arising from a foreign body reaction and epithelial downgrowth results in delayed wound healing and closure. This facilitates microbial pathogen entry, leading to infection, inflammation, and ultimately, peri-implantitis. Toward this end, bioglue formulations of -human hair keratin (HHK) and chicken feather keratin coupled with polyphenols, dopamine (DOPA), quercetin (Q), and tannic acid (TA) were developed for peri-implant soft tissue sealing. A freeze-thaw gelation mediated by thiol recombination of reduced keratins was employed for attachment of soft tissue (porcine intestine) to titanium. Lap shear tests revealed that the adhesion strength of reduced keratins improved with polyphenol addition, with a maximal glue strength exhibited by HHK + TA (10:1 w/w) when applied between the porcine intestine and titanium. Rheological characterization ascertained shear-thinning behavior and injectability of the glues into wet aqueous media and dry surfaces. Despite inferior glue strength to commercial ethyl 2-cyanoacrylate bioglue, the keratin &#xb1; polyphenol glues were more skin compatible, evidenced by greater viability and proliferation of immortalized human skin epidermal keratinocytes (HaCaT) and equine dermal fibroblasts (E. Derm NBL6). Furthermore, the antioxidant activity of keratin &#xb1; polyphenol glue formulations conferred greater anti-inflammatory activity in bacterial lipopolysaccharide stimulated RAW 264.7 murine macrophages. Taken together, the application of keratin &#xb1; polyphenol glues for soft tissue sealing may be a promising approach to mitigate peri-implantitis around transcutaneous metallic prostheses.

### PMID 40998373 (2025) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Cardiac Arrest due to Pseudoaneurysm-induced Compression after Ascending Aortic Replacement for Stanford Type A Acute Aortic Dissection:Report of a Case].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports, English Abstract
ABSTRACT: We present the case of a 27-year-old male who collapsed due to severe stenosis of an artificial vessel caused by a pseudoaneurysm at the central anastomotic site after acute aortic dissection Stanford type A. Although we believe that BioGlue mediated tissue toxicity may be one cause of this pseudoaneurysm, other factors, such as tissue separation due to tissue fragility caused by infection, inflammation, and cutting caused by the surgical procedure, are also thought to have contributed. Emergency re-operation was performed after resuscitation. The patient was eventually discharged home without adverse events on the 34th postoperative day. Careful observation in mid- to long-term and remote post-operative phases is necessary for patients subjected to procedures using BioGlue, and prompt repair of pseudoaneurysms is desirable.

### PMID 40852826 (2025) — Biomacromolecules
TITLE: Chlorella-Loaded Bioglue with Antibacterial, Antioxidant, and Immunomodulatory Properties for Accelerated Wound Healing.
DOI: 10.1021/acs.biomac.5c01147 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Biological glue (bioglue) can noninvasively seal and reattach wound tissue outside the hospital, which has been extensively studied recently. Nevertheless, the commercial bioglue lacks constant oxygen supply, antioxidation, and anti-inflammation, three other key factors for bacteria-infected wound healing in plateau areas. Herein, a multifunctional bioglue (LA-DESP/&#x3b5;-PLL@Chlorella) is simply fabricated by encapsulating Chlorella into a matrix composed of &#x3b1;-lipoic acid (LA), &#x3b1;-lipoic acid sodium (LANa), and &#x3b5;-polylysine (&#x3b5;-PLL). In vitro studies depicted that the LA-DESP/&#x3b5;-PLL@Chlorella bioglue exhibits good adhesion, oxygen delivery, antioxidant, antibacterial, antibiofilm, and anti-inflammatory activities. Furthermore, in vivo experiments show that LA-DESP/&#x3b5;-PLL@Chlorella bioglue could eradicate bacteria, reduce inflammation, and promote the healing of bacteria-infected wound. This multifunctional bioglue represents a promising concept and alternative therapeutic option for accelerating the healing of bacteria-infected wounds.

### PMID 39917778 (2025) — European heart journal. Case reports
TITLE: An aortic root abscess mimic identified by multi-disciplinary imaging review: a case report.
DOI: 10.1093/ehjcr/ytaf004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: While echocardiography and cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) can aid in the diagnosis of prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE), post-operative changes can lead to false-positive imaging findings. We report a case of a patient with an aortic valve prosthesis with remnant BioGlue deposits mimicking a para-valvular abscess on imaging in the setting of suspected PVE.
CASE SUMMARY: A 67-year-old man presented with 2 days of fever, chills, and altered mentation. He had a history of two prior aortic root replacements-19 and 4 years prior to his presentation. He had blood cultures that were persistently positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Initial transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was notable for a thickening of the posterior aortic root thought to be consistent with post-surgical changes. Cardiac PET showed significant uptake around the prosthetic aortic valve, concerning for a para-valvular abscess. However, given the patient's high risk for re-do surgery, clearance of blood cultures, and preserved valve function, our multi-disciplinary endocarditis team (MET) recommended non-surgical management and close follow-up. After 6 weeks of appropriate antibiotics, a TEE demonstrated concern for an evolving para-valvular abscess. The MET performed extensive review of his prior surgical interventions and cardiac imaging, revealing the previous use of surgical BioGlue and stability in the aortic root on imaging, consistent with non-infectious post-surgical changes, and conservative management was recommended.
DISCUSSION: Thorough review of prior interventions and serial imaging in patients with suspected PVE through a multi-disciplinary team approach is essential in elucidating the complete, often complex, clinical picture and recommending the most appropriate management.

### PMID 41569881 (2025) — Journal of neurosurgery. Case lessons
TITLE: "Dural sealant-oma" after posterior fossa surgery: illustrative case.
DOI: 10.3171/CASE25574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Dural sealants, widely used in neurosurgical practice, have been associated with few complications, mostly relating to the expansive nature of the hydrogel. Although generally well tolerated, DuraSeal expands up to 150% after application, and rare reports have described complications from mass effect.
OBSERVATIONS: This report presents the case of a 34-year-old female with a past surgical history of multiple operations for a Chiari type 1 malformation. After a thorough workup, intraoperative images and histological findings revealed a concealed hematoma-like mass at the patient's previous surgical site, likely due to the DuraSeal system. Imaging revealed that the DuraSeal was mostly hyperintense on T2-weighted MRI with focal spots of hypo-/isointensity, similar in appearance to an abscess or hematoma. Histological analysis showed exuberant fibrosis, granulation tissue, and a granulomatous response to the foreign material used for the dural patch and seal rather than the wall of an infectious abscess.
LESSONS: This case adds to the growing body of literature on DuraSeal, highlighting the imaging and histological characteristics of "dural sealant-omas" and their expansile nature that can lead to the formation of a mass mimicking an abscess or a hematoma. In areas susceptible to compression, clinicians ought to be vigilant to identify findings consistent with the appearance of these dural sealant-omas. https://thejns.org/doi/10.3171/CASE25574.

### PMID 40168286 (2025) — PloS one
TITLE: Platelet rich fibrin and commercial sealants for dural closure in neurosurgery: An in vitro study.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0319349 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Watertight closure of the dura mater is essential after neurosurgical interventions to avoid complications such meningitis, intracranial hypotension and surgical site infections. In addition to conventional suturing techniques, various biomaterials have been proposed as sealants to minimize the risk of leakage. We previously reported that patient derived platelet-rich fibrin (PRF), an autologous biomaterial, significantly improves watertight dural closure when applied as an onlay over a standard running suture. To demonstrate the efficacy of this method, we aimed to compare this orthobiological approach with other commercially available sealants.
METHODS: We utilized an in vitro testing device that allowed for the assessment of watertight dura mater closure via hydrostatic testing. On our testing phantom using freshly harvested bovine dura maters, a standardized 20-mm incision was closed using a running suture, and the leak pressure was measured initially without (primary leak pressure) and subsequently with on lay augmentation (secondary leak pressure) using either PRF, fibrinogen- and thrombin-coated collagen patch (TachoSil&#xae;), collagen matrix graft (DuraGen&#xae;), Polyethylenglykol (PEG) and polyethylene glycol ester and trilysine amine hydrogel solution (DuraSeal&#xae;), polyethylene glycol, protein-reactive polyethylene glycol monomer coated collagen matrix (Hemopatch&#xae;) or polyethylenimine component autospray sealant (Adherus&#xae;).
RESULTS: The outcomes demonstrate that the usage of a dural onlay in addition to the standard running suture exhibited a substantial improvement in leak pressure compared to the running suture alone. Specifically, the median leak pressure was improved by 3.5 times, where the combined approach was able to withstand 38&#x2009;cm H2O, whereas the running suture alone had a median leak pressure of 11&#x2009;cm H2O. Upon evaluating the performance of the sealants, we identified two categories of dural sealants: a medium performance group (30&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2&#x2009;cm H2O) comprised of Adherus&#xae; (31&#x2009;cm H2O), DuraGen&#xae; (31&#x2009;cm H2O), and Hemopatch&#xae; (28&#x2009;cm H2O), and a high-performance group composed of DuraSeal&#xae; (45.5&#x2009;cm H2O), and TachoSil&#xae; (41&#x2009;cm H2O). Patient-derived PRF was able to withstand a max pressure of 45&#x2009;cm H2O, falling into the high-performance group. Of all the sealants tested in this study, the PRF based patch demonstrated the lowest variance in leak pressure among all the tested sealants.
CONCLUSIONS: Autologous platelet-rich fibrin in a two-step procedure displayed enhanced augmentation and reinforced watertight closure of the dura mater, exhibiting a four-fold increase in leak pressure compared to standard running suture alone. Among other commonly utilized commercial sealants, it ranked second with demonstrated consistency in its performance.

### PMID 40094962 (2025) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: The Remote Intradural Migration of Polyethylene Glycol-Based Hydrogel Sealant Following Lumbar Laminectomy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm14051472 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background/Objectives: Synthetic polyethylene glycol (PEG)-based hydrogel sealants, such as Adherus, are commonly used in spinal surgeries to achieve watertight dural closure and prevent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks. This case report describes an unusual instance of suspected hydrogel sealant migration resulting in an intradural collection at a spinal level remote from the original surgery. Methods: A 57-year-old female with a history of osteoarthritis and prediabetes underwent a minimally invasive L5-S1 laminectomy for the removal of an epidural abscess causing cauda equina and S1 nerve root compression. During the procedure, a dural puncture occurred, which was repaired using Duragen (collagen matrix) and Adherus (synthetic PEG hydrogel sealant). Postoperatively, the patient developed urinary retention and new bilateral posterior leg pain. An MRI on postoperative day four revealed a new peripherally enhancing dorsal intradural collection at the L2 level, causing significant thecal sac narrowing and compression of the cauda equina nerve roots, suggestive of migration of the hydrogel sealant used during surgery. Conservative management was adopted. Results: The patients symptoms gradually resolved. Follow-up imaging at five months showed resolution of the intradural collection, with residual intradural inflammatory changes and arachnoiditis. Conclusions: While PEG-based hydrogel sealants like Adherus are effective in preventing CSF leaks, they can, in rare instances, migrate and cause remote intradural collections with neurological symptoms. Surgeons should exercise meticulous application techniques, thoroughly document the use of sealants, and maintain vigilant postoperative monitoring to mitigate these risks.

### PMID 40508638 (2025) — Materials (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: The Use of Cyanoacrylate and Glubran in Dentistry: A Review of Clinical Applications and Outcomes.
DOI: 10.3390/ma18112642 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cyanoacrylate-based adhesives have gained increasing attention in dentistry for their rapid polymerization, biocompatibility, and antimicrobial activity. This review analyzes the clinical use of cyanoacrylate adhesives-particularly the Glubran II formulation-in dental procedures, including wound closure, tissue management, and bleeding control. A comprehensive literature search was conducted across PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases for studies published between 2000 and 2024, using specific inclusion criteria (clinical and in vitro studies focusing on dental applications of cyanoacrylates) and exclusion criteria (non-dental uses, insufficient data). The findings indicate that compared to traditional sutures, cyanoacrylates, especially n-butyl and octyl derivatives, significantly reduce operative time, postoperative pain, and infection rates. However, differences among formulations-such as degradation rate and cytotoxicity-require further exploration. Glubran II, in particular, shows promising results in hemostasis and wound stability. This review highlights the potential of cyanoacrylate adhesives as effective, minimally invasive alternatives in dental surgery and underlines the need for standardized protocols and long-term comparative studies.

### PMID 41583841 (2025) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: Efficacy of fibrin sealant for bedside pleurodesis in patients with prolonged air leak after lung cancer surgery: a comparative study.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2025.1722846 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Prolonged air leak (PAL) represents a significant clinical problem after lung resection surgery, frequently causing extended hospital stays. Although several treatments exist, their effectiveness often remains limited. Fibrin sealant has attracted attention as a potential alternative due to its biocompatible properties, but strong evidence from controlled studies supporting its use for bedside pleurodesis remains insufficient. This study was conducted to compare the effectiveness and safety of fibrin sealant vs. 50% glucose solution in managing PAL following pulmonary resection for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of NSCLC patients who developed PAL (lasting &#x2265;5 days) after surgery between January 2021 and May 2025. Patients received either fibrin sealant or 50% glucose solution for bedside pleurodesis. To address potential selection bias, we employed propensity score matching (1:1 ratio) based on key clinical characteristics. Primary outcomes included success rate after initial intervention and time to chest tube removal. Secondary outcomes focused on complication rates.
RESULTS: After matching, 74 pairs were available for analysis. The fibrin sealant group showed significantly better outcomes, with a higher success rate after the first intervention (56.8% vs. 24.3%; OR&#x2009;=&#x2009;4.08, 95% CI: 2.02-8.24, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) and shorter time from intervention to median chest tube duration (6.0 days vs. 9.5 days, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). All patients in the fibrin sealant group achieved resolution within three interventions, while some in the glucose group required up to seven procedures. Complication rates were similar between groups (16 cases each, p&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.05), with no infection-related complications observed in the fibrin sealant group.
CONCLUSION: For patients with PAL after NSCLC resection, bedside pleurodesis using fibrin sealant appears more effective than 50% glucose solution. It offers better initial success rates, significantly reduces air leak duration, and demonstrates a comparable safety profile. These findings support considering fibrin sealant as a primary non-surgical treatment option for this challenging complication.

### PMID 37933541 (2025) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: The Outcome of Sac Filling With Fibrin Sealant and Gentamicin After Endovascular Aortic Repair of Brucella-Related Aorto-Iliac Artery Aneurysms: A Retrospective Single-Center Study.
DOI: 10.1177/15266028231209943 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This study aimed to analyze the experience of our center and assess the efficacy of sac filling with fibrin sealant (FS) and gentamicin after endovascular aortic repair (EVAR) in patients with Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All patients who received sac filling with FS and gentamicin after EVAR for Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysms between March 2019 and September 2022 were reviewed. Before and after sac filling with FS and gentamicin, aneurysm sac thrombosis and endoleak were evaluated using a preloaded catheter to monitor immediate repair outcome. Short- to mid-term outcomes were assessed by the incidence of vascular graft infection (VGI), all-cause mortality, maximum aneurysm diameter, aneurysm sac thrombosis, and other adverse events.
RESULTS: There were 14 patients with Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysms who underwent sac filling with FS and gentamicin after EVAR. Perioperative death due to myocardial infarction in 1 patient resulted in a postoperative all-cause mortality rate of 7.1% (1/14). All patients received anti-Brucella drugs for a median of 6.0 (range: 3-12) months postoperatively. During a median follow-up period of 15.0 (range 0.5-36) months, the absolute and sagittal maximum diameters of the aorto-iliac aneurysm sac were significantly smaller than preoperation (from 46.3 &#xb1; 17.0 to 27.2 &#xb1; 16.3 mm, P&lt;.001, and from 39.2 &#xb1; 13.1 to 24.0 &#xb1; 13.8 mm, P&lt;.001). Two of these patients had a postoperative disappearance of the pseudoaneurysm. One patient was reintervened for bilateral femoral artery bypass surgery. Except for sac filling with gentamicin, all patients received anti-brucella medication for a median of 6.0 (range: 3-12) months. There were no allergic reactions, nephrotoxicity, endoleak, recurrence, VGI, aorta-related or infection-related deaths during the perioperative period and follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Sac filling with FS and gentamicin adjunctive to EVAR, with targeted drug delivery to the sites of Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysm infection lesions, may be an effective solution to control pseudoaneurysm infection and rupture.Clinical ImpactPrevious Brucella-associated aorto-iliac artery aneurysms have been limited to case reports. This study significantly increased the number of Brucella-associated aorto-iliac aneurysms by 19.7% (14/71) and extended the follow-up to 3 years. In this retrospective study of 14 patients with Brucella-associated aorto-iliac aneurysms treated endovascularly with fibrin sealant and gentamicin for sac filling and targeted administration to infection-related aneurysms, there were no aneurysm-related deaths or infection-related complications and may be an effective solution for controlling aneurysm infection and rupture. And, this approach is an attractive treatment for moving away from long-term dependence on antibiotics but still needs further evaluation.

### PMID 41089584 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Postoperative Pelvic Abscess Risk in Gynecologic Surgery: A Four-Year Single Institution Experience.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.94383 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background Hemostatic agents (HAs) are often used in gynecologic surgery to control bleeding when conventional methods such as sutures, clips, and electrocautery are insufficient. Tisseel Fibrin Sealant (FS) and oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) (e.g., Surgicel Powder) are two HAs that are commonly utilized; however, there is limited clinical data regarding their safety profiles, specifically regarding the risk of postoperative complications such as pelvic abscess. This study was initiated following observations of increased readmissions for pelvic abscesses in patients receiving ORC. Objective The primary objective of this retrospective study was to evaluate the association between the intraoperative use of FS versus ORC and the incidence of postoperative pelvic abscess and other associated complications in patients undergoing gynecologic surgery. Methods A retrospective chart review was conducted on women who underwent gynecologic surgery by the author at a single academic institution in Baltimore, Maryland, between 2019 and 2023. Patient and surgical characteristics were extracted, and comparisons were made between those who received FS versus ORC. The association between intraoperative HA use and postoperative pelvic abscess formation was examined. Secondary outcomes included the assessment of other major postoperative complications. Results A total of 607 patients were identified, with 422 receiving ORC and 185 receiving FS; 72 (11.9%) patients experienced postoperative complications. Pelvic abscess occurred in 10.4% (95% CI, 7.5%-13.3%) of ORC-treated patients compared with 0% (95% CI, 0%-1.6%) of FS-treated patients (p &lt; 0.05). The overall complication rate was significantly greater at 15.6% (95% CI, 12.2-19.0%) for ORC versus 3.2% (95% CI 0.7%-5.8%) for FS. Readmission within 30 days of surgery occurred in 12.1% (95% CI, 9.0%-15.2%) of ORC-treated patients compared with 0.5% (95% CI, 0%-1.6%) of FS-treated patients, a significantly higher rate among those receiving ORC. Conclusion The use of ORC for adjunctive hemostasis in gynecologic surgery between 2019 and 2023 was associated with a significantly higher risk of pelvic abscess and other postoperative complications compared to FS. These findings suggest that FS may be a safer alternative for managing bleeding in gynecologic procedures, particularly in patients at higher risk for postoperative infections. Enhanced regimens of antibiotic prophylaxis are clinically significant and should be considered when ORC is used. These findings warrant prospective studies to validate these results and optimize clinical practice.

### PMID 40812612 (2025) — Acta biomaterialia
TITLE: Chlorocatechol-functionalized gelatin nanoparticles as a hemostatic agent with antimicrobial properties.
DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2025.08.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage is one of the leading preventable causes of death associated with trauma, which is often complicated by wound infection. Current hemostatic materials are not ideal and lack antimicrobial properties needed for infection prevention. Here, we tested the feasibility for 6-chlorodopamine-functionalized gelatin (GDC) nanoparticles to function as a hemostatic powder with strong tissue adhesion and antibacterial properties. 6-Chlorodopamine contains a catechol sidechain that is further modified with an electron withdrawing chlorine atom, and provides strong tissue adhesion and antimicrobial property. These gelatin nanoparticles are not covalently crosslinked, which enablde them to rapidly transition into an adhesive film when hydrated with an aqueous solution or blood. The chlorination of catechol significantly increased structural integrity, interfacial bonding to tissue surface, and the rate of film formation. Additionally, GDC nanoparticles are noncytotoxic and nonhemolytic, and effectively killed Gram-positive (Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus aureus) and Gram-negative (Escherichia coli) bacteria. Finally, GDC nanoparticles achieved significantly faster hemostasis and reduced blood loss when compared to a commercial fibrin glue, Tisseel, in tail transection and liver hemorrhage models performed in mice. These findings highlight the potential of GDC nanoparticle as a versatile, multifunctional hemostatic agent capable of both rapid hemorrhage control and infection prevention. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Existing hemostatic agents often lack effective antimicrobial properties and may not be suited for application in a prehospital setting. This work evaluated a multifunctional, hemostatic nanoparticle that addresses key challenges in hemorrhage control and infection prevention, through a simple, bioinspired formulation. Gelatin nanoparticles were functionalized with chlorocatechol (GDC) that can rapidly transition into adhesive films when hydrated with blood. Chlorocatechol imparted the nanoparticles with strong tissue adhesion, film integrity, and antimicrobial property. In mouse hemorrhage models, GDC significantly reduced blood loss and bleeding time when compared to a commercial fibrin sealant. This powder-form material requires no mixing or specialized equipment to deploy, which makes it potentially suitable for application in a prehospital setting.

### PMID 41431582 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Safety and Feasibility of Microporous Polysaccharide Hemosphere Absorbable Hemostat in Robotic Liver Resection: A Single-Center Retrospective Cohort Study.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.97384 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: &#xa0;Numerous absorbable hemostats are often employed in liver surgery; however, the safety and efficacy of microporous polysaccharide hemosphere (MPH) absorbable hemostats in robotic liver resection (RLR) remain&#xa0;uncertain.
METHODS: &#xa0;This study included 141 cases that underwent RLR at Kokura Memorial Hospital between September 2021 and May 2025. The included patients were divided into three groups: those without using any hemostat (non-hemostat (non-HS) group, n=47), those with the use of fibrin sealant patch (FSP) hemostat&#xa0;(TachoSil&#xae;;&#xa0;CSL Behring K.K., Tokyo, Japan) (FSP group, n=23), and those with the use of MPH hemostat (Arista&#x2122; AH Absorbable Hemostat; Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, USA) (MPH group, n=71). The background characteristics and perioperative outcomes were compared between the groups.
RESULTS: &#xa0;There were no differences in any background characteristics. The rate of anatomical hepatectomy in the FSP group was higher than in the MPH or non-HS groups (95.7% vs. 35.2% vs. 36.2%, p&lt;0.001), and surgical blood loss was less in the MPH and non-HS groups than in the FSP group (11 mL vs. 0 mL vs. 34 mL, p&lt;0.001). There were no conversions to open hepatectomy in the MPH group, no serious postoperative complications such as hemorrhage or bile leakage, and no mortality. There were no differences in the time for MPH application between the anterolateral and posterosuperior segment areas (35 sec vs. 36 sec, p=0.396), but a significant difference was observed between FSP and MPH application time in anatomical hepatectomy (382 sec vs. 36 sec, p&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: &#xa0;Application of MPH is easy and effective for hemostasis without increasing the rate of bleeding complications after RLR. In addition, MPH may not raise the risk of bile leakage or intra-abdominal abscess. Thus, the use of MPH for RLR appears to be safe, effective, and time-efficient.

### PMID 41240180 (2025) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Efficacy of a synthetic collagen-based sealant (TachoSil&#xae;) in preventing cerebrospinal fluid leak following planned and incidental durotomies in spine surgery: a retrospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-025-03917-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a significant complication following planned or incidental durotomies during spinal surgery. While primary suturing remains the gold standard for dural closure, it is common to necessitate adjunctive reinforcement techniques. This study aims to evaluate the efficacy of a synthetic collagen-based sealant patch (TachoSil&#xae;) in preventing CSF leaks in a large cohort of patients undergoing spinal surgery.&#xa0;A retrospective analysis was conducted in whom TachoSil&#xae; was used as a dural sealant, either following planned (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12) or incidental (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;42) durotomies, or prophylactically (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;31) after decompression for critical lumbar canal stenosis. The primary endpoint was the prevention and resolution rate of CSF leaks. Secondary endpoints included reoperation rates and postoperative complications. A total of 85 patients (6.8%) met the inclusion criteria (mean age, 64.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;15.4 years). TachoSil&#xae; was used as monotherapy in 39 patients and in combination with primary suturing or other sealants in 46 patients. Overall, 66 patients (77.6%) did not require surgical reintervention. TachoSil&#xae; monotherapy was associated with a significantly higher success rate (89.7%) compared to combined techniques (68.2% for TachoSil&#xae; plus suturing and 60.0% for TachoSil&#xae; plus other sealants; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.041). Excluding its prophylactic use (either planned or incidental durotomy, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;54), its efficacy in avoiding reintervention was 86.7% for TachoSil&#xae; alone, 77.3% for TachoSil&#xae; plus suture, and 64.7% for TachoSil&#xae; plus other combinations of sealants (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.67). Postoperative complications occurred in 22 patients (25.9%), primarily including persistent CSF fistula, pseudomeningocele formation, and surgical site infections.&#xa0;TachoSil&#xae; demonstrated high efficacy as a standalone dural reinforcement method and when combined with suture or other sealant techniques in preventing CSF leaks following spinal surgeries involving dural compromise.

### PMID 40805457 (2025) — Materials (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: In Vivo Biocompatibility Assessment of a Novel Cyanoacrylate-Polylactic Acid Hemostatic Patch.
DOI: 10.3390/ma18153581 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: Although cyanoacrylate-polylactic acid (CA + PLA) patches shorten the time to hemostasis after partial hepatectomy, their long-term biocompatibility remains uncertain. We compared the 5-month histopathological footprint of a novel CA + PLA patch (Study group) with a licensed fibrinogen/thrombin matrix (TachoSil&#xae; group) and electrocautery (Control group). Methods: Thirty-three male Wistar rats underwent a 3 &#xd7; 1.5 cm hepatic segment resection and were randomized to the Control (n = 5), Study (n = 14), or TachoSil&#xae; (n = 14) group. The animals were sacrificed on postoperative day (POD) 50, 100, or 150. Blinded semiquantitative scoring (0-3) was used to capture inflammation intensity, and the number of neutrophils (PMNs), lymphocytes (Ly's), isolated histiocytes, and foreign-body giant cells (FBGCs). Results: The proportions of animals in each group across the different sacrifice time points were homogeneous (&#x3c7;2 = 4.34, p = 0.36). The median inflammation remained mild (2 [IQR 1-2]) in the Control and Study groups but lower in the TachoSil&#xae; group (1 [1-2], p = 0.47). The FBGC scores differed markedly (score &#x2265; 2: 64% in Study, 0% in Control, 14% in TachoSil&#xae;; p &lt; 0.001). Fibrosis occurred almost exclusively in the Study group (79% vs. 0%; &#x3c7;2 = 22.4, p &lt; 0.001). Mature vessels were most frequently observed in the TachoSil&#xae; group (50%, aOR = 5.1 vs. Study, p = 0.04). Abscesses only developed in the Study group (29%, p = 0.046). Within the TachoSil&#xae; group, inflammation (&#x3c1; = -0.62, p = 0.019) and Ly infiltration (&#x3c1; = -0.76, p = 0.002) declined with time; no significant temporal trends emerged in the Study group. Conclusions: At the five-month follow-up, there was an exuberant foreign-body reaction, dense collagen deposition, and a higher abscess rate around the CA + PLA patch compared with both TachoSil&#xae; and cautery. Conversely, TachoSil&#xae; evolved toward a mature, well-vascularized scar with waning inflammation. These findings underscore the importance of chronic-phase evaluation before clinical adoption of new hemostatic biomaterials.

### PMID 40800171 (2025) — Translational pediatrics
TITLE: Delayed diagnosis of isolated congenital H-type tracheoesophageal fistula: a case report of surgical repair supported by TachoSil&#xae; as an adjunct in chronically inflamed tissues.
DOI: 10.21037/tp-2025-72 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: H-type tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEFs) are rare congenital malformations characterized by an abnormal connection between the trachea and esophagus in the absence of esophageal atresia. These lesions may remain undiagnosed for years due to subtle and non-specific symptoms, often resulting in chronic pulmonary complications. Delayed diagnosis can contribute to the development of long-standing inflammation and fibrosis, which significantly complicates surgical intervention.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We present the case of a 14-year-old girl with a previously undiagnosed H-type TEF who was treated for recurrent lower respiratory tract infections since early childhood. Her condition acutely worsened with severe respiratory distress requiring hospitalization. Comprehensive imaging, including contrast-enhanced esophagography and chest computed tomography (CT), identified the presence of a congenital H-type TEF with associated chronic peritracheal and paraesophageal inflammatory changes. Surgical repair was performed via a cervical approach. Intraoperatively, significant fibrotic tissue surrounding the fistulous tract posed challenges to dissection and closure. To reinforce the primary suture line and reduce the risk of postoperative complications, a fibrinogen-thrombin-coated hemostatic patch (TachoSil&#xae;) was applied. The patient recovered uneventfully and demonstrated no evidence of recurrence or airway compromise at 12-month follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: This case highlights the importance of heightened clinical suspicion in children with persistent respiratory symptoms. In delayed TEF diagnoses, chronic inflammation should be anticipated. Adjunctive use of hemostatic sealants may enhance surgical safety and improve outcomes in complex cases.

### PMID 40283128 (2025) — Life (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Dura Closure Tactics to Prevent CSF Leakage in Microvascular Decompression Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/life15040574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (1) Background: Achieving a complete and secure dural closure to prevent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a critical concern in microvascular decompression (MVD). Proper dural closure minimizes complications, such as infections caused by CSF leakage. This study introduces a novel three-step dural suturing method, termed the "triple-layer closing technique". (2) Methods: From September 2020 to March 2023, a total of 475 patients underwent MVD surgery at our institution, all of whom received dural closure using the triple-layer closing technique. This technique incorporates three layers: Duragen&#xae; (synthetic dura, Integra Lifesciences), TachoSil&#xae; (collagen matrix, Nycomed), and polymethyl methacrylate (PMMC) bone cement. Postoperative complications, including CSF leakage and infections, were retrospectively analyzed. (3) Results: CSF leakage was observed in five patients (1.1%), all of whom presented with CSF rhinorrhea and radiological evidence of effusion within the mastoid air cells. These patients were successfully treated with lumbar drainage, and none required reoperation. No other postoperative infections or complications were reported. (4) Conclusions: The triple-layer closing technique, utilizing Duragen&#xae;, TachoSil&#xae;, and PMMC bone cement, is an effective and reliable method for dural closure. This technique significantly reduces the risk of CSF leakage and surgical site infections, enhancing postoperative outcomes in MVD procedures.

### PMID 40009909 (2025) — European journal of surgical oncology : the journal of the European Society of Surgical Oncology and the British Association of Surgical Oncology
TITLE: Periventricular gliomas: Evaluation of the risks associated with ventricular opening in two cohorts-one prospective with TachoSil&#xae; for ventricular sealing and the other without it retrospective.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejso.2025.109670 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Historically, ventricular opening (VO) has been associated with a greater risk of postoperative complications and a risk of leptomeningeal spread (LMS) in periventricular gliomas especially high grade gliomas. There are no specific products on the market for ventricular sealing with registered studies. TachoSil&#xae; is widely used for supportive sealing of the dura mater. We wanted to assess the effectiveness and safety of TachoSil&#xae; as a ventricular sealant for periventricular gliomas surgery with VO.
METHODS: A single-center, analytical, and observational study was conducted. Two cohorts of patients with gliomas and VO were compared. A prospective cohort treated with TachoSil&#xae; (2020-2024) and a retrospective control cohort without TachoSil&#xae; (2017-2023). We recorded epidemiological, clinical, radiological, and surgical variables and the percentage of complications attributable to the VO: CSF leak, pseudomeningocele, infection, hydrocephalus, or leptomeningeal spread (LMS).
RESULTS: We included 68 patients: the prospective cohort treated with TachoSil&#xae; consisted of 37 patients and the control group of 31. The demographic, clinical, and radiologic characteristics of two cohorts were statistically homogeneous. Ventricular sealing with TachoSil&#xae; had wider resections (1.54cm3&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;SD 1.92 residual tumor volume vs. 3.71 cm3&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;SD 5.64, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.032) and fewer postoperative complications related to VO (2 vs. 9 patients, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.008).
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that the use of TachoSil&#xae; for sealing glioma patients with VO is safe and effective, reducing complications related to VO, increase the degree of resection and reduces readmissions and reinterventions resulting from complications arising from VO. A randomized clinical trial should be conducted.

### PMID 39891941 (2025) — Neurosurgical focus
TITLE: The use of dural sealant patches for reinforcement of durotomy repair: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.3171/2024.12.FOCUS24705 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Dural sealant patches (DSPs) are a useful adjunct when closing the dura during cranial or spinal surgery to avoid cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage or infection. Authors of this paper systematically review the outcomes and incidence of CSF leakage and infection with the use of a DSP versus conventional practice.
METHODS: The MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Scopus databases were searched, and clinical trials and prospective or retrospective case-control and cohort studies with a low-risk of bias and involving any solid DSP used in adults for cranial or spinal cases were included. Studies that used a DSP in combination with another method of dural sealant closure, used a DSP as a dural substitute rather than an adjunctive closure device, or used hydrogel or polymer gel (i.e., nonsolid) dural sealant "patches" were excluded. A meta-analysis of comparative studies reporting outcomes relating to CSF leakage was performed together with a subgroup analysis for each DSP type. For comparative studies reporting outcomes relating to infection, a separate meta-analysis was conducted.
RESULTS: Across the 7 noncomparative studies included, 669 patients received TachoComb (n = 421, 1 study), TachoSil (n = 8, 1 study), Liqoseal (n = 40, 1 study), TissuePatchDural (n = 144, 2 studies), or Hemopatch (n = 56, 2 studies). Across the 6 comparative studies included, 1013 patients received TachoSil (n = 784, 3 studies), TissuePatchDural (n = 147, 2 studies), or Hemopatch (n = 82, 1 study). When considering the rates of CSF leakage or infection, 2/6 comparative studies found DSPs to be significantly more effective than current practice, while the remaining 4/6 demonstrated noninferiority compared to current practice. All studies considered the DSPs to be safe. A meta-analysis revealed significant improvements in the incidence of CSF leakage with the use of a DSP overall, but the improvements in CSF leak rates for the TachoSil and TissuePatchDural subgroups did not reach statistical significance. The single study evaluating Hemopatch did find statistically significant improvements in CSF leak rates. There were no significant differences in infection between the DSP groups.
CONCLUSIONS: There was a significant improvement in the incidence of CSF leaks with the use of DSPs. Comparisons among DSP types and evaluations of outcomes relating to infection should be the focus of further research in this area.

### PMID 39891939 (2025) — Neurosurgical focus
TITLE: Fibrin-coated collagen fleece "sandwich" closure technique for cranial and spinal dural reconstruction and closure.
DOI: 10.3171/2024.11.FOCUS24721 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Persistent CSF leakage and symptomatic pseudomeningocele formation are a primary concern following intradural posterior fossa and spinal surgeries, with rates approaching 23.7% and 10%, respectively. These complications occur at a higher rate in cases in which a watertight primary closure cannot be attained. In such cases, various dural substitutes and sealants are at the surgeon's disposal and often require suturing a dural substitute to the existing dura. Herein, the authors describe a novel sutureless inlay-onlay fibrin-coated collagen fleece (TachoSil) "sandwich" closure technique for dural reconstruction and closure.
METHODS: The authors retrospectively reviewed posterior fossa and intradural spinal cases performed by the senior author from January 1, 2021, to August 30, 2024, which used the described novel closure technique when primary closure without expansion could not be attained. Primary outcomes were rates of postoperative CSF leakage, symptomatic pseudomeningocele formation, CSF diversion, infection, and revision surgery.
RESULTS: A total of 13 patients (8 craniotomies, 2 craniectomies, and 3 spinal cases) were identified with a mean age of 61.3 &#xb1; 14.0 years. Surgical indications included intra-axial and extra-axial tumors, acute cerebellar infarcts, an unruptured aneurysm, and a ruptured arteriovenous malformation. One patient (7.7%) who underwent emergency craniectomy for acute cerebellar infarct developed a postoperative CSF leak and symptomatic pseudomeningocele with suspicion of pseudotumor cerebri, ultimately requiring CSF diversion. There were no complications among patients receiving craniotomy or intradural spinal surgery. No postoperative infections or revision surgeries occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: The TachoSil sandwich technique represents an effective means of cranial and spinal dural reconstruction and closure in cases in which watertight primary dural closure cannot be achieved.

### PMID 39891934 (2025) — Neurosurgical focus
TITLE: Dural and cranial reconstruction techniques in retrosigmoid craniotomy: key factors associated with CSF leaks in 225 patients.
DOI: 10.3171/2024.11.FOCUS24681 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study evaluated the effectiveness of various dural closure and bone reconstruction techniques in preventing CSF leakage following retrosigmoid craniotomy for cerebellopontine angle (CPA) tumors. The goal was to identify whether newer combinations of reconstructive materials offer any advantage in reducing CSF leaks and improving surgical outcomes.
METHODS: The authors conducted a retrospective review of 225 patients who underwent a retrosigmoid craniotomy for CPA neoplasms between January 2018 and August 2024. Patient demographics, intraoperative reports, and postoperative complications were analyzed. Various reconstructive methods, including the use of TachoSil, HydroSet, autologous or heterologous dural patches, and bone flap repositioning, were compared. CSF-related complications such as CSF leakage, infections, and postoperative hydrocephalus were systematically evaluated.
RESULTS: CSF leakage occurred in 31% of cases (n = 69), while CSF infections and postoperative hydrocephalus were noted in 6% and 7% of patients, respectively. HydroSet combined with bone flap repositioning significantly reduced CSF leakage (p = 0.008), as did the combination of HydroSet and heterologous dural patches (p = 0.007). TachoSil did not show a significant reduction in CSF leakage. Craniectomy with titanium mesh or heterologous cranioplasty was not associated with any CSF leaks. No other single or combined techniques showed significant associations with CSF leakage.
CONCLUSIONS: HydroSet in combination with bone reconstruction and heterologous patches demonstrated superior outcomes in reducing CSF leaks. TachoSil did not significantly affect leakage rates, with less definite results. Refining surgical techniques and selecting appropriate materials for dural and bone reconstruction may help reduce complications and improve patient outcomes in CPA tumor surgeries using the retrosigmoid approach.

### PMID 39842025 (2025) — Journal of lower genital tract disease
TITLE: Hemostatic Efficacy of TachoSil in Loop Electrosurgical Excisional Procedure: A Prospective Randomized Controlled Study.
DOI: 10.1097/LGT.0000000000000867 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate the hemostatic efficacy of the fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil) after loop electrosurgical excision (LEEP) and its influence on other complications and quality of life (QoL).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This single-blind, prospective, randomized study involved patients undergoing LEEP with or without TachoSil (1:1) between August 2014 and August 2015 in Asan Medical Center, Korea. Primary outcome measures were bleeding duration and the frequency of additional treatment owing to vaginal bleeding within 2 weeks after LEEP. Secondary outcome measures were vaginal bleeding volume using pictorial blood loss assessment chart (PBAC) score, the amount of vaginal discharge, the frequency of external genitalia, vaginal, and cervical infections within 2 weeks after LEEP, and changes in QoL.
RESULTS: Of the 140 patients enrolled, 126 (90.0%) were successfully followed up and analyzed. The median vaginal bleeding duration and frequency of additional treatment owing to vaginal bleeding showed no significant difference in the TachoSil applied and nonapplied groups ( p = .96 and p = .61, respectively). In addition, no significant difference was also observed in vaginal bleeding volume between 2 groups ( p = .64). In subgroup analysis for patients who underwent large LEEP (the longest dimension of &#x2265;2 cm), significant improvement was observed at physical functioning in QoL at 2-3 ( p = .03) and 6 weeks ( p = .03) after LEEP of the TachoSil applied group, compared to the nonapplied group.
CONCLUSIONS: TachoSil did not demonstrate significant hemostatic efficacy after LEEP. However, TachoSil improved patient recognition on physical function in patients who underwent large LEEP.

### PMID 39377995 (2025) — International urology and nephrology
TITLE: Collagen fleece grafting for surgical treatment of patients with mild to severe peyronie's curvatures.
DOI: 10.1007/s11255-024-04222-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Collagen fleece grafting (CFG) is the recommended treatment for severe Peyronie's disease (PD) curvature (&gt;&#x2009;60&#xb0;), but its efficacy in mild/moderate curvatures remains uncertain. This study evaluated CFG in patients with mild/moderate curvatures (&lt;&#x2009;60&#xb0;) at risk of penile shortening or symptomatic plaque.
METHODS: A retrospective review was conducted on patients who underwent surgical treatment for PD using plaque incision or partial plaque excision and CFG. Clinical parameters and complications were reviewed. Subgroup analysis was performed on patients with curvatures of&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;60&#xb0; and curvatures&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;60&#xb0;.
RESULTS: 89 patients with a median age of 59&#xa0;years and a median curvature of 70 (20-90)&#xb0; were identified. Dorsal curvature was predominant in 66% of cases, followed by lateral (16%), ventral (8%), and complex curvatures (10%). Partial plaque excision was performed in 98% of patients, with an average grafting area of 2.1&#xa0;cm2; 71% had a singular penile plaque, while 29% presented two or more plaques. The comparison between patients with curvatures&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;60&#xb0; and&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;60&#xb0; revealed no significant differences in mean operation time (86.3 vs. 94.4&#xa0;min, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.13) or in the incidence of postoperative complications, including glans necrosis, hypoesthesia, ecchymosis, bleeding, hematoma, infection, residual curvature, revision surgery, or pain.
CONCLUSIONS: Early postoperative outcomes and complication rates following plaque incision or partial plaque excision and grafting with CFG were comparable in patients with mild/moderate and severe PD deformities. The technique may be a viable option with a similar risk profile for achieving penile straightening in selected PD cases, particularly when plication is not feasible.

### PMID 40142307 (2025) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: Total Thyroidectomy with Harmonic Scalpel Combined with Gelatin Thrombin Hemostatic: A Focus on the Elderly Population-A Multicentric Study.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina61030496 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: With the increasing life expectancy, the frequency of total thyroidectomies in elderly patients has risen, raising concerns regarding hemorrhage and recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy compared to the general population. Therefore, considering the frequent alteration of the coagulation status in such patients, innovative methods able to reach an accurate hemostasis appear highly desirable. This retrospective multicentric study aimed to compare the postoperative outcomes of patients treated with conventional hemostasis with patients treated with the Harmonic Scalpel (HS) and gelatin-thrombin matrix (Floseal). Materials and Methods: Patients undergoing total thyroidectomy were retrospectively enrolled and categorized into two groups: Group A patients underwent surgery with the Harmonic Scalpel and Floseal, while Group B underwent traditional hemostasis surgery with ligations and monopolar electrocautery. The primary endpoint was the drain output after 24 and 48 h and the presence of significant blood loss. Secondary endpoints included the presence of seroma, wound infection, hematoma, laryngeal nerve palsy, surgery duration, and onset of post-surgical hypocalcemia. Results: From January 2014 to January 2024, 870 individuals participated in the study. Group A (gelatin-thrombin and HS) comprised 502 patients, while Group B (Standard Hemostasis-control group) comprised 368 patients. The 24 h drain output was 52 &#xb1; 25 mL in Group A vs. 113 &#xb1; 27 mL in Group B, p = 0.003, while the 48 h drain output was 95 &#xb1; 29 mL in Group A and 113 &#xb1; 27 mL in Group B (p = 0.002). Significant blood loss occurred in eight patients (2.2%) of Group B vs. three cases (0.6%) in Group A (p = 0.039). Also, neck hematoma (p = 0.012), seroma (p = 0.005), and reoperation (p = 0.052) values were significantly lower in Group A. Conclusions: Surgery aided with HS, and gelatin-thrombin was associated with lower major and minor complications compared to the conventional approach, guarantying reduced operative time, ensuring hemostasis, and preserving parathyroid glands, even in elderly patients.

### PMID 41322758 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Real-World Case Series on Surgi-ORC&#xae; in ENT Surgery.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.95539 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Effective hemostasis is essential in ENT surgical operations to reduce blood loss and improve postoperative recovery. This case series assesses the hemostatic efficacy and safety of Surgi-ORC&#xae; Knit, an absorbable oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) hemostat, in four patients undergoing four different ENT operations. This case series included four patients who underwent parotidectomy, thyroidectomy, neck mass excision, and submandibular excision. To control bleeding, a Surgi-ORC&#xae; Knit was applied to the bleeding site. The study's primary objective was to monitor time to hemostasis for bleeding control in ENT surgery. The secondary aim of safety monitoring was to conduct a 60-day follow-up to confirm complete absorption and assess for adverse events. Along with this, the handling characteristics of the product were also assessed. Surgi-ORC&#xae; attained hemostasis within the range of 0.93 to 2.1 minutes. No adverse events were reported, and all patients had stable recoveries. The surgeons found that the product was easy to apply and had good tissue adherence. Surgi-ORC&#xae; was entirely absorbed within 28 days, which was confirmed by radiological imaging. On follow-up day 60, there were no signs of infections, adhesions, granuloma formation, or foreign body reactions. Surgi-ORC&#xae; Knit is a viable treatment option for managing bleeding in ENT surgeries. Surgeons found its user-friendly application, stability, and easy delivery in intricate surgery locations to be noteworthy advantages. Its safety is bolstered by complete absorption and no further complications.

### PMID 41288216 (2025) — Khirurgiia
TITLE: [Intraopertive use of local hemostatics in infected wounds].
DOI: 10.17116/hirurgia202511194 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Local hemostatics is well-established device to tackle a problem of surgical bleeding, but their properties in infected wounds are still the point of discussion. We present the results of the use of collagen sponge (22 cases) and Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose (10 cases) in surgical closure of infected wounds during routine surgical practice. Local hemostatics have been used only in cases of inconsistency of surgical methods of bleeding control.
RESULTS: Both used hemostatics allowed to achieve a robust control of surgical bleeding. We did not notice an influence of local hemostatics on the frequency and nature of post-surgery wound complications.
&#x41e;&#x411;&#x41e;&#x421;&#x41d;&#x41e;&#x412;&#x410;&#x41d;&#x418;&#x415;: &#x41f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x43b;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x440;&#x430;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x434;&#x43b;&#x44f; &#x438;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44f; &#x434;&#x438;&#x444;&#x444;&#x443;&#x437;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x43a;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439; &#x438;&#x437; &#x43c;&#x44f;&#x433;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x442;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x439; &#x438; &#x43f;&#x430;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x445;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x430;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x43e;&#x440;&#x433;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e; &#x437;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x44f;&#x43b;&#x43e; &#x441;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x435; &#x43c;&#x435;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e; &#x432; &#x430;&#x440;&#x441;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x435; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x440;&#x430;&#x437;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x441;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x446;&#x438;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x435;&#x439;. &#x412;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x441;&#x442;&#x435; &#x441; &#x442;&#x435;&#x43c; &#x432;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x441; &#x43e; &#x432;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438; &#x438;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x440;&#x430;&#x437;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x432; &#x443;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x438;&#x44f;&#x445; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x438;&#x43d;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x435;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x434;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x434;&#x438;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x443;&#x441;&#x441;&#x438;&#x438;.
&#x426;&#x415;&#x41b;&#x42c; &#x418;&#x421;&#x421;&#x41b;&#x415;&#x414;&#x41e;&#x412;&#x410;&#x41d;&#x418;&#x42f;: &#x41e;&#x446;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43a;&#x430; &#x44d;&#x444;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438; &#x438; &#x431;&#x435;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438; &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x440;&#x430;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x43d;&#x430; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x435; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x433;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x430; &#x438; &#x43e;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x432;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x446;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x43b;&#x44e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x44b; &#x434;&#x43b;&#x44f; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44f; &#x437;&#x430; &#x438;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x43c; &#x43a;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43c; &#x438;&#x437; &#x43c;&#x44f;&#x433;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x442;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x439; &#x438; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x433;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x430; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x437;&#x430;&#x43a;&#x440;&#x44b;&#x442;&#x438;&#x438; &#x438;&#x43d;&#x444;&#x438;&#x446;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;.
&#x41c;&#x410;&#x422;&#x415;&#x420;&#x418;&#x410;&#x41b; &#x418; &#x41c;&#x415;&#x422;&#x41e;&#x414;&#x42b;: &#x418;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x44b; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x440;&#x430;&#x442;&#x44b; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x433;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x430; (n=22) &#x438; &#x43e;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x432;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x446;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x43b;&#x44e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x44b; (n=10) &#x432; &#x441;&#x43b;&#x443;&#x447;&#x430;&#x44f;&#x445; &#x43d;&#x435;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43a;&#x438; &#x438;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x438; &#x43c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x434;&#x430;&#x43c;&#x438;. &#x418;&#x441;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x434;&#x438;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x44c; &#x432; &#x440;&#x430;&#x43c;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x445; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x441;&#x435;&#x434;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x438;.
&#x420;&#x415;&#x417;&#x423;&#x41b;&#x42c;&#x422;&#x410;&#x422;&#x42b;: &#x412;&#x43e; &#x432;&#x441;&#x435;&#x445; &#x441;&#x43b;&#x443;&#x447;&#x430;&#x44f;&#x445; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x43b;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x43b;&#x43e; &#x434;&#x43e;&#x431;&#x438;&#x442;&#x44c;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x443;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x439;&#x447;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;. &#x41d;&#x430;&#x43c;&#x438; &#x43d;&#x435; &#x43e;&#x442;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43e; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x44b;&#x448;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x447;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x44b; &#x440;&#x430;&#x437;&#x432;&#x438;&#x442;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x432;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438; &#x438;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x438; &#x43b;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x440;&#x430;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432;.

### PMID 41246695 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Biomaterial-Based Hemostasis: A Review of the Clinical and Functional Versatility of Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.94602 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose (ORC) is a widely used polysaccharide-based hemostatic agent known for its biocompatibility, absorbability, antibacterial properties, and ease of application. It has been employed across a broad range of surgical specialties as an adjunctive tool for controlling mild to moderate bleeding, reducing postoperative adhesions, and minimizing infection risks. This scoping review aimed to evaluate the clinical efficacy, safety, functional versatility, and future potential of ORC across diverse surgical applications, with a focus on its comparative performance against other topical hemostatic agents. A systematic search of PubMed Central and clinicaltrials.gov database was conducted, including filters for only clinical trials, controlled trials, and randomized controlled trials involving human subjects. A total of 31 studies (28 from PubMed Central and three from clinicaltrials.gov) met the inclusion criteria, encompassing various surgical disciplines. Data were extracted on clinical indication, comparator agents, outcomes, and adverse events. ORC demonstrated consistent efficacy in controlling intraoperative bleeding, particularly in orthopedic, general, and gynecologic surgeries. It reduced total blood loss and postoperative drainage in specific contexts, though its hemostatic effect was less pronounced than fibrin-based sealants in high-pressure bleeding scenarios. It also contributed to adhesion prevention, particularly in pelvic and abdominal surgeries, and showed antibacterial activity against multidrug-resistant organisms. Adverse events were rare and typically unrelated to the material itself. In conclusion, ORC is a versatile, cost-effective hemostatic agent valued for its ease of use, rapid absorption, and intrinsic bactericidal properties. While newer, specialized agents may excel in specific high-risk scenarios, it remains a clinically indispensable option due to its balanced efficacy and safety profile, particularly in resource-limited settings. Further high-quality studies are warranted to solidify its evidence base across diverse surgical applications.

### PMID 41155849 (2025) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: Evaluation of the Performance of StypCelTM Absorbable Hemostat for Intraoperative Hemorrhage Control in Neurosurgery: A Multicenter, Single-Arm Study in Riga, Latvia.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina61101862 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000068397">Clinical Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: Intraoperative bleeding during neurosurgical procedures poses a significant risk by increasing morbidity and mortality, obscuring the surgical field and prolonging operative time and hospitalization. Effective hemostasis is therefore essential, frequently necessitating the use of topical hemostatic agents. This study aimed to evaluate the performance of a plant-derived oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) hemostatic agent StypCel&#x2122; Absorbable Hemostat (Medprin Regenerative Medical Technologies Co., Ltd.) in various neurosurgical interventions, including intracranial tumor resections, spinal surgeries, trigeminal neuralgia operations, cerebrospinal fluid fistula repair and ventriculoperitoneal shunt implantation. The study aimed to assess its performance in these procedures due to the high risk of intraoperative bleeding and the challenges of achieving hemostasis in delicate neural structures. Materials and Methods: This prospective, single-arm clinical study included 46 patients who underwent neurosurgical procedures at three neurosurgerical clinics in Riga, Latvia. The primary endpoint was the rate of effective bleeding control achieved within 5 min of StypCel&#x2122; application. Safety assessments included monitoring for central nervous system infections (CNSI), intracranial granuloma formation, new-onset neurological deficits, seizures, anaphylactic reactions or device malfunction. All adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs) were documented during the postoperative follow-up. Results: The cohort consisted of 46 patients (29 females and 17 males), including 20 with neoplastic intracranial lesions and 26 with other neurosurgical pathologies. Effective bleeding control within 5 min was achieved in 93.5% of cases (95% CI: 82.1-98.6%). In three patients, bleeding control exceeded 5 min due to unexpected arterial hemorrhage encountered during intracranial tumor resection. No device-related AEs, SAEs, CNSIs or granuloma formations were reported throughout the follow-up period. Conclusions: The findings demonstrate that StypCel&#x2122; Absorbable Hemostat is a safe and effective adjunct for achieving intraoperative hemostasis in neurosurgical procedures. Its favorable safety profile and high hemostatic success rate support its clinical utility, particularly for controlling low-pressure venous or capillary bleeding. Further comparative and long-term studies are warranted to validate these results in broader surgical settings.

### PMID 40955238 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Hemostatic Cellulose Masquerading as a Postoperative Abscess Following Elective Colon Surgery: A Unique Case and Literature Review.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.90151 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgical site infections (SSIs) and intra-abdominal abscesses (IAAs) are common and costly complications following elective colon surgery, requiring prompt diagnosis and treatment. Hemostatic cellulose, a widely used intraoperative hemostatic agent, can mimic pathological lesions such as abscesses on imaging, leading to potential misdiagnoses. We present the case of a 68-year-old man who underwent elective colostomy reversal complicated by a postoperative computed tomography (CT) scan suggestive of an IAA. Upon review of the operative note and repeat imaging, the suspected abscess was determined to be a hemostatic cellulose. This case highlights the importance of meticulous intraoperative documentation and interdepartmental communication to prevent unnecessary interventions and improve patient outcomes. Additionally, it underscores the need for awareness among clinicians regarding this masquerading ability of hemostatic cellulose to avoid misinterpretation and its potential impact on both patients and hospital quality metrics.

### PMID 40809635 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Bilateral Systemic Artery-to-Pulmonary Vessel Fistulas Following Video-Assisted Thoracoscopic Surgery for Primary Spontaneous Pneumothorax: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.87862 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Systemic artery-to-pulmonary vessel fistula (SAPVF) is a rare vascular anomaly, with acquired forms typically arising secondary to intrathoracic inflammation, infection, trauma, or thoracic surgery. We report a case of a 21-year-old man with a history of bilateral video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) bullectomy for primary spontaneous pneumothorax who developed bilateral SAPVF. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed abnormally dilated pulmonary vessels with systemic arterial communications in both lungs, corresponding to previous surgical incision sites. On the left side, SAPVF developed despite the surgical wound separated from the lung by oxidized regenerated cellulose sheets. Due to multiple systemic feeding arteries, embolization was considered ineffective, and surgery was avoided owing to the high risk of postoperative reformation. The patient has been managed conservatively, with no progression observed over a two-year follow-up period. This case highlights that SAPVF can occur even after minimally invasive surgery such as VATS, emphasizing the need for careful follow-up and further evaluation of optimal preventive strategies.

### PMID 40800638 (2025) — Journal of surgical case reports
TITLE: Surgicel&#xae; mimicking a retained appendix on CT: a case report and literature review of diagnostic pitfalls in retained Surgicel&#xae; cases.
DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjaf388 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cross-sectional imaging, particularly computed tomography, is vital in post-operative care but can pose diagnostic challenges. Absorbable hemostatic agents like Surgicel&#xae; may mimic abscesses or hematomas, leading to misinterpretation. This review explores these pitfalls and presents a relevant case. 10 studies, including case reports, series, and observational studies, were reviewed to identify imaging characteristics and misdiagnoses of retained Surgicel&#xae; across cardiac, neurosurgical, abdominal, and gynecological surgeries. Surgicel&#xae; often appears as low-attenuation or gas-containing masses, mimicking complications like abscesses. Misdiagnoses frequently led to unnecessary imaging, treatments, or reoperations. Contributing factors included limited awareness of Surgicel&#xae;'s imaging appearance and potential for contrast enhancement. Misinterpretation of Surgicel&#xae; can increase interventions and healthcare costs. Clear communication between surgeons and radiologists about its use and location, along with radiologist awareness and clinical correlation, is key to avoiding misdiagnosis and improving patient care.

### PMID 40574938 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Preoperative Transcatheter Arterial Embolization and Modified Hepatorrhaphy for Severe Liver Trauma: An Emerging Damage-Control Strategy.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.86812 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The efficacy of hepatorrhaphy in managing severe hepatic trauma remains uncertain. Although perihepatic packing (PHP) is widely employed, it is associated with risks such as infection and abdominal compartment syndrome. These concerns underscore the need for safer and more effective damage-control strategies. We report the case of a 16-year-old female patient who sustained blunt abdominal trauma following a motorcycle collision and presented with hemodynamic instability due to severe hepatic and renal injuries. Preoperative transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) enabled hepatorrhaphy without the need for PHP. An absorbable oxidized regenerated cellulose hemostat (Surgicel NU-KNIT, Ethicon, Raritan, NJ) was used in place of conventional non-absorbable pledgets. A right nephrectomy was concurrently performed due to extensive hilar avulsion. The postoperative course was uneventful, and no further interventions were required. This case highlights two potential innovations: the integration of preoperative TAE with hepatorrhaphy and the use of an absorbable hemostatic agent. These approaches may enhance hemostatic efficacy and reduce reliance on PHP in selected trauma cases.

### PMID 40062152 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Real-World Evaluation of the Safety and Efficacy of Surgi-ORC&#xae; in Orthopedic Surgeries: A Multicenter Prospective Study.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.78616 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Aim Achieving adequate hemostasis is a critical aspect of surgical practice, especially in orthopedics, where bleeding can impact visibility and patient outcomes. Surgi-ORC&#xae; (Aegis Lifesciences Pvt. Ltd., Ahmedabad, India), an oxidized regenerated cellulose hemostatic agent, was evaluated for its safety, efficacy, biocompatibility, and clinical performance in real-world patients undergoing orthopedic surgeries. Method This prospective observational study included patients undergoing upper limb, lower limb, or axial skeletal orthopedic surgeries. Blood loss, time to hemostasis (TTH), and surgeon-rated performance parameters such as ease of application, conformation to tissue, and preparation were recorded to assess the performance of Surgi-ORC&#xae; at predefined time points. Biocompatibility assessments were conducted through in vitro and in vivo tests, including reactivity, sensitization, systemic toxicity, tissue response, and hemolytic potential. Results The study involved 59 patients undergoing orthopedic surgeries using Surgi-ORC&#xae; variants: Powder (n=4), Knit (n=5), Original/Standard (n=4), Fibril (n=42), and Non-Woven/Snow (n=4). Hemostasis was achieved in 100% of cases within &#x2264; five minutes, with a mean TTH of 1.95 minutes (Surgi-ORC&#xae; Original/Standard). Powder demonstrated the lowest mean TTH across all surgeries, averaging 0.83 to 1.08 minutes. Surgeon feedback highlighted excellent handling, ease of application, and conformance to tissue without sticking/adherence to surgical gloves/surgical instruments. No infections, adverse events, or complications occurred over 60 days, and all patients showed stable recoveries. The surgeon confirmed complete absorption by day two.&#xa0; Conclusion Surgi-ORC&#xae; is a reliable and effective hemostatic agent for orthopedic surgeries. Its ease of use, handling characteristics, ease of placing, stability upon placement, and safety profile make it a preferred choice among surgeons.

### PMID 39697504 (2025) — The Indian journal of radiology &amp; imaging
TITLE: Absorbable Hemostatic Agents Mimic Gossypiboma or Infected Collection on Imaging.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0044-1781458 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Absorbable hemostatic agents are commonly used in clinical practice and their imaging appearance is less known. In our case series, we demonstrate how absorbable hemostatic agents can masquerade as other clinically and medicolegally significant conditions such as gossypiboma and infected collections. Through our report, we aimed to describe the imaging features of absorbable hemostatic agents, to compare them with their imaging mimics, and provide a comprehensive review of the available literature.

### PMID 40607103 (2025) — BJUI compass
TITLE: The impact of haemostatic agent used during robot-assisted radical prostatectomy on post-op infection and anastomotic leak.
DOI: 10.1002/bco2.70023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Despite the widespread use of robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP), considerable variation exists in practice with regard to postoperative cystograms prior to trial without catheter (TWOC).Our practice was to undertake a cystogram at 7-14-day post-op and proceed with TWOC if the leak was small or absent.In this study, we evaluate the risk factors for anastomotic leak and post-op urinary tract infection (UTI), while assessing the impact of using powdered haemostat Arista AH on post-op UTIs and cystographic leaks to rationalise the use of cystograms.
METHODS: The study was carried out in two phases, the first a retrospective review of 154 patients undergoing RARP between January and October 2022, where Oxitamp (an absorbable haemostat of oxidised regenerated cellulose) was used as the haemostatic agent.The second phase was prospective, involving 62 patients between November and June 2023, in whom the powdered haemostat Arista AH (microporous polysaccharide haemospheres) was used instead.Data were collated from a prospectively collected database (REDCap&#xd2;) and electronic patient records. RARP was performed by two experienced surgeons using similar techniques. Analysis was carried out on R-studios, using Fisher's exact test for categorical variables and unpaired student t-test for continuous variables.
RESULTS: Post-op UTI occurred in 19 (12%) patients in Cohort 1 (with Oxitamp) and leaks were associated with 15 (79%). In comparison, seven (11%) patients in Cohort 2 (with Arista AH) suffered from post-op UTI, and only one (14%) was associated with leak.There was an overall reduction in leaks on post-op cystograms from 44 (29%) in Cohort 1 to only nine (15%) in Cohort 2 (p&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.036).One hundred per cent of the leaks in Cohort 2 were small, compared to nine (20%) in Cohort 1 (p&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.0002).
CONCLUSIONS: A selective approach can be implemented with regard to post-op cystograms.We propose that when using Arista AH cystograms should be carried out in patients in need of bladder neck reconstruction. We will also continue to undertake routine cystograms in those with a history of transurethral resection of prostate (TURP) or in salvage prostatectomy cases.

### PMID 40638367 (2025) — International journal of surgery (London, England)
TITLE: Propensity score-matched analysis comparing drains and no-drains in rectal cancer surgery: the value of using a hemostatic agent instead - a prospective observational study.
DOI: 10.1097/JS9.0000000000002965 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study, Multicenter Study, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study evaluates the efficacy of microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPH) as an alternative to prophylactic drains in rectal cancer surgery. We hypothesize that MPH reduces postoperative complications by minimizing fluid accumulation and associated risks, thereby improving outcomes within enhanced recovery protocols (ERPs).
METHODS: A prospective, multicenter observational study was conducted from January 2020 to January 2024, including adult patients undergoing high or low rectal resection for rectal cancer. Patients receiving MPH were compared to matched controls from the IMPRICA database who either received prophylactic drains or no drainage. Propensity score matching was employed to mitigate selection bias. Outcomes were assessed within the 30 postoperative days, focusing on surgical and medical complications.
RESULTS: From a cohort of 3725 patients, 90 received MPH without drainage, 2806 underwent surgery with prophylactic drains, and 829 had no drains. Between 2020 and 2024, surgical complications were significantly lower in the MPH group (12.2%) compared to the drain group (26.2%) and comparable to the no-drain group (20.6%). The odds of complications in the MPH group were reduced by nearly half with respect to the no-drain group [odds ratio: 0.54 (95% confidence interval: 0.27-1.08)]. MPH was associated with fewer anastomotic leaks, hemorrhages, and surgical site infections, and no adverse effects were reported.
CONCLUSION: This study provides evidence that prophylactic drains are not only unnecessary but may also be potentially harmful in rectal surgery. The application of MPH offers a safe and effective alternative to improve postoperative outcomes. These findings support a shift toward eliminating drains in favor of innovative solutions aligned with ERP principles.

### PMID 39760512 (2025) — Journal of materials chemistry. B
TITLE: Bottom-up reconstitution design of a biomimetic atelocollagen microfibril for enhancing hemostatic, antibacterial, and biodegradable benefits.
DOI: 10.1039/d4tb02430c | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Powdered collagen is emerging as a promising topical hemostat owing to its adaptability to various wounds, active hemostatic abilities, and biosafety. The reproduction of a bionic structure similar to natural collagen is crucial for effective hemostasis and bioactivity. Additional factors relevant to clinical application include antimicrobial properties, minimal immune response, and straightforward preparation. However, current developments in collagen hemostatic powders often lack comprehensive integration of these multidimensional attributes. In this study, atelocollagen molecules and antimicrobial peptide (&#x3b5;-polylysine) were successfully employed to achieve the simultaneous expression of biomimetic structures and antimicrobial functions through a bottom-up reconstruction design. The synergistic effects of low temperature and mechanical processing facilitated the dispersion of collagen fibrils without leading to a stiffened network. The resultant atelocollagen microfibril (BCF-10) exhibited biomimetic D-periodicity and a fluffy morphology. BCF-10 demonstrated excellent antimicrobial properties and biocompatibility. Notably, BCF-10 could absorb blood up to 12 times its own weight within 15 s and significantly activate platelets to promote coagulation. In both a rat tail amputation model and a liver multi-point puncture model, BCF-10 exhibited significantly improved hemostatic capability compared to commercially available gauze (****P &lt; 0.0001) and was found to be comparable to the well-established microfibrillar collagen hemostat, Avitene. Immune response assessments indicated that BCF-10 could be biodegraded within 30 days without eliciting a severe inflammatory response, and could serve as a scaffold for cellular infiltration to promote tissue regeneration. This research presents a straightforward and effective strategy for preparing a biomimetic atelocollagen microfibril that is efficient in hemostasis, infection prevention, and rapid biodegradability, positioning BCF-10 as a promising candidate for clinical translation and application.

### PMID 40422854 (2025) — Journal of functional biomaterials
TITLE: Biomaterial-Based and Surgical Approaches to Local Hemostasis in Contemporary Oral Surgery: A Narrative Review.
DOI: 10.3390/jfb16050190 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Effective local hemostasis is essential in oral surgery to prevent complications such as delayed healing, infection, and the need for re-intervention. Postoperative bleeding occurs in 4-6% of cases, increasing to 9-12% in patients receiving anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy. This review evaluates the efficacy, safety, and clinical utility of local hemostatic agents based on 51 studies published between 1990 and 2023. Traditional agents, such as oxidized cellulose and gelatin sponges, control bleeding in over 85% of standard cases but offer limited regenerative benefits. Autologous platelet concentrates (APCs), including platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and leukocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF), reduce bleeding time by 30-50% and enhance soft tissue healing. Studies show the PRP may reduce postoperative bleeding in dental surgery by 30-50%, and in orthopedic and cardiac surgery by 10-30%, particularly in patients on anticoagulants. Tranexamic Acid mouthwash can reduce postoperative bleeding by up to 50-60%. Fibrin sealants achieve a 70-90% reduction in bleeding among high-risk patients, while topical tranexamic acid decreases hemorrhagic events by up to 80% in anticoagulated individuals without increasing thromboembolic risk. However, comparative studies remain limited, particularly in medically compromised populations. Additional gaps persist regarding long-term outcomes, cost-effectiveness, and the standardized use of emerging agents such as nanomaterials. Future research should prioritize high-quality trials across diverse patient groups and develop clinical guidelines that integrate both safety and regenerative outcomes.

### PMID 42232257 (2025) — Journal of visualized surgery
TITLE: Abruzzini procedure: transsternal bronchial closure for left bronchopleural fistula post-pneumonectomy.
DOI: 10.21037/jovs-25-25 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchopleural fistula (BPF) is a rare but severe complication following pneumonectomy, associated with high morbidity and mortality, particularly when pleural contamination occurs. Several predisposing factors have been described, including preoperative corticosteroid use, right-sided pneumonectomy, neoadjuvant therapy, diabetes mellitus, and the presence of a long bronchial stump. Preventive strategies such as bronchial stump reinforcement have been widely employed, though the optimal technique and material remain controversial. Therapeutic options range from minimally invasive approaches, including endobronchial closure with cauterization or biological glue, to complex surgical procedures such as intrathoracic muscle transposition, thoracostomy, and thoracoplasty. In cases where conventional reclosure of the stump is hindered by infection or adhesions, the transsternal transpericardial approach described by Abruzzini in 1961 offers an alternative that avoids direct manipulation of the infected pleural cavity. This technique enables safe exposure of the mediastinal structures through a full median sternotomy, allowing direct closure of the bronchial stump. The present study provides a descriptive account and educational video of the Abruzzini technique, based on a real clinical case. The patient, a 72-year-old male with silicosis and endobronchial aspergilloma, underwent left pneumonectomy with radical mediastinal lymphadenectomy. Postoperative evolution was complicated by stump dehiscence and recurrent BPF, despite previous surgical attempts with manual suturing and thymic flap reinforcement. Definitive management was achieved through the transsternal transpericardial approach, involving careful mediastinal dissection, protection of major vascular structures, and closure of the bronchial stump with stapling under bronchoscopic guidance. This report emphasizes the technical nuances of the procedure, including the impact of mediastinal shift in left pneumonectomy, the risks of vascular injury, and the necessity of meticulous preoperative imaging. Differences between left- and right-sided fistulas are also highlighted, underscoring the importance of individualized surgical planning. BPF remains one of the most challenging post-pneumonectomy complications, with mortality exceeding 50% in uncontrolled cases. Although rarely performed, the Abruzzini technique remains a valuable tool in selected scenarios, with reported success rates above 80%. By documenting this surgical approach through video demonstration, the present work aims to enhance thoracic surgery training, preserve classical techniques, and promote safer management of complex BPF.

### PMID 39887486 (2025) — Nephrology (Carlton, Vic.)
TITLE: A First Case Report of Autoimmune Acquired Factor V Deficiency After Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 mRNA Vaccination at the Time of Initiating Haemodialysis.
DOI: 10.1111/nep.70003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 73-year-old Japanese man with chronic kidney disease had no history of abnormal clotting or bleeding. Six days after receiving his third dose of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) vaccine (BNT162b2; Pfizer/BioNTech), blood tests showed a marked prolongation of the prothrombin time-international normalised ratio and activated partial thromboplastin time, as well as a decrease in factor V (FV) activity. Three months later, he required dialysis owing to worsening heart and renal failure. After supplementation with FV, a flexible double-lumen catheter was inserted, and haemodialysis was initiated without the use of anticoagulants. The patient was found to be positive for FV inhibitors and was diagnosed with autoimmune acquired factor V deficiency (AiFVD). AiFVD is a rare autoimmune disease in which factor V inhibitors decrease FV activity. The patient did not undergo immunosuppressive therapy because he did not have severe bleeding symptoms, and he is currently able to continue dialysis without causing fatal bleeding. FV inhibitors can be induced by bovine thrombin, surgery, and infection, but have also been detected after SARS-CoV-2 infection. The development of various acquired coagulation factor inhibitors has been reported after SARS-CoV-2 infection or vaccination, but there have been no reports of AiFVD due to SARS-CoV-2 vaccination. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of AiFVD probably associated with SARS-CoV-2 vaccination. Although AiFVD is rare, physicians should be aware of its possibility after SARS-CoV-2 vaccination.

### PMID 41597314 (2025) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: Ultrasound-Guided Femoral Hemostasis in Peripheral Angioplasty: Real-World Outcomes with Vascular Closure Devices Versus Manual Compression.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina62010028 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: Access-site complications (ASCs) remain clinically relevant after peripheral endovascular procedures, particularly with large femoral sheaths and complex anatomy. While randomized coronary trials show non-inferiority of vascular closure devices (VCDs) versus manual compression (MC), real-world data in peripheral interventions performed under systematic ultrasound-guided access are limited. Materials and Methods: This retrospective single-center cohort included consecutive peripheral arterial revascularizations (2010-2023) performed via common femoral access under real-time ultrasound guidance. Hemostasis was achieved using MC or VCDs, categorized as collagen plug-based, suture-mediated, or clip-based systems. The primary endpoint was 30-day ASCs, defined as hematoma requiring management, pseudoaneurysm, bleeding requiring transfusion, access-site thrombosis/occlusion, arteriovenous fistula, or infection. The secondary endpoint was VCD failure, defined as unsuccessful hemostasis requiring adjunctive measures. Multivariable logistic regression adjusted for prespecified anatomical and procedural covariates, including sheath size &gt; 6 Fr and puncture-site calcification. Results: Among 231 procedures, VCDs were used in 139 (60.2%) and MC in 92 (39.8%). ASC occurred in 28 cases (12.1%), with higher rates in the MC group compared with VCDs (18.5% vs. 9-14% across device types; p = 0.044). In adjusted analyses, MC (vs any VCD) (odds ratio [OR] 2.41, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.06-5.47; p = 0.035), sheath size &gt; 6 Fr, and puncture-site calcification were independently associated with ASCs. VCD failure occurred in 5 cases (3.6%) and was not observed with collagen plug-based devices. Conclusions: In this ultrasound-guided real-world peripheral cohort, VCD use was associated with lower 30-day ASC rates and low device failure rates compared with MC. Given the retrospective and non-randomized design, these findings should be considered hypothesis-generating and support individualized, imaging-guided strategies for femoral closure in peripheral interventions.

### PMID 40005347 (2025) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: Use of Ultra-Hydrophilic Absorbable Polysaccharide for Bleeding Control in Cardiothoracic Surgical Procedures.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina61020230 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: Operative blood loss is strongly correlated with morbidity and mortality in surgery. Various hemostatic agents are used to reduce bleeding in cardiothoracic procedures. We report our experience with a plant-based microporous polysaccharide hemostatic powder (Starsil&#xae; Hemostat, Hemostat Medical GmbH, Velen, Germany). Materials and Methods: Data were collected retrospectively from 65 patients who underwent cardiac surgery at our institution from January 2012 to January 2015 with (n = 42) or without (n = 23; control group) the use of the hemostat powder. Primary endpoints were safety (e.g., laboratory parameters, adverse events, and infection parameters) and time to hemostasis when the hemostat powder was used. Other endpoints included operation time, hospitalization, quantity of the hemostat powder applied, and length of stay in the intensive care unit. Results: The 65 patients (49 male:16 female) analyzed in the study underwent 65 cardiothoracic procedures, including off-pump coronary artery bypass grafts (n = 25), on-pump coronary artery bypass grafts (n = 6), valve procedures (n = 6), valve procedures in combination with bypass grafts (n = 7), and others (n = 21). The application of the hemostat powder did not increase adverse events. The laboratory parameters did not exceed the expected range after heart surgery in both groups. The hemostat powder had no significant impact on the laboratory parameters compared to the control group. Blood control was sufficient and was rated by surgeons from good to very good on a visual analog scale (VAS) from 1 (very bad) to 10 (very good) [VAS = 8.3 &#xb1; 1.2]. Intraoperative hemostasis was possible in nearly all patients. The hemostat powder led to satisfactory bleeding control within 2 min in 88% of cases. Five patients needed a second 5 g unit of the hemostat powder. Conclusions: The observed parameters between groups did not differ significantly. Therefore, the use of Starsil&#xae; Hemostat in cardiothoracic surgery is safe and effective bleeding control was achieved.

### PMID 41440869 (2025) — Journal of cardiovascular development and disease
TITLE: Risk Factors and Preventing Strategies of Pocket Hematoma After Cardiac Implantable Electronic Device Implantation: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.3390/jcdd12120490 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Pocket hematoma is a common complication following cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED) implantation, traditionally perceived as a manageable local issue. Accumulating evidence, however, indicates that clinically significant pocket hematoma (CSH) is strongly associated with increased infection rates, elevated healthcare costs, and heightened mortality. Key risk factors include advanced age, low body mass index (BMI), chronic kidney disease, complex procedures (device upgrades/replacements) and periprocedural antithrombotic management, particularly uninterrupted dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) and heparin/low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) bridging strategies, which significantly elevate bleeding risk compared to continued vitamin K antagonist (VKA) therapy or direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) protocols. Novel compression devices and topical hemostatic agents show promise for prevention, while standardized definitions and risk stratification tools are urgently needed. This review synthesizes current evidence on multifactorial pathogenesis, adverse outcomes, and evolving preventive strategies for pocket hematoma, emphasizing its underappreciated clinical significance and the critical need for optimized periprocedural management in high-risk patients.

### PMID 39735148 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: A Case of Acute Aortic Dissection in an Older Patient of Advanced Age.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.74567 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The patient an 85-year-old female resided in a care facility where she maintained an independent daily activity level. She was discovered hunched over a table in her room, displaying reduced responsiveness and prompting an emergency call. Initially, her blood pressure was within 60 mmHg, and she was transported by ambulance to our hospital. Further examination revealed acute Stanford type A aortic dissection accompanied by signs of cardiac tamponade, necessitating urgent surgery. The operation was performed under general anesthesia and tracheal intubation. After exposing the femoral vessels through an incision in the right groin, cannulation was achieved for cardiopulmonary bypass. Subsequently, a median sternotomy was performed and the pericardium was opened. Blood within the pericardial cavity was carefully exposed and blood pressure was monitored. The pericardial cavity contained a large number of dark red hematomas. A left ventricular vent was inserted and cooling was initiated. The circulatory arrest was achieved at a rectal temperature of 28&#xb0;C, accompanied by antegrade cerebral perfusion and selective antegrade myocardial protection to facilitate cardiac arrest. The entry tear was located on the dorsal aspect of the ascending aorta. Additionally, the ascending aorta was trimmed proximal to the brachiocephalic artery and a 26-mm Gelweave graft was anastomosed. Circulation was subsequently resumed, and rewarming commenced. The proximal dissection was extended to the non-coronary cusp, where BioGlue was applied to bond the intima and adventitia, followed by a partial adventitial inversion. The proximal anastomosis was then completed. The total operation duration was 366 min. The patient was extubated, and oral intake was initiated the following day. However, postoperative delirium persisted, and the patient developed a cerebral infarction triggered by paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Her daily activities declined, and she experienced complications including pneumonia and urinary tract infection, which responded to antibiotic therapy. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 49.

### PMID 39265367 (2024) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Navigating the challenges: A case of iatrogenic cervical esophageal perforation following thyroid surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110223 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Iatrogenic cervical esophageal perforation (ICEP) represents a rare and challenging surgical complication that results in significant morbidity and mortality. This is a case report of a cervical esophageal fistula that resulted from an iatrogenic perforation following thyroid surgery, treated with surgical repair followed by negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT).
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 43-year-old female was presented with an infected post-total thyroidectomy and bilateral radical neck dissection two weeks prior. Esophagography revealed contrast leakage from the anterolateral aspect of the esophagus at the level of C7-T1. Surgical debridement exposed large (4&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;1 cm) esophageal damage. The esophageal repair was performed using a sternocleidomastoids flap reinforced with BioGlue&#xae; followed by placement of a feeding tube through a gastrostomy. Subsequent mucus leakage was observed two weeks after the repair. Conservative approach using NPWT was used to promote wound closure. Over a 3-week period, serial imaging demonstrated fistula closure and complete wound healing by 8&#xa0;weeks.
DISCUSSION: A delay in diagnosis and treatment for esophageal perforation leads to severe complications, highlighting the need for standardized treatment algorithms. Larger perforations illustrated in this case report require primary repair with muscle flaps. When reconstructive surgery fails, a follow-up conservative therapy utilizing proper NPWT was able to heal the leakage.
CONCLUSION: This case report illustrates rare but devastating potential complications from a commonly performed oncologic surgery. The involvement of a multidisciplinary team from the very first identification of surgical complications is crucial for ensuring proper treatment.

### PMID 38679286 (2024) — Journal of nuclear cardiology : official publication of the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology
TITLE: 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake patterns in positron emission tomography/computed tomography caused by inflammation and/or infection after graft surgery for thoracic aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.nuclcard.2024.101865 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To identify 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake patterns in positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) caused by infection, inflammation, surgical material, and/or graft coating.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Of 610 consecutive patients with thoracic aortic graft surgery, 60 patients with 187 PET/CT were retrospectively included. We quantified FDG uptake in all grafts&#xa0;using maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) alone and in relation to liver background (SUVratio)&#xa0;and determined the uptake pattern. Mixed linear regression models with random slope and intercept were applied for the analysis of SUVratio over time and generalized estimating equations to analyze the associations with anastomosis uptake. FDG uptake was frequently focal (90%), higher in infected than in noninfected grafts (mean SUVratio 2.19; 95% CI 2.05-2.32 vs. 1.63; 1.46-1.79, P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001), and decreasing slowly over time (SUVratio per year since surgery&#xa0;-0.048; 95% CI -0.15- 0.051, P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.34), without a difference in slope between infected and noninfected grafts (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.52). There was no evidence of an interaction between SUVratio and use of BioGlue&#xae; surgical adhesive (intercept P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.73, slope P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.71), or graft coating (gelatin and collagen, all P&#xa0;&gt;&#xa0;0.7). FDG uptake at the anastomosis was more frequent in noninfected grafts than in infected grafts (66% vs. 21%, odds ratio (OR) 11.34; 95% CI 3.61-35.66, P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001). This effect was attenuated by the use of BioGlue&#xae; (OR 5.05; 95% CI 0.45-56.9, P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.19).
CONCLUSIONS: FDG uptake in PET/CT after thoracic aortic graft surgery is higher in infected grafts than in noninfected grafts. In noninfected grafts, focal uptake is also frequent, mostly anastomosis-associated, not associated with graft coating, and possibly affected by the use of BioGlue&#xae;.

### PMID 38923269 (2024) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: An Injectable Living Hydrogel with Embedded Probiotics as a Novel Strategy for Combating Multifaceted Pathogen Wound Infections.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202400921 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Wound infections pose a significant challenge in healthcare, and traditional antibiotic treatments often result in the development of resistant pathogens. Addressing this gap, ProGel is introduced, a living hydrogel created by entrapping probiotic Lactobacillus plantarum as a therapeutic component within a gelatin matrix. With a double-syringe system, ProGel can be easily mixed and applied, conforming swiftly to any wound shape and forming hydrogel in situ. It also demonstrates robust mechanical and self-healing properties owing to the Schiff-base bonds. ProGel sustains more than 80% viability of the entrapped L. plantarum while restricting their escape from the hydrogel. After a week of storage, more than 70% viability of the entrapped L. plantarum is preserved. Importantly, ProGel exhibits broad-spectrum antimicrobial efficacy against pathogens commonly associated with wound infections, i.e., Pseudomonas aeruginosa (7Log reduction), Staphylococcus aureus (3-7Log reduction), and Candida albicans (40-70% reduction). Moreover, its cytocompatibility is affirmed through coculture with human dermal fibroblasts. The effectiveness of ProGel is further highlighted in more clinically relevant tests on human skin wound models infected with P. aeruginosa and S. aureus, where it successfully prevents the biofilm formation of these pathogens. This study showcases an injectable living hydrogel system for the management of complex wound infections.

### PMID 39407359 (2024) — Journal of cardiovascular electrophysiology
TITLE: Contact allergic dermatitis to skin adhesive after CIED upgrade procedure.
DOI: 10.1111/jce.16465 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The utilization of skin adhesives for closure is typically secondary to its noninvasive application and aesthetic benefits. Allergic reactions to Dermabond&#x2122; can occur, though there are no reported cases in pediatric patients following cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED) implantation. The allergic reaction to skin glues is typically to cyanoacrylates, the primary component of Dermabond&#x2122;.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This report describes severe allergic contact dermatitis due to sensitization to cyanoacrylate in an 18-year-old with repaired congenital heart disease and postoperative atrioventricular block following CIED upgrade procedure.
CONCLUSION: This demonstrates the importance of prompt diagnosis of allergic contact dermatitis, which can be confused with local infections.

### PMID 39091545 (2024) — AME case reports
TITLE: Infected stent graft and severe aortitis after transcaval glue embolization of type II endoleak: a case report.
DOI: 10.21037/acr-23-148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Type II endoleaks are common and embolization is often performed if treatment is necessary. Although transarterial embolization is common, other methods including trans-caval embolization are also utilized. Complications can occur and we report a case of infection that was challenging to diagnose and treat. There is no data regarding the risk of aortic stent graft infection after trans-caval embolization with n-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate (n-BCA) glue of a type II endoleak.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We report a rare case of infected, Gore Excluder infrarenal stent graft after transcaval embolization with coil and n-BCA glue to treat a type II endoleak in a 71-year-old male. The endoleak caused a rapid sac enlargement. The stent graft was placed 5 years earlier electively. Soon after the endoleak embolization, the patient experienced abdominal pain and malaise. There was an intense inflammatory reaction involving the aneurysm wall and the adjacent bowel mesentery. Our differential included normal inflammation after embolization vs. infection and this was difficult to distinguish. The infection was confirmed by positron emission tomography scan and tissue biopsy. The patient was deemed high-risk for surgery because of his extensive cardiac history, status post coronary bypass and tissue mitral valve replacement, congestive heart failure with residual left ventricular ejection fraction of 36%. He was optimized by correcting fluid status, administration of intravenous antibiotic, and nutrition consultation with dietary supplementation before surgery over the course of 2 weeks. The graft was explanted through a transabdominal approach, and the aorta was reconstructed with cryopreserved allograft. Interestingly, the small and large intestine with their mesentery were found to be plastered to the aneurysm sac. The post-operative course was unremarkable except for a transient acute kidney injury that resolved within 1 week. Follow-up computed tomography scan at 6 months showed widely patent bypass.
CONCLUSIONS: Glue embolization induces inflammation promoting thrombus formation inside the aneurysm sac. With a transcaval approach to the sac, there is the risk of extravasation of glue outside the sac as well as contamination of the graft with instrumentation. Differentiating between inflammation and infection can be difficult, and tissue biopsy provided the most conclusive diagnosis. Risk minimization considerations include, pre-operative optimization, a transabdominal approach, ureteral stenting, and tissue buttressing of anastomosis.

### PMID 38868262 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Foreign Body Granuloma After Embolization of Internal Iliac Artery Aneurysm Using N-Butyl-2-Cyanoacrylate: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.60187 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Foreign body granulomas following endovascular treatment are rare complications and are mostly reported in the brain or cutaneous vascular tissues. To the best of our knowledge, no study to date has reported on foreign body granulomas in the abdomen after injection of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA)-lipiodol mixture into the abdominal arteries. This study reports a case of foreign body granuloma that appeared 12 months after the embolization of a right internal iliac artery aneurysm using an NBCA-lipiodol mixture, which posed challenges in differentiation from malignant tumors. We present a 77-year-old man who underwent embolization of a right internal iliac artery aneurysm and open surgical repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm. A contrast-enhanced CT performed 12 months postoperatively revealed a right-sided retroperitoneal mass surrounding the iliopsoas muscle. The mass contained multiple, small, hyperdense areas, suggesting the migration of the NBCA-lipiodol mixture casts from the embolized right internal iliac artery aneurysm. The differential diagnosis included foreign body granuloma, lymphoma, and sarcoma. A biopsy of the lesion revealed a granuloma with various stages of inflammation, no hemosiderin deposition, multinucleated giant cells, and foam cells containing fat, and was diagnosed with a foreign body granuloma. Special staining for microorganisms revealed no findings suggestive of infection. Because the patient was asymptomatic, no treatment was administered. Contrast-enhanced CT at 24 months postoperatively showed shrinkage of the mass, with no change in size noted at 48 months postoperatively.&#xa0;This report highlights a foreign body granuloma that mimicked malignant tumors. Extravascular&#xa0;migration of the NBCA-lipiodol mixture casts likely contributed to granuloma formation. Radiologists should consider foreign body granulomas after embolization using NBCA into the abdominal arteries.

### PMID 39027005 (2024) — Frontiers in cardiovascular medicine
TITLE: Feasibility of a modified hybrid glubran-supported single-proglide technique for access closure during endovascular aneurysm repair.
DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2024.1426961 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the feasibility of a hybrid Glubran-supported single-Proglide technique for large bore femoral access closure during percutaneous access endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR).
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed for all percutaneous EVARs at our center from January 2023 to June 2023. All patients received the hybrid Glubran-supported single-Proglide technique involving a mixture of surgical glue and Lipiodol injection after single suture placement for femoral access closure. Technical success was defined as achieving complete hemostasis without a bailout strategy. Vascular complications and bleeding were defined by Valve Academic Research Consortium-3 (VARC-3) criteria. Vascular access changes and 30-day mortality were recorded.
RESULTS: The technique success rate for the entire study population was 100% (55 femoral access in 37 patients; median age: 72; 78% males). The mean sheath size was 20.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.3F. The mean manual compression time was 3.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.4&#x2005;min, the mean hemostasis time was 9.0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.5&#x2005;min, and the mean procedural time was 103.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;34.7&#x2005;min. One patient (1.6%) developed an access site infection and recovered conservatively. No VARC-3 vascular complications and access changes were observed. No 30-day mortality happened.
CONCLUSIONS: The hybrid Glubran-supported single-Proglide technique is feasible for large bore access closure during EVAR and may be a viable alternative; however, larger prospective studies are required to confirm its efficacy.

### PMID 38355514 (2024) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Improved early risk stratification of deep sternal wound infection risk after coronary artery bypass grafting.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-024-02570-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Deep sternal wound infection (DSWI) following open heart surgery is associated with excessive morbidity and mortality. Contemporary DSWI risk prediction models aim at identifying high-risk patients with varying complexity and performance characteristics. We aimed to optimize the DSWI risk factor set and to identify additional risk factors for early postoperative detection of patients prone to DSWI.
METHODS: Single-centre retrospective analysis of patients with isolated multivessel coronary artery disease undergoing myocardial revascularization at Paracelsus Medical University Nuremberg between 2007 and 2022 was performed to identify risk factors for DSWI. Three data sets were created to examine preoperative, intraoperative, and early postoperative parameters, constituting the "Baseline", the "Improved Baseline" and the "Extended" models. The "Extended" data set included risk factors that had not been analysed before. Univariable and stepwise forward multiple logistic regression analyses were performed for each respective set of variables.
RESULTS: From 5221 patients, 179 (3.4%) developed DSWI. The "Extended" model performed best, with the area under the curve (AUC) of 0.80, 95%-CI: [0.76, 0.83]. Pleural effusion requiring intervention, postoperative delirium, preoperative hospital stay&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;24&#xa0;h, and the use of fibrin sealant were new independent predictors of DSWI in addition to age, Diabetes Mellitus on insulin, Body Mass Index, peripheral artery disease, mediastinal re-exploration, bilateral internal mammary harvesting, acute kidney injury and blood transfusions.
CONCLUSIONS: The "Extended" regression model with the short-term postoperative complications significantly improved DSWI risk discrimination after surgical revascularization. Short preoperative stay, prevention of postoperative delirium, protocols reducing the need for evacuation of effusion and restrictive use of fibrin sealant for sternal closure facilitate DSWI reduction.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The registered retrospective study was registered at the study centre and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Paracelsus Medical University Nuremberg (IRB-2019-005).

### PMID 38102397 (2024) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Fibrin sealant for closure of mucosal penetration at the oesophagus or cardia during submucosal tunnelling endoscopic resection for gastrointestinal submucosal tumours.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-023-10563-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIM: To assess the efficacy and safety of a fibrin sealant for the prevention of leak resulting from mucosal penetration at the esophagus or cardia during a STER procedure to remove gastrointestinal submucosal tumors (SMTs).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between April 2014 and October 2022, a total of 290 patients with oesophageal or cardiac SMTs underwent STER at our centre. We retrospectively identified patients with oesophageal or cardia SMTs who underwent STER and experienced mucosal penetration of the cardia or oesophagus during the procedure. A total of 31 mucosal penetrations in 30 procedures were included. Of the 31 mucosal penetrations, 12 occurred in the cardia, and the other 19 occurred in the oesophagus. All 31 sites received the fibrin sealant to close the mucosal penetration. Clinical characteristics, procedure-related parameters, detailed data of the mucosal penetrations, and treatment outcomes using the fibrin sealant were reviewed for all 30 patients to assess the efficacy and safety of the fibrin sealant for closure of mucosal penetration at the cardia or oesophagus.
RESULTS: For the 31 mucosal penetrations, the mean size was 0.08&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.06&#xa0;cm2 (range 0.01-0.25&#xa0;cm2). Mucosal closure using the fibrin sealant was performed successfully in all 31 mucosal penetrations. Of the 31 mucosal penetrations, clips were used in 13 cases. All 30 patients were discharged after a median of 7&#xa0;days (range 4-20&#xa0;day) postoperatively. During a mean 62&#xa0;months (range 6-107&#xa0;months) follow-up, all 31 mucosal penetrations successfully healed without the occurrence of infection, ulcer, oesophagitis, chest infection or abdominal infection.
CONCLUSION: For the closure of mucosal penetration during STER at the cardia or oesophagus, a fibrin sealant is both safe and efficacious. It is necessary to conduct more research on the viability, effectiveness, and safety of using a fibrin sealant to close wider mucosal penetrations.

### PMID 39371760 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Early Esophageal Perforation Following Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion Treated With Controlled Esophageal Fistula and TachoSil&#xae; Coverage: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.68591 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) is a commonly performed procedure. One of its most feared complications is esophageal injury (EI). There is no standard approach on how to treat these injuries. TachoSil&#xae; (Corza Medical GmbH, D&#xfc;sseldorf, Germany) is a fibrinogen-containing patch that has been used in various surgical areas. Here, we present a 68-year-old male patient who was diagnosed with an EI with secondary surgical site infection following a three-level ACDF (C4/5, C5/6, and C6/7). Initially, the patient underwent incision and drainage (I&amp;D) of the surgical site abscess, primary repair of the esophageal tear, and esophageal catheter placement to create a controlled esophagocutaneous fistula. Postoperatively, he was diagnosed with a leak&#xa0;and underwent a second I&amp;D procedure. The primary repair of the EI was augmented with a TachoSil patch, and the patient was started on glycopyrrolate. The site of EI was well-sealed with no re-leaks, and the patient was discharged after he had completed a course of intravenous (IV) antibiotics&#xa0;and had been on parenteral nutrition for a total of 40 days. This case shows that the use of TachoSil to augment the repair of ACDF-associated EI, and glycopyrrolate to decrease salivation could decrease the risk of leak and enhance the healing process. This is an observation that needs to be scrutinized in future studies.

### PMID 39331127 (2024) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Effectiveness and safety of Tachosil&#xae; as a ventricular sealant: an observational cohort study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-024-06276-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Surgery close to or in contact with the ventricular system is challenging due to the complications. We sought to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of TachoSil&#xae; as a ventricular sealant in preventing complications after cranial surgery with an open ventricular system (OVS).
METHODS: This is a single-center and prospective cohort study We included patients who underwent elective surgery for supratentorial craniotomy and periventricular pathology between December 2020 and November 2023. We registered surgical complications arising from CSF dynamics (such as percutaneous cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage, hydrocephalus, pseudomeningocele), infections, and other complications (postsurgical hematoma) adverse drug reactions (ADRs), reintervention or hospital readmission up to 90&#xa0;days after surgery.
RESULTS: Forty interventions were performed on 39 patients, whose median age was 56&#xa0;years. Eleven patients (28.2%) had antecedents of previous surgery in the same location, 5 (12.8%) had previously received radiotherapy and chemotherapy, and 11 (28.2%) were smokers. Twenty-four patients (60%) underwent surgery for high-grade glioma, 8 (20%) for low-grade gliomas, 6 (15%) for metastasis and 2 (5%) for meningioma. Throughout the study and up to 90&#xa0;days after surgery, none of the patients presented an ADR. Only 2 patients (5%) presented with a surgery complications derived from ventricular opening (one patient with a percutaneous CSF leakage and one patients with external hydrocephalus). Both patients resolved with a ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
CONCLUSIONS: TachoSil&#xae; is a dural sealant that can be used safely and effectively intraparenchymally in patients whose surgery involves a ventricular opening. Only 5% of treated patients presented complications arising from CSF hydrodynamics. No patients had pseudomeningocele, infections or complications related to the use of this sealant. To confirm these positive results, randomized and comparative clinical trials assessing the efficacy of TachoSil&#xae; in patients after cranial surgery with an OVS are essential.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER AND DATE OF REGISTRATION: This study was registered in the Clinical Trials.gov (NCT05717335). Date May 1st, 2022.

### PMID 39664040 (2024) — Journal of rhinology : official journal of the Korean Rhinologic Society
TITLE: Two Cases of Cerebrospinal Fluid Rhinorrhea Repair Surgery Using TachoComb.
DOI: 10.18787/jr.2023.00076 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea is a rare condition characterized by the leakage of CSF through the nose. The diagnosis is established through comprehensive history taking, brain imaging, and nasal endoscopy. Surgical intervention is considered a secondary option for CSF leakage when conservative treatments, including behavioral therapy, pharmacotherapy, or lumbar puncture, fail to elicit a response. In recent years, endoscopic intranasal surgery has been favored over craniotomy for such surgical treatment. When repairing CSF leakage defects via endoscopic intranasal surgery, autologous fat and muscle flaps are commonly employed. However, these grafts may lead to complications, including donor site infection, edema, and wound dehiscence. Therefore, in this article, we would like to introduce two cases of CSF rhinorrhea repair surgery using TachoComb. While previous studies have employed TachoComb as a supplementary material for the repair of CSF leak defects, in the cases we describe, the primary reconstruction of the defect area was achieved using TachoComb, supported by free grafts such as septal bone or turbinate mucosal flap, which were smaller than the size of the CSF leakage defects.

### PMID 39659339 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Comparative Effectiveness of Surgical Drainage Techniques and Postoperative Interventions for Reducing Complications: A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.73364 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: This systematic review assessed the comparative effectiveness of surgical drainage techniques and postoperative interventions in reducing complications across various surgical fields. We conducted a comprehensive search across multiple databases, including PubMed, MEDLINE, Embase, the Cochrane Library, and CINAHL, covering studies from January 2019 to September 2024. Ten randomized controlled trials met our inclusion criteria, focusing on human surgical patients and comparing outcomes such as seroma, hematoma, infection rates, and postoperative pain. Techniques such as pigtail catheters and vacuum sealing drainage (VSD) demonstrated statistically significant improvements in thoracic and orthopedic surgeries, reducing postoperative pain (effect size: 0.35, p &lt; 0.05), pleural effusion (risk ratio: 0.68, p &lt; 0.01), and hospital stays (mean difference: -2.5 days, p &lt; 0.01), while also accelerating wound healing. However, inconsistent results were observed for hemostatic agents like topical gelatin-thrombin matrix sealant and polysaccharide agents, which did not consistently reduce complications in spinal and breast surgeries (effect size range: 0.10-0.20, p &gt; 0.05). These findings suggest that drainage techniques should be tailored to specific surgical procedures and that the routine use of hemostatic agents requires more critical evaluation. Based on these insights, the review recommends prioritizing the use of pigtail catheters and VSD in appropriate contexts while further investigating the effectiveness of hemostatic agents in different surgical fields. This review underscores the need for additional long-term studies and personalized approaches to optimize drainage management in diverse patient populations. Overall, it provides clinicians with concrete recommendations and a framework for improving postoperative care and guiding clinical decision-making.

### PMID 38130367 (2024) — Journal of vascular surgery cases and innovative techniques
TITLE: Human gelatin thrombin matrix with rifampin for the treatment of prosthetic vascular graft infections.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvscit.2023.101365 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We aim to describe and report on a novel graft preservation technique using a human gelatin thrombin matrix with rifampin for the treatment of vascular graft infections. Eight patients with vascular graft infections were included, one with bilateral infections, for a total of nine cases from January 2016 through June 2021. All the patients underwent wound exploration and placement of human gelatin thrombin matrix with rifampin. No deaths or allergic reactions had been&#xa0;reported at the 30-day follow-up, with only one major amputation. The graft and limb salvage rates were 77.8% at the 1-year follow-up. The mean time to a major amputation was 122&#xa0;days, and the mean time to graft excision was 30&#xa0;days.

### PMID 39131519 (2024) — Infection and drug resistance
TITLE: REGECEL (an Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose) Provides Superior Bioactivity Effect on Microorganisms.
DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S454539 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Patients who need to be readmitted to the hospital because of complications from infections or require long-term care and rehabilitation face substantial financial hardships. To ensure the safety of patients undergoing surgery, it is crucial to implement measures that prevent wound infections before and after the procedure. Antibacterial wound dressings are essential to prevent infections during surgical procedures. There are various types of antibacterial wound dressings available on the market, such as silver-based dressings, hydrocolloid dressings, polyhexamethylene biguanide, alginate dressings, collagen-based dressings, and iodine-based dressings.
METHODS: We used each type (standard, knit, fibril, and non-woven) of a commercial brand of oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) called Regecel to test bacterial growth. The choice of antibacterial wound dressing depends on the type of wound being treated. Different bacterial strains require specific culture conditions to thrive and grow in laboratory settings. To obtain accurate and reliable results, it is vital to follow the precise culture conditions required for each bacterial strain.
RESULTS: The evaluation of ORC highlighted its potential to inhibit bacterial growth, showing promising results against various bacterial strains and Candida albicans. Different variants of ORC, such as Regecel, have demonstrated impressive capacity to hinder the growth of 32 distinct bacterial strains, with inhibition rates ranging from 40-100%. These bacteria include methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE), and penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae.
CONCLUSION: This study supports the usage and development of ORC (Regecel) as an innovative approach to treating bacterial infections.

### PMID 38689813 (2024) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Does the use of Surgicel affect postsurgical radiological follow-up of kidney tumors?
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2024.03.089 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Remaining Surgicel in the body can be mistaken for complications such as hematoma, abscess, or tumor recurrence in paraclinical examinations after surgery. We have presented the case of kidney cancer who underwent radical nephrectomy. In radiological follow-ups, hematoma was reported in the surgery site. The typical appearance of Surgicel on a postoperative CT scan is characterized by air trapped bubbles. Surgicel exhibits a short relaxation time on T2-weighted images. It is important to differentiate the remaining Surgicel from cases such as hematoma, abscess and tumor recurrence. T2MRI images will be most accurate in the correct diagnosis of Surgicel.

### PMID 38176112 (2024) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Expert panel recommendations for topical hemostatic agent use in varied bleeding sites and situations during neuro-spine surgeries.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2023.12.007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016454">Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative bleeding poses a substantial challenge, particularly in neuro-spine surgeries leading to complications such as hematomas, infections, and hemodynamic instability. Despite their proven efficacy, use of topical hemostatic agents (THAs) lacks comprehensive published literature and guidelines particularly in the Indian setting. The present study provides the first-ever Indian expert panel recommendations for effective adjunct THA use in different intraoperative bleeding sites and situations in neuro-spine surgeries. A comprehensive approach, encompassing a literature review, followed by experience sharing in a meeting using a survey helped integrate expert opinions in the form of practical algorithms to guide THA selection. Our survey results revealed a strong inclination towards specific THAs, flowable gelatin&#xa0;+&#xa0;thrombin being choice of THA for difficult to access and problematic bleeding situations during tumor removal/resection, transsphenoidal hypophysectomy and skull-based procedures. Both oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC)/Fibrillar and flowable gelatin&#xa0;+&#xa0;thrombin were recommended for continuous oozing. ORC/Fibrillar was preferred for arteriovenous and cavernous malformations. This expert-panel guidance on THA use aims to optimize hemostat use practices and improve surgical outcomes in neuro-spine surgery.

### PMID 38398686 (2024) — Life (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: The Safety and Efficacy of Microporous Polysaccharide Hemospheres in Terms of the Complication Rates in Total Hip Arthroplasty for Femoral Neck Fractures: A Control-Matched Retrospective Cohort.
DOI: 10.3390/life14020177 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIMS: This study aimed to assess the safety and efficacy of microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPSHs) in managing blood loss and reducing the risk of postoperative haematoma and early periprosthetic joint infection (PJI) following total hip arthroplasty (THA) for femoral neck fracture (FNF), in the context of the existing treatment challenges.
METHODS: A control-matched retrospective analysis of 163 patients undergoing unilateral primary THA for displaced FNF between 2020 and 2023 was performed. The study group consisted of 74 patients who received MPSH administered intraoperatively. The control group consisted of 89 patients who received no topical haemostatics. One-to-one case-control matching between groups was performed. The primary outcome was a perioperative change in the haematologic values (haemoglobin, red blood cell count, haematocrit, platelet concentration) and transfusion rate. The secondary outcomes were the incidence of postoperative local haematoma formation, prolonged wound secretion, surgical site infection (SSI), and PJI within 3 months of surgery.
RESULTS: Our analysis found no statistically significant differences in the haematologic parameters between the control and study cohorts. The changes in the haemoglobin concentration were not significant between the control group (3.18 &#xb1; 1.0 g/dL) and the treatment group (2.87 &#xb1; 1.15 g/dL) (p = 0.3). There were no significant differences (p = 0.24) in the haematocrit and red blood cell concentration (p = 0.15). The platelet levels did not significantly differ (p = 0.12) between the groups. Additionally, we found no significant discrepancy in the incidence of early PJI or blood transfusion rates between the groups. No adverse effects following MPSH use were recorded in the study group.
CONCLUSIONS: Routine use of MPSH in THA for FNF management appears to be safe, with no observed adverse events related to Arista&#xae; use. Although there was a tendency towards reduced blood loss in the Arista&#xae; AH group, MPSH did not significantly impact bleeding complications, local haematoma formation, or subsequent PJI.

### PMID 38740394 (2024) — Neurosciences (Riyadh, Saudi Arabia)
TITLE: Hemopatch&#xae; as a primary dural sealant in cranial neurosurgery: Technical note and a retrospective study.
DOI: 10.17712/nsj.2024.2.20230109 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To determine the effectiveness and safety of Hemopatch&#xae; as a primary dural sealant in preventing CSF leakage following cranial surgery. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks occur in cranial operations and are associated with significant patient burden and expense. The use of Hemopatch&#xae; as a dural sealant in cranial neurosurgical procedures is described and analyzed in this study.
METHODS: Data were retrospectively collected from all patients who underwent a craniotomy for various neurosurgical indications where Hemopatch&#xae; was used as the primary dural sealant between June 2017 and June 2022. Infection and CSF leak were the main indicators evaluated after surgery.
RESULTS: A total of 119 consecutive patients met our inclusion criteria. The median was age 41.5 years, and 52.5% were female. The mean follow-up period was 2.3 years (7 months to 6 years). There were 110 (92.44%) supratentorial and 9 (7.56%) infratentorial craniotomies. Postoperative CSF leak was reported in 2 patients (1.68%), one in each cohort. Postoperative infection occurred in one patient (0.84%).
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that using Hemopatch&#xae; as a dural sealant in cranial surgery is effective and safe. After supra-/infratentorial craniotomies, the rate of postoperative adverse events in our sample was within the range of known surgical revision rates. Future randomized clinical studies are required to confirm our encouraging findings.

### PMID 38687036 (2024) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Report on Pseudoaneurysm Caused by Injury of Internal Carotid Artery During Endoscopic Pituitary Surgery and Rebleeding After Treatment With Willis Covered Stent.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0000000000010174 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Report on a case of pseudoaneurysm which was caused by injury of the internal carotid artery (ICA) during endoscopic endonasal surgery (EES), which was followed by rebleeding after treatment with a Willis covered stent.
METHODS: A woman, aged 68, underwent EES for the treatment of a pituitary adenoma. During the surgery, the right ICA was injured, and successfully hemostasis by packed with cottonoid and gelatin sponge. Besides, cerebral angiography was performed in the interventional operating room for the purpose of discovering the formation of a pseudoaneurysm in the cavernous sinus segment of ICA, which was treated with a covered stent. After successfully placing the covered stent, the patient was promptly transferred to the general operating room for the removal of the cottonoid and to address the bleeding once again. The authors employ crushed muscles and cottonoid to locally compress and stop bleeding. Owing to concerns about the risk of rebleeding in the patient, after stent implantation, the patient did not utilize antiplatelet drugs. After the surgery, the patient developed occlusion of the right ICA and massive cerebral infarction in the right hemisphere. Dehydration, anti-infection, rehabilitation, hyperbaric oxygen, as well as related treatments, were given. The cottonoid was removed in EES 2 months postsurgery, and no instances of bleeding were observed. Six months after surgery, the patient had clear consciousness and hemiplegia in the left limb, with a Glasgow Outcome Scale score of 4.
RESULTS: The ICA was injured during EES, which resulted in the formation of a pseudoaneurysm, the Willis stent was adopted for treatment, and there was a risk of rebleeding after the nasal packing (cottonoid, crushed muscles) was removed immediately.
CONCLUSIONS: The ICA was injured during EES after bleeding was controlled by packing with cottonoid, crushed muscles, etc, subsequently, the patient was given intravascular treatment, it is advised to make thorough preparations and, after a suitable period, remove nasal packing in the hybrid operating room to address unexpected situations and unforeseen circumstances.

### PMID 38365499 (2024) — Heart, lung &amp; circulation
TITLE: Implementation of Patient Blood Management in Orthotopic Heart Transplants: A Single Centre Retrospective Observational Review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.hlc.2024.01.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Blood transfusion in the perioperative cardiothoracic setting has accepted risks including deep sternal wound infection, increased intensive care unit length of stay, lung injury, and cost. It has an immunomodulatory effect which may cause allo-immunisation. This may influence long-term survival through immune-mediated factors. Targeting coagulation defects to reduce unnecessary or inappropriate transfusions may reduce these complications.
METHODS: In 2012, an institution-wide patient blood management evidence-based algorithmic bleeding management protocol was implemented at The Prince Charles Hospital, Brisbane, Australia. The benefit of this has been previously reported in our lung transplant and cardiac surgery (excluding transplants) cohorts. This study aimed to investigate the effect of this on our orthotopic heart transplant recipients.
RESULTS: After the implementation of the protocol, despite no difference in preoperative haemoglobin levels and higher risk patients (EuroSCORE 20 vs 26; p=0.013), the use of packed red blood cells (13.0 U vs 4.4 U; p=0.046) was significantly lower postoperatively and fresh frozen plasma was significantly lower both intra- and postoperatively (7.4 U vs 0.6 U; p&lt;0.001, and 3.3 U vs 0.6 U; p=0.011 respectively). Concurrently, the use of prothrombin complex concentrate (33% vs 78%; p&lt;0.001) and desmopressin (5% vs 22%; p=0.0028) was significantly higher in the post-protocol group, while there was less use of recombinant factor VIIa (15% vs 4%; p=0.058). Intraoperative units of cryoprecipitate also rose from 0.9 to 2.0 (p=0.006).
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated that a targeted patient blood management protocol with point-of-care testing for heart transplant recipients is correlated with fewer blood products used postoperatively, with some increase in haemostatic products and no evidence of increased adverse events.

### PMID 39200878 (2024) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Omentoplasty for Cervical Lymphocele after Aortic Arch Replacement.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm13164737 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Lymphocele formation is a rare complication after surgical procedures involving the mediastinum. While uncomplicated lymphoceles show high rates of spontaneous closure and are usually treated conservatively, surgical treatment might be required in cases with persistent or recurrent lymphoceles. We present the case of a 53-year-old male with reoccurring cervical swelling after two surgeries of the thoracic aorta. After 1.5 years, the swelling occurred for the first time and appeared for the next 2 years repeatedly without clinical or laboratory signs of infection. A cervical lymphocele was suspected, and the decision for surgical revision was made. Fibrin glue was applied to the potential leakage of the thoracic duct, and the cavity was filled with a free omental flap. This resulted in a complete regression of the swelling.

### PMID 38028553 (2023) — Frontiers in molecular biosciences
TITLE: More than just a gel: the extracellular matrixome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
DOI: 10.3389/fmolb.2023.1307857 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Armed with an arsenal of protein secretion systems, antibiotic efflux pumps, and the occasional proclivity for explosive self-destruction, Pseudomonas aeruginosa has become a model for the study of bacterial pathogenesis and biofilm formation. There is accruing evidence to suggest that the biofilm matrix-the bioglue that holds the structure together-acts not only in a structural capacity, but is also a molecular "net" whose function is to capture and retain certain secreted products (including proteins and small molecules). In this perspective, we argue that the biofilm matrixome is a distinct extracellular compartment, and one that is differentiated from the bulk secretome. Some of the points we raise are deliberately speculative, but are becoming increasingly accessible to experimental investigation.

### PMID 37765617 (2023) — Polymers
TITLE: Application of Biological Glue-Clay Composite Substrate in Slope Ecological Restoration.
DOI: 10.3390/polym15183763 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Given the issues of soil cracking, poor water retention during drought, and erosion damage caused by rainfall, we conducted an in-depth study on the water retention properties, cracking resistance, and scouring resistance of biogel-amended clay using evaporation cracking and scouring tests. The hydrophysical properties and cohesive aggregation mechanism of biogel-amended clay were explored, and the results showed that the incorporation of biogel improved the water retention, cracking resistance, and scour resistance of the clay samples. With an increase in the biogel content, the biogel mucous membrane inside the samples improved the cohesion between soil particles, reduced the generation and development of cracks, and improved the cracking resistance. There was no significant cracking of the samples after the biogel content reached 0.3%, which changed the migration of water in the sample, prevented water evaporation, and improved the water retention of the clay samples. Biofilm can change the migration of water in the sample, prevent some evaporation, and reduce the evaporation rate. To a certain extent, it can enhance the water retention capacity of the sample. Enhanced biofilm content significantly reduced scouring in the process of rainfall and runoff erosion of the sample, and biofilm content of 0.2% significantly reduced the surface of the specimen damaged by erosion. The hydrophysical properties of the composite-adhesive-amended clay samples were significantly improved compared with those of the single-bioadhesive-amended clay samples.

### PMID 34668154 (2023) — Journal of nuclear cardiology : official publication of the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology
TITLE: Previous BioGlue repair mimicking cardiac infection with 18F-FDG PET imaging.
DOI: 10.1007/s12350-021-02807-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 37206158 (2023) — Respirology case reports
TITLE: Management of alveolar-pleural fistula secondary to invasive pulmonary aspergillosis with bronchial occlusion using a combination of Endobronchial Watanabe Spigot and N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate: A case report.
DOI: 10.1002/rcr2.1163 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Alveolar-pleural fistulas that do not improve with thoracic drainage can be conservatively treated via endobronchial occlusion and pleurodesis, among other options. However, for inoperable cases, the treatment strategy to be followed, in the event that conventional conservative management fails, is unclear. Herein, we report a case of alveolar-pleural fistula managed by bronchial occlusion using a combination of Endobronchial Watanabe Spigot (EWS) and N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA). A 79-year-old man on prednisolone for interstitial pneumonia with autoimmune features was diagnosed with invasive pulmonary aspergillosis and Aspergillus pyothorax infection. He was administered voriconazole; however, a pneumothorax developed and did not improve with thoracic drainage. Bronchial occlusion with EWS failed due to spigot migration. However, a combination of EWS with NBCA could control the alveolar-pleural fistula. Thus, an EWS and NBCA combination may help prevent EWS migration, providing another option for patients who are unfit for surgery.

### PMID 36912814 (2023) — Journal of laparoendoscopic &amp; advanced surgical techniques. Part A
TITLE: Cyanoacrylate Tissue Adhesive After Chest Tube Removal in Children.
DOI: 10.1089/lap.2022.0503 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: After open or thoracoscopic lung biopsy, it is common to leave a chest tube as a postoperative drain that is typically removed on the first or second postoperative day. Standard technique is to apply an occlusive dressing at the site of chest tube removal using gauze and some form of tape. Methods: We reviewed the charts of children who underwent thoracoscopic lung biopsy at our institution for the past 9 years, many of whom left the operating room with a chest tube. When the tube was removed, the site was dressed, based on attending surgeon preference, with either cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive (Dermabond&#xae;; Ethicon, Cincinnati, OH) or a standard dressing with gauze and transparent occlusive adhesive dressing. Endpoints included wound complications and need for a secondary dressing. Results: Of 134 children who underwent thoracoscopic biopsy, 71 (53%) were given a chest tube. Chest tubes were removed at bedside in standard manner after a mean of 2.5 days. In 36 (50.7%) cyanoacrylate was used and in 35 (49.3%) a standard occlusive gauze dressing was used. No patient in either group suffered a wound dehiscence or needed a rescue dressing. There were no wound-related complications or surgical site infections in either group. Conclusion: Cyanoacrylate dressings are effective for closure of chest tube drain sites and appear to be safe. They might also save patients from having to deal with a bulky bandage and the discomfort of having a strong adhesive removed from their surgical site.

### PMID 37427979 (2023) — Science progress
TITLE: Fibrin Sealant TISSEEL Lyo as a haemostatic agent in vascular surgery: Results of randomized, controlled, patient-blinded, multicentre clinical study in the Russian population.
DOI: 10.1177/00368504231182834 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Multicenter Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This phase III, controlled, patient-blinded, multicentre study in two parallel, equal-sized treatment groups compared the efficacy and safety of TISSEEL Lyo, fibrin sealant versus Manual Compression (MC) with surgical gauze pads for use as a haemostatic agent in patients who underwent vascular surgery in Russia.
METHODS: Adult patients, both genders, who received peripheral vascular expanded polytetrafluoroethylene conduits and had suture line bleeding after surgical haemostasis were enrolled. Patients were randomized to be treated with TISSEEL Lyo or MC. The bleeding needed additional treatment and had to be assessed as grade 1 or 2 bleeding according to the Validated Intraoperative Bleeding scale. The primary efficacy endpoint was the proportion of patients achieving haemostasis at 4&#x2005;min after treatment application (T4) at the study suture line, which was maintained until the closure of the surgical wound. The secondary efficacy endpoints included the proportion of patients achieving haemostasis at 6&#x2005;min (T6) and 10&#x2005;min (T10) after treatment application at the study suture line, which was maintained until closure of the surgical wound, as well as the proportion of patients with intraoperative and postoperative rebleeding. Safety outcomes included incidence of adverse events (AEs), surgical site infections and graft occlusions.
RESULTS: A total of 110 patients were screened; 104 patients were randomized: (TISSEEL Lyo: 51 [49%] patients; MC: 53 [51%] patients). T4 haemostasis was achieved in 43 (84.3%) patients in the TISSEEL Lyo group and in 11 (20.8%) patients in the MC group (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Significantly more patients in TISSEEL Lyo group achieved the haemostasis at T6 (relative risk (RR) of achieving haemostasis 1.74 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.37; 2.35]) and T10 (RR 1.18 [95% CI 1.05; 1.38]) versus MC. No one had intraoperative rebleeding. Postoperative rebleeding was reported only in one patient in the MC group. No treatment-emergent serious AEs (TESAEs) related to TISSEEL Lyo/MC, TESAEs leading to withdrawal and TESAEs leading to death were reported in patients during the study.
CONCLUSIONS: Data demonstrated TISSEEL Lyo had clinically and statistically significant superiority to MC as a haemostatic agent in vascular surgery at all measured time points including 4, 6 and 10&#x2005;min and had proven to be safe.

### PMID 37300448 (2023) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: Injectable, Antibacterial, and Hemostatic Tissue Sealant Hydrogels.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202301551 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage and bacterial infections are major hurdles in the management of life-threatening surgical wounds. Most bioadhesives for wound closure lack sufficient hemostatic and antibacterial properties. Furthermore, they suffer from weak sealing efficacy, particularly for stretchable organs, such as the lung and bladder. Accordingly, there is an unmet need for mechanically robust hemostatic sealants with simultaneous antibacterial effects. Here, an injectable, photocrosslinkable, and stretchable hydrogel sealant based on gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA), supplemented with antibacterial zinc ferrite (ZF) nanoparticles and hemostatic silicate nanoplatelets (SNs) for rapid blood coagulation is nanoengineered. The hydrogel reduces the in vitro viability of Staphylococcus aureus by more than 90%. The addition of SNs (2% w/v) and ZF nanoparticles (1.5&#xa0;mg mL-1 ) to GelMA (20% w/v) improves the burst pressure of perforated ex vivo porcine lungs by more than 40%. Such enhancement translated to &#x2248;250% improvement in the tissue sealing capability compared with a commercial hemostatic sealant, Evicel. Furthermore, the hydrogels reduce bleeding by &#x2248;50% in rat bleeding models. The nanoengineered hydrogel may open new translational opportunities for the effective sealing of complex wounds that require mechanical flexibility, infection management, and hemostasis.

### PMID 37356481 (2023) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: FLOSEAL Versus SURGIFLO in Lumbar Surgery: Similar Outcomes, Different Costs in a Matched Cohort Analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.06.070 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Flowable gelatin-based matrices with thrombin for hemostatic control are commercially available as Floseal (Baxter International Inc.) and Surgiflo (Ethicon Inc.). The objective of this study is to compare the rate of blood transfusions following the use of Floseal and Surgiflo in lumbar spine surgery.
METHODS: Elective lumbar spine surgery patients between September 2019 and March 2021 were identified via CPT codes. Floseal 10 mL (N=102) and Surgiflo matrix 8 mL (N=108) cohorts excluded those younger than 18 years or those who underwent surgeries for infection, trauma, or tumor. The primary outcome was blood transfusion. Surgical complexity was controlled using the Surgical Invasiveness Index and Adult Spinal Deformity Invasiveness Score. The 1:1 propensity score matching was performed using demographic information, Surgical Invasiveness Index, Adult Spinal Deformity Invasiveness Score, and tranexamic acid use.
RESULTS: A total of 77 Floseal patients were propensity score matched with 77 Surgiflo patients. There was no difference in the rate of blood transfusion (p=0.441). There was also no difference in operative time, estimated blood loss, or postoperative hemoglobin levels. The Surgiflo cohort used more units per surgery (p=0.004) and cost $102.45 more per surgery. Switching to Floseal saves $102,450 per year per 1000 surgeries.
CONCLUSIONS: There was no difference in transfusion rates between using Floseal or Surgiflo for lumbar spine surgery. Surgiflo had higher usage per surgery and costs than Floseal.

### PMID 37269017 (2023) — Biomaterials research
TITLE: A hydrogel-based first-aid tissue adhesive with effective hemostasis and anti-bacteria for trauma emergency management.
DOI: 10.1186/s40824-023-00392-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Clinical tissue adhesives remain some critical drawbacks for managing emergency injuries, such as inadequate adhesive strength and insufficient anti-infection ability. Herein, a novel, self-healing, and antibacterial carboxymethyl chitosan/polyaldehyde dextran (CMCS/PD) hydrogel is designed as the first-aid tissue adhesive for effective trauma emergency management.
METHODS: We examined the gel-forming time, porosity, self-healing, antibacterial properties, cytotoxicity, adhesive strength, and hemocompatibility. Liver hemorrhage, tail severance, and skin wound infection models of rats are constructed in vivo, respectively.
RESULTS: Results demonstrate that the CMCS/PD&#xa0;hydrogel has the rapid gel-forming (~&#x2009;5&#xa0;s), good self-healing, and effective antibacterial abilities, and could adhere to tissue firmly (adhesive strength of&#x2009;~&#x2009;10&#xa0;kPa and burst pressure of 327.5&#xa0;mmHg) with excellent hemocompatibility and cytocompatibility. This suggests the great prospect of CMCS/PD&#xa0;hydrogel in acting as a first-aid tissue adhesive for trauma emergency management. The CMCS/PD hydrogel is observed to not only achieve rapid hemostasis for curing liver hemorrhage and tail severance in comparison to commercial hemostatic gel (Surgiflo &#xae;) but also exhibit superior anti-infection for treating acute skin trauma compared with clinical disinfectant gel (Prontosan &#xae;).
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the CMCS/PD&#xa0;hydrogel offers a promising candidate for first-aid tissue adhesives to manage the trauma emergency. Because of the rapid gel-forming time, it could also be applied as a liquid first-aid bandage for mini-invasive surgical treatment.

### PMID 37933349 (2023) — Cureus
TITLE: Surgicel&#xae; Granuloma Mimicking Recurrent Thyroid Tumor After Thyroidectomy: A Case Report and Literature Review.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.46587 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidized regenerated cellulose, commonly known by the brand name Surgicel&#xae;, is a hemostatic agent widely used in various surgical procedures. While it is generally considered safe and effective, there have been reports of complications associated with its use, including the formation of pseudotumoral lesions. This article presents a case of a patient who developed a Surgicel&#xae; granuloma in the thyroid bed, mimicking a recurrent tumor. Surgicel&#xae; is known to cause a chronic inflammatory reaction, leading to foreign body giant cell formation and fibroblastic proliferation. Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology is a valuable diagnostic tool for identifying pseudotumoral lesions caused by oxidized cellulose. The characteristic appearance of oxidized cellulose fragments and the presence of a granulomatous reaction can help distinguish these lesions from tumor recurrence or abscesses. To prevent Surgicel&#xae; granuloma, it is recommended to use the minimal amount necessary to achieve hemostasis. It is also important to document its use in the operative report. In cases where a recurrent mass lesion is suspected postoperatively, a comprehensive medical history, imaging studies, and FNA are essential for accurate diagnosis and management. This case report highlights the importance of considering Surgicel&#xae;-induced granuloma in the differential diagnosis of recurrent thyroid-bed tumors. A correct diagnosis can help avoid unnecessary aggressive interventions, particularly in cancer patients.

### PMID 37727334 (2023) — Gland surgery
TITLE: The novel use and feasibility of hemostatic oxidized regenerated cellulose agent (SurgiGuard&#xae;): multicenter retrospective study.
DOI: 10.21037/gs-22-675 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: SurgiGuard&#xae; is an absorbent hemostatic agent based on oxidized regenerated cellulose. The efficacy, effects and safety of SurgiGuard&#xae; are equivalent to existing hemostatic agents in animal experiments. This study was designed to confirm that the use of SurgiGuard&#xae; alone is effective, safe and feasible compared to combination with other hemostatic methods.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed clinical data from 12 surgery departments in seven tertiary centers in South Korea nationwide. All surgeries were performed between January and December 2018.
RESULTS: A total of 807 patients were enrolled; 447 patients (55.4%) had comorbidities. The rate of major surgery (operative time &#x2265;4 hours) was 44% (n=355 patients). Regarding the type of SurgiGuard&#xae; used in surgery, more than 70% of minor surgeries used non-woven types. In major surgery, more than five SurgiGuards&#xae; were used in 7.3% (26 patients), and the proportion of co-usage (with four other hemostatic products) was 19.7% (70 patients). The effectiveness score was higher when SurgiGuard&#xae; was used alone in both major (5.3&#xb1;0.5 vs. 5.1&#xb1;0.6, P=0.048) and minor surgery (5.4&#xb1;0.6 vs. 5.2&#xb1;0.4, P&lt;0.001). Seven patients had immediate re-bleeding, and all of them used SurgiGuard&#xae; and other products together. Nine patients reported adverse effects, such as abscess, bleeding, or leg swelling, but we found no direct correlation with SurgiGuard&#xae;.
CONCLUSIONS: SurgiGuard&#xae; exhibited greater effectiveness when used alone. No direct adverse effects associated with SurgiGuard&#xae; use were reported, and SurgiGuard&#xae; had stable feasibility. Prospective comparative studies are needed in the future.

### PMID 37526076 (2023) — Expert review of medical devices
TITLE: A contemporary systematic review of the complications associated with SURGICEL.
DOI: 10.1080/17434440.2023.2242776 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This review aims to summarize the findings from recent literature (2010-2022) reporting on complications that resulted from the surgical use of SURGICEL for intraoperative hemostasis.
METHODS: A literature search was conducted using the MEDLINE (OVID), Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials - CENTRAL (OVID) databases. The studies were sorted into case reports and other study types for data extraction. Covidence was used for data extraction and statistics were descriptive.
RESULTS: Of the total 560 articles screened, 73 papers were selected for a full-text review and 70 studies were included in this review. A total of 7,242 participants were included in the studies (case studies n&#x2009;=&#x2009;93, others n&#x2009;=&#x2009;7149). 67/70 of the included studies reported complications when SURGICEL was used intraoperatively. Reported complications included: SURGICEL induced masses (granulomas, abscesses, hematomas, cysts) (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;25), hemorrhagic complications (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12), masses misdiagnosed as tumors, cardiovascular, nervous system, and hepatobiliary complications, pain, and infections. Other complications included: fistulas, erectile dysfunction, chorioamnionitis, swelling, urinary leak, renal failure, and anaphylaxis.
CONCLUSIONS: Publications reporting on complications associated with the use of SURGICEL intraoperatively have continued to emerge. Future studies should compare how the types and rates of complications compare between SURGICEL and alternative hemostatic agents.

### PMID 37197101 (2023) — Cureus
TITLE: Neck Sinus Post-Thyroidectomy Secondary to Retained Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.37605 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The present study aims to report the first case of chronic neck sinus post-thyroidectomy caused by oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC). A 55-year-old female patient&#xa0;underwent a total thyroidectomy operation. Three months after the surgery, the patient presented with persistent purulent discharge and sinus at the site of the drain. A CT scan of the neck showed a fistula tract, deep-neck fluid collection, and bilateral paratracheal high-density lesions at the thyroid bed, suggesting infected foreign bodies. The patient underwent surgery, during which the mesh of the ORC was found nonresorbed at the paratracheal space. The treatment involved neck exploration with the removal of all retained material and excision of the sinus tract. The patient had a favorable outcome following the surgical excision of the sinus tract and the removal of retained hemostatic materials. Further research is needed to explore the risk factors and preventive measures&#xa0;for neck sinus formation to enhance the safety and outcomes of thyroidectomy.

### PMID 37168937 (2023) — American journal of clinical and experimental urology
TITLE: Evaluation of postoperative bleeding control employing Surgicel: a clinical trial.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Various techniques have been developed for the rapid control of bleeding as a potential surgical complication. Research shows that the Surgicel has a significant effect on reducing bleeding in most surgeries; however, in our experimental observations on patients undergoing open prostatectomy, not only no significant reduction was seen in the amount of bleeding, but in some cases, Surgicel led to infection. Therefore, in this study, the effect of the Surgicel on infection and bleeding in open prostatectomy was investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty patients undergoing open prostatectomy were randomly divided into two groups. To control bleeding after suturing the bladder neck, the Surgicel was installed in the first group, while it was not in the second group. Hemoglobin, hematocrit, PT, PTT, INR, bleeding rate, and postoperative complications were evaluated in all patients.
RESULTS: In the studied groups, hemoglobin level and hematocrit percentage before surgery and on the first and second days after surgery, along with coagulation status, were compared in terms of PT, PTT, and INR. There were no significant differences between the studied variables and baseline variables.
CONCLUSION: The present study revealed that the Surgicel in open prostatectomy was ineffective in controlling bleeding and can lead to infection.

### PMID 37062549 (2023) — Saudi medical journal
TITLE: Surgicel plug technique versus endoclose technique for port-site closure post minimally invasive (robotic and laparoscopic) surgeries: Retrospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.15537/smj.2023.44.4.20220899 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To compares the endoclose technique (ET) techniques and surgicel plug technique (SPT) in terms of port-site related complications. Minimally invasive surgeries (MIS) are widely performed nowadays, nonetheless, port-site closure technique plays a role in the prevention of port-site related complications.
METHODS: This retrospective study was carried out at general surgery and urology departments of King Fahad Medical City, Saudi Arabia. Variables that were collected include age, gender, height, weight, body mass index, co-morbidities, type and date of surgery, intraoperative visceral injury or bleeding, technique cost, and port-site post-operative complications (hernia, infection, bleeding, dehiscence, and hypertrophic scarring). Data was collected from electronic medical records. Patients included are whom underwent any minimally invasive procedure from the beginning of 2014 until the end of September 2020. Follow up period was at least for 2 years.
RESULTS: We analyzed 397 patients. Surgicel plug technique was more of having hernia (2.3%) than of ET (0%). While ET was more on infection (0.9%) than in SPT, but no significant difference being observed (p=0.064).
CONCLUSION: There is no significant difference between the ET and the novel SPT in terms of port-site related complications.

### PMID 36874754 (2023) — Cureus
TITLE: Real-World Data on the Usage of Hemopatch&#xae; as a Hemostat and Dural Sealant in Cranial and Spinal Neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.34387 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and objectives Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a significant complication in cranial and spinal interventions. Hemostatic patches such as Hemopatch&#xae; are therefore used to support the watertight closure of the dura mater. Recently, we published the results of a large registry documenting the effectiveness and safety of Hemopatch&#xae; in various surgical specialties, including neurosurgery. Here we aimed to analyze the outcomes from the neurological/spinal cohort of this registry in more detail. Methods Based on the data from the original registry, we performed a post hoc analysis for the neurological/spinal cohort. The Hemopatch&#xae; registry was designed as a prospective, multicenter, single-arm observational study. All surgeons were familiar with the application of Hemopatch&#xae; and it was used at the discretion of the responsible surgeon. The neurological/spinal cohort was open for patients of any age if they had received Hemopatch&#xae; during an open or minimally invasive cranial or spinal procedure. Patients with known hypersensitivity to bovine proteins or brilliant blue, intraoperative pulsatile severe bleeding, or an active infection at the potential target application site (TAS) were excluded from the registry. For the posthoc evaluation, we stratified the patients of the neurological/spinal cohort into two sub-cohorts: cranial and spinal. We collected information about the TAS, intraoperative achievement of watertight closure of the dura, and occurrence of postoperative CSF leaks. Results The registry comprised 148 patients in the neurological/spinal cohort when enrolment was stopped. The dura was the application site for Hemopatch&#xae; in 147 patients (in one patient in the sacral region after tumor excision), of which 123 underwent a cranial procedure. Twenty-four patients underwent a spinal procedure. Intraoperatively, watertight closure was achieved in 130 patients (cranial sub-cohort: 119; spinal sub-cohort: 11). Postoperative CSF leakage occurred in 11 patients (cranial sub-cohort: nine; spinal sub-cohort: two). We observed no serious adverse events related to Hemopatch&#xae;. Conclusion Our post hoc analysis of real-world data from a European registry confirms the safe and effective use of Hemopatch&#xae; in neurosurgery, including cranial and spinal procedures, as also observed in some case series.

### PMID 38146409 (2023) — The journal of Tehran Heart Center
TITLE: Vegetation Formation and Aortitis as a Possible Sequela of COVID-19 in a Patient with an Aortic Stent: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.18502/jthc.v18i3.14117 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bacteria, especially staphylococcal groups, cause aortic graft infection. Infection stems from synthetic materials that repair aneurysms or artery blockages. Aortic stent infection and vegetation formation are rare, and heterogeneous presentations and ambiguous findings in routine diagnostic modalities render the diagnosis challenging. A 25-year-old man with a history of catheter-based aortic stenting for hypertension associated with severe aortic coarctation was referred to our tertiary care hospital. Five months before the presentation, the patient had been infected with COVID-19, but he recovered after mild symptoms. Nevertheless, 3 months later, he developed erythematous lesions, progressive anorexia, epigastric pain, fever, and weakness. The results of blood tests, blood cultures, transthoracic echocardiography, plain chest radiography, computed tomography angiography, and electrocardiography were unremarkable. We found severe infectious aortitis, crescent thickness surrounding the aorta, pseudoaneurysm development, and a mass with dimensions of 17 mm&#xd7;8 mm within the aortic stent on transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy was initiated, and the patient was transferred to the operating room, where the infected stent and adhesive vegetation were removed. The patient recovered remarkably after the surgery and was discharged. At 6 months' follow-up, he was in good condition. Our findings highlight the significance of maintaining vigilance and a high level of clinical suspicion for the possibility of vegetation formation and aortitis as the possible sequelae of COVID-19, particularly in patients with an implanted stent. Furthermore, we strongly suggest TEE in patients with implanted stents to detect vegetation and aortitis.

### PMID 35083593 (2022) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Sinonasal outcomes associated with the use of BioGlue&#xae; in endoscopic transsphenoidal pituitary surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-021-01723-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Concerns have been raised in the neurosurgical literature regarding the use of BioGlue&#xae;, a tissue sealant initially developed for cardiothoracic surgery, due to reports of an increased incidence of infection, wound breakdown, and CSF fistulae. The aim of this study was to determine if the use of BioGlue&#xae; in skull base repair impacts on the sinonasal outcomes and the incidence of post-operative infection following endoscopic pituitary surgery. SNOT-22 questionnaires were completed pre-operatively, and at 6, 12, and 24&#xa0;weeks post-operatively by 50 patients. Pre- and post-operative MRI scans were reviewed and assessed for evidence of post-operative sinusitis. Patient records were consulted to ascertain the incidence of post-operative infection. Repeated measures ANOVA and Wilcoxon signed rank test were used for data analysis. Statistical analysis revealed a significant difference in the mean SNOT-22 scores across the four time intervals (F(1.605, 78.642)&#x2009;=&#x2009;9.180, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.001). This difference was powered by a deterioration at 6&#xa0;weeks that recovered completely by 12&#xa0;weeks. The mean SNOT-22 score in the study cohort at 24&#xa0;weeks was 16.84/110 (range 0-57,&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.04) which was lower than the mean pre-operative score and is consistent with mild rhinosinusitis. There were no cases of post-operative meningitis and 1/50 (2%) case of post-operative sinusitis in this cohort. The use of BioGlue&#xae; in endoscopic endonasal pituitary surgery does not appear to lead to significant sinonasal morbidity. Previous concerns about the use of BioGlue&#xae; in transcranial procedures may not apply to extradural application of this tissue sealant in endoscopic transnasal surgery.

### PMID 36087335 (2022) — Journal of neurosurgery. Pediatrics
TITLE: Association between synthetic sealants and increased complication rates in posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty for Chiari malformations regardless of graft type.
DOI: 10.3171/2022.7.PEDS22231 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Dural sealants are commonly used in posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty (PFDD) for Chiari malformation type I (CMI). Prior evidence suggests that combining certain sealants with some graft material is associated with an increased rate of complications. In 2018, the authors noted an increased rate of symptomatic pseudomeningocele and aseptic meningitis after PFDD in CMI patients. The authors utilized retrospective and prospective analyses to test the hypothesis that complication rates increase with the use or combination of certain sealants and grafts.
METHODS: The analysis was split into 2 periods. The authors retrospectively reviewed patients who underwent PFDD for CMI at their center between August 12, 2011, and December 31, 2018. The authors then eliminated use of DuraSeal on the basis of the retrospective analysis and prospectively examined complication rates from January 1, 2019, to August 4, 2021. The authors defined a complication as symptomatic pseudomeningocele, bacterial or aseptic meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid leak, subdural hygroma, hydrocephalus, surgical site infection, or wound dehiscence.
RESULTS: From 2011 to 2018, complications occurred in 24.5% of 110 patients. Sealant choice was correlated with complication rates: no sealant (0%), Tisseel (6%), and DuraSeal (15.3%) (p &lt; 0.001). No difference in complication rate was noted on the basis of choice of graft material (p = 0.844). After eliminating DuraSeal, the authors followed 40 patients who underwent PFDD after 2018. The complication rate decreased to 12.5%. All complications after 2018 were associated with Tisseel.
CONCLUSIONS: At the authors' single center, use of sealants in PFDD surgery for CMI, especially DuraSeal, was correlated with a higher complication rate. Eliminating DuraSeal led to a significant decrease in the rate of symptomatic pseudomeningocele and aseptic meningitis.

### PMID 36031599 (2022) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Clinical and economic outcomes after sternotomy for cardiac surgery with skin closure through 2-octyl cyanoacrylate plus polymer mesh tape versus absorbable sutures plus waterproof wound dressings: a retrospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-022-01956-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To compare clinical and economic outcomes after sternotomy for cardiac surgery with skin closure through 2-octyl cyanoacrylate plus polymer mesh tape (2OPMT) versus conventional absorbable sutures plus waterproof wound dressings (CSWWD).
METHODS: Retrospective study using the Premier Healthcare Database. Patients undergoing a cardiac surgery requiring sternotomy with 2OPMT or CSWWD were included. Primary outcome was 60-day cumulative incidence of diagnosis for wound complications (infection, dehiscence). Secondary outcomes were index admission hospital length of stay (LOS), total hospital-borne costs, discharge status, and 60-day cumulative incidences of inpatient readmission and reoperation. After propensity score matching, outcomes were compared between the 2OPMT and CSWWD groups using bivariate multilevel mixed-effects generalized linear models.
RESULTS: Overall, 7,901 2OPMT patients and 10,775 CSWWD patients were eligible for study. After propensity score matching on 68 variables, each group comprised 5,338 patients (total study N&#x2009;=&#x2009;10,676). The 2OPMT and CSWWD groups did not differ significantly in terms of the 60-day cumulative incidences of wound complication (3.47% vs 3.47%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.996), inpatient readmission (12.6% vs. 13.6%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.354), and reoperation (10.3% vs 10.1%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.808), as well as discharge to home versus non-home setting (77.2% vs. 75.1%), p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.254. However, the 2OPMT group had significantly lower LOS (9.2&#xa0;days vs 10.6&#xa0;days, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) and total hospital-borne costs ($50,174&#xa0;vs $60,526, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This large observational study provides evidence that sternotomy skin closure with 2OPMT is associated with nearly identical 60-day cumulative incidence of wound complication as compared with CSWWD, while exhibiting a significant association with lower LOS and total hospital-borne costs. Trial registration Not applicable.

### PMID 35949828 (2022) — World journal of clinical cases
TITLE: Strategies and challenges in treatment of varicose veins and venous insufficiency.
DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i18.5946 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Patients with varicose veins can be treated with conservative or surgical approaches based on the clinical conditions and patient preferences. In the recent decade, the recommendations for managing symptomatic varicose veins have changed dramatically due to the rise of minimally invasive endovascular techniques. The literature was systematically searched on Medline without language restrictions. All papers on the treatment of varicose veins and venous insufficiency with different procedures were included and reviewed. Endovenous laser ablation (EVLA) and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) both are same safe and effective in terms of occlusion rate, and time to return to normal activity. In comparison with RFA or EVLT, Cure conservatrice et Hemodynamique de l'Insufficience Veineuse en Ambulatoire (CHIVA) may cause more bruising and make little or no difference to rates of limb infection, superficial vein thrombosis, nerve injury, or hematoma. In terms of recurrence of varicose veins, there is little or no difference between CHIVA and stripping, RFA, or EVLT. Great saphenous vein recanalization is highest in the ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy (FS) group (51%) during 1 year of follow-up. The 2013 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence clinical guidelines recommend surgery as a third-line therapeutic option after EVLA or RFA and sclerotherapy. Although the mechanochemical endovenous ablation (MOCA) is a non-thermal, non-tumescent option and appears to be of similar efficacy to stab avulsion with no potential risk of nerve damage, the overall success rate of MOCA is lower than those of other procedures such as EVLA, RFA, or high ligation and stripping. EVLA is the most cost-effective therapeutic option, with RFA being a close second for the treatment of patients with varicose veins. Endovenous thermal ablation (EVLA or RFA) is recommended as a first-line treatment for varicose veins and has substituted the high ligation of saphenofemoral junctional reflux and stripping of varicose veins. Ultrasound-guided FS is associated with a high recurrence rate and can be used in conjunction with other procedures. MOCA and cyanoacrylate embolization appear promising, but evidence of their effectiveness is required.

### PMID 35038891 (2022) — Journal of investigative medicine high impact case reports
TITLE: Massive Chylous Ascites After Living Donor Nephrectomy Successfully Treated With Lymphatic Embolization.
DOI: 10.1177/23247096211065631 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chylous ascites may result from a variety of pathological conditions, most of them from nontraumatic causes, such as congenital defects of the lymphatic system, infections, liver cirrhosis, and malignancy. Rarely, chylous ascites occurs as an iatrogenic complication after left-sided laparoscopic donor nephrectomy (LDN). Injury to the cisterna chyli and its main lymphatic tributaries around the para-aortic region intraoperatively can cause the lymphatic fluid to accumulate. There is currently no standardized treatment for chylous ascites as there have only been 54 cases documented to date. Most patients can be managed with conservative therapy. Recommended guidelines include high-protein and low-fat diet with medium-chain triglycerides. Paracentesis is often used as a diagnostic and therapeutic first-line measure with total parenteral nutrition (TPN), bowel rest, and somatostatin analogue as adjunct therapies. We present a case of massive chylous ascites refractory to conservative therapy. The patient had progressive abdominal distention and unintentional weight gain 2 weeks postoperatively warranting multiple paracenteses of &gt;7 L of chylous fluid. Ultimately, the patient was successfully treated with lymphatic embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue.

### PMID 34543711 (2022) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: How to Prevent Surgical Site Infection in Vascular Surgery: A Review of the Evidence.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2021.06.045 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This review aims to identify and review the current evidence for preventing postoperative surgical site infections in abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery or infrainguinal arterial surgery.
METHODS: Extended literature review of clinical trials that examined the prevention of postoperative surgical site infections in abdominal aortic aneurysm or infrainguinal arterial surgery. Searches were conducted on Ovid MEDLINE (1950 - 13 March 2020) using key terms for vascular surgery, surgical site infections and specific preventative techniques. Articles were included if they discussed a relationship between a preventative technique and surgical site infections in abdominal aortic aneurysm or infrainguinal arterial surgery. The GRADE guidelines were used to assess the quality of evidence.
RESULTS: 21 techniques and 81 studies were included. Prophylactic antibiotics and negative pressure wound therapy have a high quality of evidence for the prevention of surgical site infections in abdominal aortic aneurysm or infrainguinal arterial surgery. A moderate quality evidence base was identified for gentamicin containing collagen implant (confined to high surgical site infection risk centers). Currently, there is a low or very low quality of evidence to suggest a reduction in the surgical site infection rate for combination therapy, glycaemic control, Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus screening and absorbable suture. Evidence suggests no beneficial effect for nutritional supplementation, chlorhexidine bath, hair removal therapy, Staphylococcus aureus nasal eradication, cyanoacrylate microsealant, silver grafts, rifampicin bonded grafts, triclosan coated suture and postoperative wound drains. Endoscopic saphenous vein harvest may reduce surgical site infection rate (very low quality of evidence) but may lower long-term patency. Autologous vein grafts may increase surgical site infections (very low quality of evidence) but may provide better long-term patency rates in above-knee infrainguinal bypass surgery. There was no identified evidence for perioperative normothermia, electrosurgical bipolar vessel sealer or Dermabond and Tegaderm for surgical site infection prevention in vascular surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Prophylactic antibiotics and postoperative negative pressure wound therapy are effective in the prevention of postoperative surgical site infection in abdominal aortic aneurysm or infrainguinal arterial surgery. There exists a significant risk of bias in the literature for many preventative techniques and further studies are required to investigate the efficacy of gentamicin containing collagen implant, and specific combination therapies.

### PMID 36264129 (2022) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Alaska pollock gelatin sealant shows long-term efficacy and safety in a pulmonary air leakage rat model.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezac497 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Postoperative prolonged air leakage is a frequent complication following lung resection. We have shown the high adhesive quality of a newly developed sealant based on a hydrophobically modified Alaska pollock-derived gelatin (ApGltn) sealant in acute in vivo settings. The purpose of this study was to investigate the long-term efficacy and safety of ApGltn sealant using rats as a preclinical model.
METHODS: An air leakage rat model with a 5-mm pleural defect was created, to which ApGltn sealant or fibrin sealant was applied. In both groups, the rats were evaluated on days 1, 7, 14 and 28. In the ApGltn sealant group, days 56 and 84 were added to evaluate absorption as sealant was still present on day 28. The number of rats in each subgroup was 4 (for a total of 40). Lung specimens and blood samples were obtained for histological and haematological assessment.
RESULTS: No findings suggesting infection or air leakage were observed. ApGltn sealant was absorbed from day 56 to day 84. Histologically, although neutrophil and lymphocyte infiltrations on the lung side did not differ between groups, those on the sealant side were significantly less in the ApGltn sealant group. Blood sample tests revealed no significant findings suggesting inflammation or organ damage in either group.
CONCLUSIONS: ApGltn sealant showed long-term sealing efficacy and safety with mild inflammation in a pulmonary air leakage rat model. ApGltn sealant is expected to be a safe and effective sealant for clinical applications.

### PMID 35647964 (2022) — Indian journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Repeated use of fibrin sealants kept at room temperature in conjunctival autografting: An animal study.
DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_2588_21 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: In this study, our aim was to investigate if fibrin adhesives used in conjunctival wound surgery with autologous conjunctival grafts could be used repeatedly at different times after surgical opening.
METHODS: 40 New Zealand rabbits were used in the study. These animals were divided into four groups, each consisting of 10 rabbits, and hence 20 eyes. In the first group (control group), Tisseel fibrin sealant was used on the day the eye was first opened surgically; in the second group, it was used on the seventh day; on the third group, it was used on the 14th day; and in the fourth group, it was used 28 days after surgical opening. The graft from the inferior bulbar conjunctiva was attached using Tisseel fibrin glue to the superior scleral bed at the location where the superior bulbar conjunctiva was excised in the same eye.
RESULTS: No microbial growth was detected in the cultures of the samples tested. There were two partial graft loss in group 2 and there was one partial graft loss in each group of the other groups, and further total graft loss was present in one rabbit in group 3. None of the rabbits had any complications like granuloma, Corneal dellen or infection.
CONCLUSION: Based on these results, fibrin sealants can be used repeatedly by storing them at room temperature. Repeated use of fibrin adhesives will reduce the cost of ophthalmologic surgeries and non-ophthalmologic surgeries.

### PMID 35672203 (2022) — Journal of cranio-maxillo-facial surgery : official publication of the European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery
TITLE: Drainless parotidectomy using tissue fibrin sealant - A retrospective case-control study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2022.05.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of drainless parotidectomy using fibrin sealant on length of stay, post-operative seroma and related complications. For this purpose, a retrospective matched case-control series was held in a single academic center. All patients who underwent drainless parotidectomies, including deep lobe tumors and revision surgeries, were compared to matched controls in which a suction drain was inserted. Main outcomes were length of hospital stay and post-operative seroma. A total of 123 patients (41 cases and 82 controls) were included in the study. Fibrin sealant group had higher rates of total parotidectomy compared with the control group (25.0% vs. 10.5%, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.054). Length of stay was significantly shorter in the fibrin sealant group (1.0&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.3 days vs. 1.5&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.6 days, p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001, respectively). No statistically significant difference was found between the fibrin sealant group and the control regarding post-operative seromas (9.8% vs. 14.6%, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.574, respectively), aspirations rate (7.3% vs. 14.6%, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.381), and infection rates (0% vs.3.7%, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.550). In conclusion, drainless parotidectomy does not increase post operative seroma rates and related complications, and can also be implemented for revision surgery.

### PMID 36315924 (2022) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Arthrozheal&#xae;, a Bioactive Fibrin Scaffold for Joint Cartilage, Tendon and Soft Tissue Lesions. Latest Results and Application Perspectives.
DOI: 10.52198/22.STI.41.OS1636 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Treatment of articular cartilage, tendon and soft tissue damage remains a challenge for the practicing orthopaedic surgeon. Due to the multifactorial aetiology of these lesions, there is a narrow therapeutic window within which they can be treated successfully, thus preventing progression to other musculoskeletal tissues. Recently, a new material that combines platelet-rich fibrin with collagen and is applied as a gel scaffold (ArthroZheal&#xae;, Vivostat A/S, Aller&#xf8;d, Denmark) has been shown to provide unique results in these patients. We arthroscopically treated 210 patients (114 knees, 32 hips, 52 shoulders, 12 ankle joints) with ArthroZheal&#xae;. The basic idea was to adjust treatment to the individual patient and to repair related and/or contributing problems before or along with treatment of chondral/tendon/ligament injuries. Arthroscopy was our preferred surgical method; the goal was to restore and preserve function, alleviate pain and minimise progression to osteoarthritis. We excluded cases of inflammatory arthropathy, unstable or malaligned joint, "kissing lesions" (bipolar), infection, obesity, massive rotator cuff rupture and multiligament instability. Our results were more than promising. We observed improved mobility in 93%, reduced pain in 95% at 3 months and further improvement at 6 months, with near-normal ROM (97% ) and pain-free status (98%). The MRI at 12 months post application showed cartilage restoration/reformation in 94% of patients, improved cartilage quality (84% )-by 2nd-look arthroscopic confirmation&#xf02d;and normal tendon or ligament reconstruction (without stitching of the affected area)(95%). We were concerned about bone marrow oedema and rehab compliance among elderly patients. For successful regeneration of tissue lesions and osteochondral defects, natural gel bioscaffolds, combined with platelet rich fibrin (PRF) with chondroinductive and osteoinductive growth factor stimulators (ArthroZheal&#xae;) are required. There is no "gold standard" in the treatment of cartilage defect/tissue lesions or preferred treatment option. Many algorithms are used, which mostly rely on the surface area of the defect/site of lesion and on surgeon experience. An important issue is that rehabilitation depends on the treatment mode used and on the defect/lesion characteristics (classification and qualification). While a return to functional work and sports is possible with all procedures, different lengths of time are needed.

### PMID 36570577 (2022) — The Saudi dental journal
TITLE: Gelatin-based hemostatic agents for medical and dental application at a glance: A narrative literature review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.sdentj.2022.11.007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Uncontrolled bleeding is linked to higher treatment costs, risk of post-surgical infection and increased disease and death. Hemostatic agents are used to treat excessive bleeding. A good hemostatic agent controls bleeding effectively, reduces the need for blood transfusion, removes the need for systemic drugs to control bleeding, results in shorter surgery time, and reduces the cost and length of hospital stay of the patient. Gelatin-based hemostatic agents have been widely used in medical and dental procedures, owing to their biodegradability and biocompatibility, as well as availability and low cost of raw materials. In this narrative literature review, we discuss the background and different types of gelatin-based hemostatic agents in medical and dental procedures, the comparison of gelatin-based and non-gelatin-based hemostatic agents, and the usage and development of enhanced or novel gelatin-based hemostatic agents. Gelatin-based hemostatic agents are effective and important part of bleeding control, as evidenced by its wide application in medicine and dentistry. The development of novel combination gelatin-based hemostatic agents has much potential for effective control of excessive bleeding.

### PMID 36071989 (2022) — JSLS : Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons
TITLE: Exploring Adverse Events and Utilization of Topical Hemostatic Agents in Surgery.
DOI: 10.4293/JSLS.2022.00033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: This retrospective study provides preliminary qualitative assessment of the adverse events (AEs), focusing on pelvic and abdominal AEs and patient outcomes reported for three hemostatic agents used in gynecologic surgery.
METHODS: Utilization rates for oxidized regenerated cellulose powder (ORC), polysaccharide powder (PSP), and fibrin sealant solution (FSS) were obtained from hospitals via the Premier Healthcare databases for all surgical procedures from January 1, 2018 to September 30, 2020. All reported cases were extracted from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) database for ORC and PSP and from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database for FSS. Distributions of AEs by anatomical site (MAUDE/FAERS) and surgical procedures by specialty (Premier) were evaluated for each product. Number of cases and number and types of AEs were compared to the total utilization for each product.
RESULTS: PSP was the most used product during the period analyzed (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;126,509 uses), followed by FSS (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;80,628 uses), and ORC (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;41,583 uses). Distribution of surgical procedures by anatomical site varied significantly between hemostatic agents (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). ORC was associated with more patient cases with AEs and numbers of reported AEs compared with PSP and FSS (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). ORC was associated with higher number of infections than PSP (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) and FSS (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that ORC use in abdominal and pelvic surgery may result in more postoperative complications compared with non-ORC hemostatic agents. Further prospective randomized studies are needed to compare efficacy and safety of these products.

### PMID 36055918 (2022) — Clinical breast cancer
TITLE: Effect of Microporous Polysaccharide Particles in Patients Undergoing Mastectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clbc.2022.07.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Microporous polysaccharide particles (MPP, proprietary name "Arista AH"), derived from purified plant starch, are used to augment hemostasis at surgery. The effect of MPP regarding short-term complications after mastectomy remains an area of ongoing investigation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A single-institution, retrospective chart review of patients undergoing unilateral mastectomy without reconstruction from January 2019 to 2021 was performed. Primary endpoints included antibiotic prescription, seroma or abscess drainage, readmission, wound dehiscence, and time to drain removal within 30 days of initial surgery. Wilcoxon rank sum test or Student t test was used for group comparisons for continuous variables; Chi-square test or Fisher exact test was used to evaluate the associations among categorical variables.
RESULTS: One hundred ninety patients were included; 119 received MPP and 71 did not. There was no difference in antibiotic prescription, infection drainage, hematoma, readmission, dehiscence, or time to drain removal with regards to MPP use. MPP treated patients were older (65.8 years vs. 59.1, P &lt; .001) and had lower albumin levels (4.1 g/dL vs. 4.3, P = .025). Patients who underwent abscess drainage had higher body mass index ( mean 36.1 vs. 30.1 P = .036). Patients requiring seroma drainage were more likely to be diabetic (12.8% vs. 4%, P = .035) and to have been treated with lymphovenous anastomosis (LVA, 15.6% vs. 3.8%, P = .009). Patients who had LVA were significantly less likely to receive MPP when compared to other groups (3.1% vs. 74.7% P &lt; .001).
CONCLUSION: Consider utilizing MPP in patients at higher risk of seroma, such as those undergoing axillary surgery including LVA.

### PMID 35434322 (2022) — Laryngoscope investigative otolaryngology
TITLE: Effect of microporous polysaccharide hemospheres on anterolateral thigh free flap donor site complications.
DOI: 10.1002/lio2.770 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative seroma is the most common donor site complication following anterolateral thigh (ALT) free flap harvest for head and neck reconstruction. The utility of novel microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPH) has not been studied as a hemostatic agent in this setting.
METHODS: Prospective, single-blind, randomized controlled trial of patients undergoing fasciocutaneous ALT harvest for head and neck reconstruction at a tertiary academic medical center between April 2018 and February 2020. The intervention (MPH) group received 3&#xa0;g of topical MPH to the ALT donor site prior to closure whereas the control group did not receive application of MPH. Outcomes included total drain output (ml), drain output during postoperative days (POD) 1-3 alone, drain duration (days), and incidence of donor site hematoma, seroma, or infection.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine patients were randomized to the MPH group and 26 to the control group. For MPH and control groups, mean total drain output was 284.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;153.0&#xa0;ml versus 317.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;177.6&#xa0;ml (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;.527), mean POD 1-3 drain output alone was 169.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;88.8&#xa0;ml versus 157.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;78.7&#xa0;ml (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;.749), and drain duration was 5.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.5&#x2009;days versus 6.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.6&#x2009;days (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;.144), respectively. There was no significant difference in seroma (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;.733), hematoma (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;.492), or infection (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.000). Drain output was not significantly influenced by gender, age, body weight, or smoking habits.
CONCLUSION: MPH administration to ALT free flap donor sites did not significantly improve drain output, hematoma formation, or seroma formation.Level of Evidence 2.

### PMID 36590141 (2022) — Breast care (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Evaluating HEmopatch&#xae; in Reducing Seroma-Related Complications following Axillary Lymph Node DIssection: A Pilot Study (HEIDI).
DOI: 10.1159/000525839 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) is performed to treat locoregional metastatic disease in breast cancer and melanoma patients. However, it is notorious for its complications, most commonly seroma formation and its sequelae. Ample research has been done to evaluate seroma formation after ALND; these results, however, have not been conclusive. Hence, this pilot study aimed to evaluate a readily available haemostatic patch, Hemopatch&#xae;, to assess its effect on seroma formation following ALND.
METHODS: In this pilot study, a prospective cohort of 20 patients receiving Hemopatch&#xae; following ALND was compared to a retrospective cohort of patients who underwent ALND between 2014 and 2019. The primary outcome measure was the number of patients developing clinically significant seroma (CSS) after ALND. Additionally, the number of wound complications, subsequent interventions, additional outpatient clinic visits, and drain output was assessed. Differences between groups were deemed clinically relevant if the proportions differed &gt;50% between groups.
RESULTS: In total, 20 prospective and 42 retrospective patients were included. In the Hemopatch&#xae; group, 30% of the patients developed CSS, compared to 43% in the control group. Three patients in both groups developed a surgical site infection. Thirty-five percent of patients in the Hemopatch&#xae; group required additional unscheduled visits versus 62% of patients in the control group.
CONCLUSION: The application of Hemopatch&#xae; after ALND did not lead to a clinically relevant reduction of CSS and wound complications. However, fewer Hemopatch&#xae; patients required additional outpatient clinic visits. Due to the limited amount of participants, the true value of Hemopatch&#xae; in ALND remains unclear.

### PMID 35986865 (2022) — Updates in surgery
TITLE: Hemopatch&#xae; is effective and safe to use: real-world data from a prospective European registry study.
DOI: 10.1007/s13304-022-01353-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: Surgical procedures are often impeded by bleeding and/or leakage of body fluids. These complications cannot always be resolved by conventional surgical techniques. Hemopatch&#xae; is a hemostatic patch that also functions as a sealant. Here we document the effectiveness and safety of Hemopatch&#xae; for routine procedures of multiple surgical disciplines. To this end, we performed a prospective, multicenter, single-arm, observational registry study. Patients were eligible if they had received Hemopatch&#xae; during an open or minimally invasive procedure in one of these specialties: hepatobiliary, cardiovascular, urological, neurological/spinal, general, or lung surgery. Patients were excluded if they had a known hypersensitivity to bovine proteins or brilliant blue, intraoperative pulsatile or severe bleeding and/or infection at the target application site (TAS). The primary endpoint for intraoperative effectiveness was hemostasis assessed as the percentage of patients achieving hemostasis within 2&#xa0;min and the percentage of patients achieving hemostasis without re-bleeding at the time of surgical closure. The registry enrolled 621 patients at 23 study sites in six European countries. Six hundred twenty patients had completed follow-up information. Hemostasis within 2&#xa0;min was achieved at 463 (74.5%) of all 621 TASs. Hemostasis without re-bleeding was observed at 620 (99.8%) TASs. Adverse events were reported in 64 patients (10.3%). This Hemopatch&#xae; registry shows that Hemopatch&#xae; efficiently establishes hemostasis and sealing in a variety of surgical specialties, including minimally invasive procedures. Furthermore, we provide evidence for the safety of Hemopatch&#xae; across all the specialties included in the registry. This study is registered at clinicaltrials.gov: NCT03392662.

### PMID 35937594 (2022) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: A practical and economical method for frontal sinus reconstruction after frontal craniotomy: A single-center experience with 140 patients.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.919276 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Frontal sinus exposure is a common consequence of frontal craniotomy. Cerebrospinal fluid leakage and infection are the major postoperative complications that may occur as a result of the open frontal sinus. The successful filling of the open frontal sinus provides an approach to prevent significant complications caused by frontal sinus exposure.
OBJECTIVE: This article describes a new technique to reconstruct the exposed frontal sinus cavity with the combined application of gelatin sponge and a vascularized pericranial flap.
METHODS: A total of 140 patients underwent frontal sinus reconstruction using gelfoam and vascularized pericranial flaps from 2016 to 2021. Gelatin sponge was used to fill the frontal sinus, and a vascularized pericranial flap was used to cover the frontal sinus when the bone flap was retracted.
RESULTS: Postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage and infection did not occur in any patient.
CONCLUSION: Our results validated the effectiveness of our technique in the prevention of exposed frontal sinus-related postoperative complications.

### PMID 35896064 (2022) — Acta cytologica
TITLE: Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose (Surgicel&#xae;) on Cytology/Histology.
DOI: 10.1159/000525857 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: In patients with a history of malignancy, follow-up surveillance of lymph nodes (LNs) is required to evaluate for potential malignancy or infection. In some cases, the lymphadenopathy may be secondary to an intraprocedural hemostatic agent and/or related granulomatous reaction.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present the case of an 80-year-old female with a remote past medical history of breast cancer status post-lumpectomy and chemoradiation. Twenty years later, a 2.4 cm pulmonary right middle lobe nodule was noted on imaging studies. She underwent bronchoscopy, cervical mediastinoscopy, and right middle lobe wedge resection. The final pathologic diagnosis was a pulmonary carcinoid tumor, and the excised mediastinal LN was negative for malignancy. A 10-month surveillance positron emission tomography scan showed new mildly avid mediastinal and right hilar LNs. The following endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration showed unremarkable lymphoid elements in the enlarged 4R LN, while the station 7 LN demonstrated ample dense hyaline-like foreign material. Subsequent review of the cell block/biopsy and communication with the thoracic surgeon revealed that Surgicel&#xae; (or oxidized regenerated cellulose) was placed during surgery at the station 7 site.
DISCUSSION/CONCLUSION: Assessment of the findings and based on the similar histologic appearance reported in previous cases associated with Surgicel&#xae; [Ann Thorac Med. 2017;12(1):55-6, Cancer Cytopathol. 2019;127(12):765-70, and Arch Bronconeumol. 2020;56(7):459-71], the station 7 acellular, amorphous, and hyaline-like exogenous material found in our case was interpreted as hemostatic agent compatible with Surgicel&#xae; (or oxidized regenerated cellulose). This case highlights the importance of cytologic/histologic recognition of hemostatic agents, specifically oxidized cellulose mesh.

### PMID 35608519 (2022) — Monaldi archives for chest disease = Archivio Monaldi per le malattie del torace
TITLE: Unusual lymphadenopathy diagnosed by endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration.
DOI: 10.4081/monaldi.2022.2306 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidized cellulose, used as hemostatic in thoracic surgery, may cause in some cases foreign body reactions, and simulate other diseases. We report the case of a 39-year-old man operated on a middle lobe lobectomy for atypical carcinoid. The follow up chest-CT showed enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes, so endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration was performed suspecting recurrence of the tumor. The cytology results showed amorphous fragments such as foreign body reaction secondary to Pahacel&#xae;, used as hemostatic during the surgery. A few days later, the patient was re-operated on suspicion of mediastinitis induced by the endoscopic procedure. The aim of this case is to consider the foreign body reaction to Pahacel&#xae;, in patients with postoperative thoracic lymphadenopathy. It is also important to remember that in these patients the endoscopic procedures allow the diagnosis but may cause mediastinitis.

### PMID 32962400 (2021) — Asian cardiovascular &amp; thoracic annals
TITLE: Long-term function of Hydrofit as hemostatic sealant: abridged republication.
DOI: 10.1177/0218492320962339 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The newly-designed hemostatic sealant, Hydrofit, was developed in Japan and consists of a urethane-based polymer without blood products. By applying Hydrofit gel to an anastomosis site on the aorta, water contact initiates a chemical change in the forming elastomer which adheres rapidly and tightly. We experienced an extirpation of Hydrofit gel that had been applied 4 years and 8 months previously in a 42-year-old female who underwent aortic valve replacement and graft replacement of the ascending aorta. The Hydrofit left around the aortic graft suture line was without infection and functioned very well as an elastic sealant for a long period.

### PMID 34496649 (2021) — The International journal of artificial organs
TITLE: Sterile peri-graft abscess formation following aortic replacement: A word of caution for usage of BioGlue&#xae;.
DOI: 10.1177/03913988211045091 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report sterile peri-graft abscess formation following an ascending aortic and hemiarch replacement for acute type A aortic dissection, possibly caused as a reaction to BioGlue&#xae;. The patient was successfully treated by drainage, cleaning, removal of BioGlue&#xae; remnants, three sessions of negative-pressure wound dressing, and secondary chest closure.

### PMID 34458343 (2021) — Frontiers in cardiovascular medicine
TITLE: 18F-FDG-Uptake in Mediastinal Lymph Nodes in Suspected Prosthetic Valve Endocarditis: Predictor or Confounder?
DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.717774 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Introduction: Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) is a serious disease affecting ~0.4% of prosthetic valve recipients per year. 18F-FDG-PET/CT has high sensitivity and specificity for PVE and is included as major criterion for the diagnosis in recent guidelines of the European Society of Cardiology. We addressed the question whether increased FDG-uptake in mediastinal lymph nodes could help to support the visual diagnostic assessment of PVE. Methods: In this sub-analysis of a previously published retrospective multicentre study, 160 unique patients were identified who underwent 18F-FDG-PET/CT for evaluation of suspected PVE. 18F-FDG-PET/CT was performed in adherence to the European Association of Nuclear Medicine guidelines of 2015 and scans were assessed for signs of mediastinal lymph node activity by 2 experienced nuclear medicine physicians who were blinded to clinical context. Clinical diagnosis of PVE had been established based on surgical findings or multidisciplinary consensus after a 1-year follow-up in 80 of 160 patients (50%). Results: In total, 52 patients showed increased mediastinal lymph node activity. Mediastinal lymph node activity on 18F-FDG-PET/CT did not increase diagnostic accuracy when added to the visual analysis of scans for signs of PVE: X 2: 0.118, p = 0.731). After excluding patients with known confounders for 18F-FDG-PET/CT, namely use of Bioglue&#xae; during prosthetic valve implantation and C-reactive protein levels below 40 mg/L, mediastinal lymph node activity was still not of additional diagnostic value compared to visual analysis alone (X2:0.129, p = 0.723). Discussion: Assessment of mediastinal lymph node activity did not improve 18F-FDG-PET/CT diagnostic accuracy for suspected PVE compared to visual assessment of the valve alone, as it seems to be a rather a specific finding, that might be caused by sternal wound or mediastinal infections or even by subclinical respiratory infections. Future studies might elucidate whether increased FDG active lymph nodes indicate a high-risk patient group and whether more detailed assessment of mediastinal lymph nodes could improve their additional diagnostic benefit.

### PMID 33853306 (2021) — Tuberkuloz ve toraks
TITLE: Can surgical adhesives may cause false positivity in follow-up positron emission tomography after lung cancer resection?
DOI: 10.5578/tt.20219907 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Postoperative complications following thoracic procedures are a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Alveolar air leaks and/or bronchopleural fistulas are associated with increased risk of infection, prolonged chest tube, and hospital stay duration and therefore generate economical concern for health care providers. A variety of surgical sealants or adhesives have been introduced to overcome this complication. Since intraoperative BioGlue&#xae; application can also cause an inflammatory reaction and mimic tumor recurrence on FDG PET-CT, in the present study we aimed to investigate its potential role in false-positive PET-CT results in patients operated for NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data of six patients who underwent resection for primary NSCLC at our institution (Department of Thoracic Surgery, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty) between January 2015 and December 2018 and had false positivity, due to BioGlue&#xae; application, at the bronchial stump in follow-up FDG PET-CT were retrospectively analyzed from a prospectively collected database.
RESULT: One of the 6 patients was female and 5 were male. The mean age was 68 years (range, 56-79 years). The average time interval between operation and postoperative FDG-PET imaging was 4.3 months (range, 4-6 months). Follow-up FDG-PET imaging SUVmax values ranged between 3.0 and 9.0 (median: 5.33). All patients have been evaluated by FDG-PET scan following the detection of soft tissue densities at the surgical site suspicious for recurrence at their follow-up chest CT scans. Four patients underwent a bronchoscopic examination, bronchial stumps were examined and multiple biopsies were taken from suspicious nodules or tissues and sent for pathologic examination. Histopathological results revealed inflammation which is compatible with foreign body granuloma, without any suspicion for malignancy, in all cases. Two patients were solely followed-up and subsequent FDG-PET imaging after 3 months revealed complete resolution of FDG uptake.
CONCLUSIONS: To avoid unnecessary biopsies or surgical procedures, the possibility of false-positive results due to surgical adhesive product use should be taken into account while interpreting follow-up FDG-PET imaging results and the operative reports should be written in detail, describing which surgical materials used and their exact application sites.

### PMID 34596382 (2021) — ACS biomaterials science &amp; engineering
TITLE: Fish Gelatin-Based Absorbable Dural Sealant with Anti-inflammatory Properties.
DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.1c00734 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage from the dura mater during craniotomy is a common complication, which is associated with infection, meningitis, pneumocephalus, and delayed wound healing. In the present study, we developed an absorbable fish gelatin-based anti-inflammatory sealant for dura mater sealing to prevent CSF leakage. Gelatin derived from Alaska pollock (ApGltn) was modified with &#x3b1;-linolenic acid (ALA), an omega-3 fatty acid that exhibits anti-inflammatory properties, and cross-linked with a poly(ethylene glycol)-based cross-linker to develop ALA-ApGltn sealant (ALA-Seal). ALA-Seal demonstrated a higher storage modulus and tangent delta (tan &#x3b4;) compared with those of the original ApGltn sealant (Org-Seal). The swelling ratio of ALA-Seal was markedly lower than that of DuraSeal, a commercially available dural sealant. Ex vivo burst strength measurements using porcine dura mater indicated that there was no significant difference between DuraSeal and ALA-Seal, despite ALA-Seal having an order of magnitude lower storage modulus. The anti-inflammatory properties of ALA-Seal, evaluated using brain microglial cells, were considerably higher than those of DuraSeal and Org-Seal, with a minimal adverse effect on cell viability. Therefore, compared to DuraSeal, ALA-Seal is a potential dural sealant with a lower swelling ratio, similar burst strength, and higher anti-inflammatory properties, which may prevent CSF leakage.

### PMID 35079500 (2021) — NMC case report journal
TITLE: Intracranial Mycotic Aneurysm after Left Ventricular Assist Device Implantation Treated with Trans-arterial Embolization via the Brachial Artery: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.2176/nmccrj.cr.2020-0259 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Implantation of left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is widely performed in patients with end-stage chronic heart failure. Infection and stroke are major complications after LVAD implantation. However, the incidence of intracranial mycotic aneurysm after LVAD implantation is rare, and with no standard of care. In this study, we describe a case of an intracranial mycotic aneurysm after LVAD implantation that was successfully treated with trans-arterial embolization (TAE) with N-butyl 2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) via the brachial artery. A 49-year-old man with a history of implantation of LVAD for ischemic cardiomyopathy was admitted to our institution. He had infectious endocarditis and was administered systemic antibiotics. At 3 weeks after admission, intracranial mycotic aneurysm of the left posterior parietal artery was detected during a diagnostic examination for asymptomatic intracranial hemorrhage. Anticoagulant therapy was administered to prevent thromboembolic complications of LVAD implantation. Under local anesthesia, TAE with NBCA was performed via the brachial artery because of the tortuous anatomy of the origin of the innominate artery and implant of the aortic arch. The aneurysm was completely obliterated. The patient was discharged without neurological deficits. TAE using NBCA could be an effective modality for the treatment of intracranial mycotic aneurysm after LVAD implantation.

### PMID 34976970 (2021) — Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology
TITLE: A Liquid Hydrogel to Restore Long Term Corneal Integrity After Perforating and Non-Perforating Trauma in Feline Eyes.
DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.773294 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Purpose: To evaluate long-term in vivo functionality of corneas regenerated using a cell-free, liquid hydrogel filler (LiQD Cornea) after deep corneal trauma in the feline model. Methods: Two healthy cats underwent 4&#xa0;mm diameter stepwise 250/450&#xa0;&#xb5;m deep surgical corneal ablation with and without needle perforation. The filler comprising 10% (w/w) collagen-like peptide conjugated to polyethylene glycol (CLP-PEG) and 1% fibrinogen and crosslinked with 2% (w/w) 4-(4,6-dimethoxy-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-4-methylmorpholinium chloride (DMTMM), was applied to the wound bed previously coated with thrombin (250 U/ml). In situ gelation occurred within 5 min, and a temporary tarsorrhaphy was performed. Eyes were examined weekly for 1&#xa0;month, then monthly over 12&#xa0;months. Outcome parameters included slit-lamp, Scheimpflug tomography, optical coherence tomography, confocal and specular microscopy, and immunohistochemistry studies. Results: The gelled filler was seamlessly incorporated, supporting smooth corneal re-epithelialization. Progressive in-growth of keratocytes and nerves into the filler corresponding to the mild haze observed faded with time. The regenerated neo-cornea remained stably integrated throughout the 12&#xa0;months, without swelling, inflammation, infection, neovascularization, or rejection. The surrounding host stroma and endothelium remained normal at all times. Tomography confirmed restoration of a smooth surface curvature. Conclusion: Biointegration of this hydrogel filler allowed stable restoration of corneal shape and transparency in the feline model, with less inflammation and no neovascularization compared to previous reports in the minipig and rabbit models. It offers a promising alternative to cyanoacrylate glue and corneal transplantation for ulcerated and traumatized corneas in human patients.

### PMID 34101045 (2021) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: A case report of percutaneous direct injection of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) to treat a pancreatic duodenal stump leak after a simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation.
DOI: 10.1186/s40792-021-01219-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation (SPK) is a treatment option for patients with end-stage renal disease due to type 1 diabetes mellitus. We report a patient with a refractory fistula due to leakage from the duodenal stump of the pancreas graft after an SPK with bladder drainage who was successfully treated with a percutaneous direct injection of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA).
CASE PRESENTATION: A 60-year-old female with a 33-year history of type 1 diabetes mellitus and a 10-year history of renal replacement therapy underwent an SPK in 2015. At the time of transplantation, an abdominal aortic aneurysm with a high risk of rupture was treated by a Y-graft replacement prior to the SPK. Bladder drainage of the pancreas graft was chosen to avoid a vessel graft infection. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 93 with good-functioning pancreas and kidney grafts. One and a half years after the operation, the patient was found to have acute graft pancreatitis and a leak from the duodenal stump of the pancreas graft due to a paralytic neurogenic bladder. The insertion of an indwelling catheter into the bladder and the endoscopic-guided insertion of a catheter into the graft pancreatic duct through the duodenum/bladder anastomosis did not result in the closure of the fistula. Therefore, NBCA was injected at the site of the leak point using CT-guided technique. The fistula was completely closed immediately after the injection, with no recurrences of leaks.
CONCLUSIONS: A percutaneous direct injection of NBCA is one of the treatment options to treat intractable fistulas.

### PMID 33371728 (2021) — Canadian Association of Radiologists journal = Journal l'Association canadienne des radiologistes
TITLE: Factors Influencing Clinical Success Following Endovascular Treatment of Type II Endoleaks.
DOI: 10.1177/0846537120981100 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare long-term outcomes of transarterial (TA) and translumbar (TL) embolization of type II endoleaks (T2E) following EVAR, as well as factors that predict clinical success.
METHODS: 129 (mean age, 71.4y; range, 53-95) with T2E referred for embolization from August-2003 to December-2017 were retrospectively reviewed. One-hundred-eighty procedures were performed via TA (n = 139) and TL (n = 41) approaches, with 37 patients undergoing 51 reinterventions. Clinical success was defined as absence of endoleak and/or absence of aneurysm sac enlargement on follow-up imaging. Medical comorbidities, procedural data, embolic agents used, presence of successful sac embolization, and 30-day morbidity and mortality data were collected.
RESULTS: TL approaches had higher technical success (41/41 vs.122/139, p = .014). Clinical success rates were 52% (N = 58/111) and 62% (N = 23/37) for TA and TL procedures respectively (p = .34). Looking at all procedures, sac embolization using n-butyl cyanoacrylate glue had higher clinical success compared to other embolic agents (p = .017-.037). Successful sac access was a strong predictor of success for TA procedures (46/78 vs.12/33, p = .0379). 30-day complication rates were similar between TA (5.8%) and TL (4.9%) approaches. There was 1 death secondary to graft infection following TA embolization.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall clinical success of TA and TL embolization when considering re-interventions is high. n-butyl cyanoacrylate glue had significantly higher success than other embolic agents (p = .017-.037). Successful sac access was associated with success for TA procedures.

### PMID 34037882 (2021) — CVIR endovascular
TITLE: Combined simultaneous embolization of the portal vein and hepatic vein (double vein embolization) - a technical note about embolization sequence.
DOI: 10.1186/s42155-021-00230-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Simultaneous portal vein embolization (PVE) and hepatic vein embolization (HVE) has been shown to be feasible, safe and lead to a faster growth of future liver remnant (FLR) than PVE alone. The objective of this study is to highlight different technical aspects as well as importance of embolization order.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seven patients were treated with simultaneous PVE and HVE. In three cases, HVE was performed first followed by PVE and in four cases the other way around. Portal vein branches were embolized using Glubran-Lipiodol mixture in all cases. Hepatic veins were embolized using Amplatzer II plugs sized 8-20&#x2009;mm. Specific consideration was given to depth of glue penetration in the portal vein defined by visible branch order on the treated side.
RESULTS: Six of seven patients were discharged home the same day. One patient with infected tumor necrosis died of liver failure 40&#x2009;days later, otherwise there were no periprocedural clinical complications. Median glue penetration was to the 5th order (4th - 5th) when PVE was performed first and 3rd order (2nd - 4th) when PVE was performed after HVE. In one PVE first case, glue spillage was seen due to marked reduced flow in the right portal vein. There was sufficient FLR growth for subsequent surgical resection in the remaining six patients.
CONCLUSION: PVE should be performed prior to HVE because the reduced flow in the portal vein after HVE leads to less deep glue penetration with presumably increased risk of contralateral spillage.

### PMID 34386047 (2021) — Kardiochirurgia i torakochirurgia polska = Polish journal of cardio-thoracic surgery
TITLE: Autologous fibrin sealant application in cardiac surgery - a single-centre observational study.
DOI: 10.5114/kitp.2021.107467 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: To minimize the risk of blood loss and post-transfusion complications in patients undergoing cardiovascular surgery, different strategies are used.
AIM: To analyse the efficacy of the intraoperative use of autologous fibrin glue to seal suture lines of cardiac and vascular structures.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The early results of 62 patients who underwent complex cardiac operations in extracorporeal circulation were analysed. In a half of them Vivostat autologous fibrin sealant in addition to the routine haemostatic agents was applied (study group), whereas in the second group (matched-pair control group) only standard haemostatics were used. Among many other factors, special attention was paid to postoperative drainage and blood products used.
RESULTS: The mean age of the patients and prevalence of comorbidities did not differ between groups. Generally, in the study group fewer haemostatic agents were used. For example, Preveleak tissue glue was applied in 3.2% of studied cases compared to one third of control patients (p = 0.008). The thoracic drainage on either day 0 or day 1 was also similar. The number of patients who received blood products did not differ between groups. More importantly, there were no significant differences in in-hospital mortality and prevalence of other postoperative complications.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study it was found that application of autologous fibrin glue was safe and might limit use of standard haemostatic agents. Taking into account the lack of potential threats related to the transmission of infections and immune responses, it may be an interesting alternative to the previously used local haemostatics.

### PMID 34099403 (2021) — Transfusion and apheresis science : official journal of the World Apheresis Association : official journal of the European Society for Haemapheresis
TITLE: Novel autologous, high concentrated fibrin as advanced hemostatic agent for coronary surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2021.103171 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Variability in transfusion outcomes and excessive postoperative bleeding represents a significant problem in cardiac surgery. The effort to reduce bleeding complications and transfusion outcomes is desirable. Our study investigated the feasibility of reducing bleeding complications and transfusion requirements by applying perioperatively prepared autologous bio-regenerative fibrin sealant.
METHODS: A prospective, case-control study enrolled 74 patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting by a single surgeon. Patients in the control group (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;43), received traditional methods of hemostasis, while patients in the experimental group (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;31) were treated additionally with autologous bio-regenerative fibrin.
RESULTS: Patients were well-matched with regard to basic demographic, laboratory and procedural data. Allogeneic blood transfusion requirement in control group was 39.5 % (17 of 43 patients), compared to 6.5 % (2 of 31 patients) in treated group (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0,001). The lower infection rate in the experimental group was also noted. No safety issues were identified during the preparation and application process.
CONCLUSION: Autologous bio-regenerative fibrin can be safely prepared, with no time consuming, and was demonstrated to be a useful tool to decrease allogeneic blood transfusion requirements following elective coronary artery bypass grafting surgery. A prospective randomized trial is needed to confirm these findings.

### PMID 33995680 (2021) — Theranostics
TITLE: TGF-&#x3b2; loaded exosome enhances ischemic wound healing in vitro and in vivo.
DOI: 10.7150/thno.57701 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Rationale: With over seven million infections and $25 billion treatment cost, chronic ischemic wounds are one of the most serious complications in the United States. The controlled release of bioactive factor enriched exosome from finbrin gel was a promising strategy to promote wound healing. Methods: To address this unsolved problem, we developed clinical-grade platelets exosome product (PEP), which was incorporate with injectable surgical fibrin sealant (TISSEEL), to promote chronic wound healing and complete skin regeneration. The PEP characterization stimulated cellular activities and in vivo rabbit ischemic wound healing capacity of TISSEEL-PEP were performed and analyzed. Results: PEP, enriched with transforming growth factor beta (TGF-&#x3b2;), possessed exosomal characteristics including exosome size, morphology, and typical markers including CD63, CD9, and ALG-2-interacting protein X (Alix). In vitro, PEP significantly promoted cell proliferation, migration, tube formation, as well as skin organoid formation. Topical treatment of ischemic wounds with TISSEEL-PEP promoted full-thickness healing with the reacquisition of hair follicles and sebaceous glands. Superior to untreated and TISSEEL-only treated controls, TISSEEL-PEP drove cutaneous healing associated with collagen synthesis and restoration of dermal architecture. Furthermore, PEP promoted epithelial and vascular cell activity enhancing angiogenesis to restore blood flow and mature skin function. Transcriptome deconvolution of TISSEEL-PEP versus TISSEEL-only treated wounds prioritized regenerative pathways encompassing neovascularization, matrix remodeling and tissue growth. Conclusion: This room-temperature stable, lyophilized exosome product is thus capable of delivering a bioactive transforming growth factor beta to drive regenerative events.

### PMID 35047295 (2021) — Cureus
TITLE: Chyloma: A Manifestation of Chyle Leak Six Months After Neck Dissection.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.20476 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chyle leaks after a neck dissection usually manifest within the immediate postoperative period. However, masked chyle leaks may present as a chyloma months later. A 54-year-old male patient with squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue underwent bilateral neck dissection, subtotal glossectomy, anterolateral thigh flap reconstruction and postoperative radiotherapy. Intraoperatively, chyle leak was encountered in level IV of the left neck. We managed it by ligation of the thoracic duct, application of Tisseel&#x2122; sealant (Baxter Inc., Illinois, USA) and one week of prophylactic fat-free feeds. Six months later, an asymptomatic chyloma of the left neck was identified on surveillance MRI. Five weeks after the diagnosis, streptococcal infection developed within the chyloma. However, initiation of fat-free diet, serial aspiration, pressure dressing and antibiotic therapy allowed the chyloma to resolve within two weeks. Further surveillance MRI over three years showed no recurrence of the chyloma. Low-volume chyle leaks may manifest as an occult chyloma. Prophylactic measures cannot replace meticulous ligation of chylous channels in left level IV neck dissection.

### PMID 34043230 (2021) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Use of Vivostat&#xae; Autologous Fibrin Sealant in Thyroid Surgery.
DOI: 10.52198/21.STI.38.SO1441 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Post-thyroidectomy hemorrhage is a rare but potentially life-threatening and unpredictable complication of thyroid surgery. Therefore, intraoperative bleeding control and hemostasis are crucial. However, the most efficient, cost-effective, and standardized way to achieve this is not clear. This study aimed to evaluate the outcome of total thyroidectomy (TT) and partial thyroidectomy (PT) performed using the Vivostat&#xae; hemostatic system (Vivostat A/S, Liller&#xf8;d, Denmark).
METHODS: Patients underwent TT and PT for benign and malignant diseases (multinodular goiter, Graves' disease, differentiated thyroid carcinoma). The primary endpoint was 1st-day postoperative drain output and bleeding that required reintervention. Secondary endpoints included surgery duration and postsurgical complications (vocal fold palsy, hypocalcemia, seroma, wound infection).
RESULTS: Between October 2020 and December 2020, 56 patients were enrolled; 69.6% female; mean age 49.5 years. The mean 24-h drain output was 40 ml. No redo surgery was needed. Seroma was present in 5.3% of cases; no permanent vocal palsy or hypocalcemia was observed.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that the Vivostat&#xae; system is both safe and effective for hemostasis during thyroid surgery.

### PMID 34020706 (2021) — Journal of medical case reports
TITLE: Posttraumatic bronchobiliary fistulae due to foreign body remnants after &#xa0;a&#xa0;road traffic injury: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s13256-021-02859-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Bronchobiliary fistula is an extremely rare disease that involves abnormal communication between a hepatic segment and bronchial tree. It is mostly caused by untreated hydatid cyst, liver abscess, iatrogenic stenosis, and, rarely, trauma.
CASE PRESENTATION: We experienced an extremely rare case of bronchobiliary fistula after motor vehicle accident. A 15-year-old Persian boy visited our clinic with chief complaints of persistent pleuritic chest pain, productive cough, weight loss, and fever for 2&#xa0;months. Coronavirus disease 2019 reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction test was negative. Chest X-ray revealed hazy opacification of right lower lobe. Bronchoalveolar lavage for acid-fast bacillus came back negative. Thoracoabdominal computed tomography scan revealed a collection in segment VIII of the liver communicating with another 13&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;5&#xa0;cm multiloculated collection in the lower lobe of the right lung, with air foci within the collection. Right posterolateral thoracotomy was performed with the impression of bronchobiliary fistula. Drainage of hepatic collection with debridement, diaphragmatic repair, and open decortication of lung followed by resection of the involved segment of the right lung was performed. Histopathologic evaluations revealed abscess formation in pulmonary tissue, and many multinucleated giant cells were seen that appear to be due to foreign body remnants after previous laparotomy surgery. The foreign body seemed to be the remnants of Surgicel absorbable hemostat.
CONCLUSIONS: Herein, we report an extremely rare case of a posttraumatic bronchobiliary fistula caused by remnants of Surgicel hemostatic agent. Bronchobiliary fistula is mainly caused by untreated hydatid cyst, liver abscess, iatrogenic stenosis, and, rarely, trauma. Migration and erosion of oxidized regenerated cellulose through the diaphragm seems to be the causative factor of bronchobiliary fistula in this patient.

### PMID 33676505 (2021) — BMC women's health
TITLE: Clinical observation of the regeneration process of defects after breast cancer resection.
DOI: 10.1186/s12905-021-01219-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The present study aims to use two different kinds of filling materials, oxidized regenerated cellulose and gelatin sponge, to repair defects of breast-conserving surgery due to breast cancer, and compare the clinical efficacy, cosmetic effect and complication rate among groups.
METHODS: A total of 125 patients, who had breast -conserving surgery due to breast cancer, were enrolled into the present study. Postoperative efficacy was assessed by a doctor and patient, according to the Harvard/NSABP/RTOG Breast Cosmetic Grading Scale.
RESULTS: Among these patients, 41 patients received conventional breast-conserving surgery, and 84 patients received breast-conserving surgery plus filling implantation (41 patients in the oxidized regenerated cellulose group and 43 patients in the gelatin sponge group). All patients had small to medium sized breasts (cup size A and B). The average weight of tumor tissues was 56.61&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;11.57&#xa0;g in the conventional breast-conserving surgery group, 58.41&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.53&#xa0;g in the oxidized regenerated cellulose group, and 58.77&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.90&#xa0;g in the gelatin sponge group. The difference in pathological factors, average operation time, length of stay and local infection rate was not statistically significant among the three groups. 18 patients in the oxidized regenerated cellulose group and 15 patients in the gelatin sponge group were evaluated to have a good cosmetic effect by the surgeon and patient, while 12 patients in the conventional breast-conserving surgery group were evaluated to be have good cosmetic effect by the surgeon and patient. The cosmetic effects in the oxidized regenerated cellulose group and gelatin sponge group were comparable, and these were superior to those in the conventional breast-conserving surgery group.
CONCLUSION: The use of oxidized regenerated cellulose and gelatin sponge is a feasible approach for defect repair after breast-conserving surgery.

### PMID 32766929 (2021) — European archives of oto-rhino-laryngology : official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS) : affiliated with the German Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
TITLE: Use of PerClot&#xae; in head and neck surgery: a Scottish centre experience.
DOI: 10.1007/s00405-020-06247-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: PerClot&#xae; is a biocompatible, polysaccharide haemostatic system recommended for surgical procedures. It is an absorbable modified polymer that is non-pyrogenic and is derived from purified plant starch. Our goal was to evaluate the safety, efficacy and usefulness of PerClot&#xae; in head and neck surgery (H&amp;N) in our department.
METHODS: All patients who received PerClot&#xae; after their neck operation over 1-year period (2019-2020) were prospectively investigated. The information collected included demographics, admission and discharge dates, type of operation, operative details, postoperative complications and their management. The data were collected and analysed using Excel.
RESULTS: A total of 57 patients (males&#x2009;=&#x2009;26, females&#x2009;=&#x2009;31) with mean age of 51 (range 19-83) were identified. None of the patients developed primary or secondary haemorrhage. Ten patients suffered from post-operative wound complications (18%). Wound infection was noticed in 9/57 (16%) of patients. 1/57 patients had seroma.
CONCLUSIONS: PerClot&#xae; is safe, effective in reducing the postoperative bleeding and would appear to be useful in head and neck surgery with minimal adverse effects.

### PMID 35166216 (2021) — Annali italiani di chirurgia
TITLE: Successful repair of a tuberculous bronchial lymphatic fistula with pericardial fat pad patch. A case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study reported a rare case of mediastinal abscess scrofula. The patient was found to have a large left main bronchial orificium fistula (approximately 1.5x1.5cm in size) after clearing a mediastinal lymph node abscess via the right thoracotomy approach. The adjacent tissue was empty and could not be directly repaired. Therefore, the research team cut out an appropriately sized right pericardial fat pad patch during the operation for repairing and then covered it with a biological patch (Neoveil) for reinforcement. The mediastinal pleura was treated by embedding and the postoperative recovery was good. KEY WORDS: Abscess, Fistula, Pericardial fat patch, Tuberculous bronchial lymphatic, Tuberculosis bacillus, Type mediastinal lymphatic tuberculosis. Gli autori riportano un raro caso di un ascesso mediastinico di natura tubercolare. Durante l&#x2019;intervento eseguito per toracotomica destra gli autori hanno riscontrato la presenza di una fistola di considerevoli dimensioni del bronco principale sinistro (circa 1,5 x 1,5 cm di dimensione). Il tessuto circostante non era utile alla chiusura della fistola ed il difetto non poteva essere riparato direttamente. Pertanto nel corso dell&#x2019;intervento per riparare la fistola &#x2002; stato usato un patch dal pericardio destro con tessuto adiposo circostante di dimensioni adeguate che poi &#x2002; stato ricoperto con un tessuto biologico (Neoveil) di rinforzo. La pleura mediastinica &#x2002; stata inoltre anch&#x2019;essa incorporata ed il recupero clinico &#x2002; stato buono.

### PMID 35511439 (2021) — Annali italiani di chirurgia
TITLE: Successful repair of a tuberculous bronchial lymphatic fistula with pericardial fat pad patch. A case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study reported a rare case of mediastinal abscess scrofula. The patient was found to have a large left main bronchial orificium fistula (approximately 1.5x1.5cm in size) after clearing a mediastinal lymph node abscess via the right thoracotomy approach. The adjacent tissue was empty and could not be directly repaired. Therefore, the research team cut out an appropriately sized right pericardial fat pad patch during the operation for repairing and then covered it with a biological patch (Neoveil) for reinforcement. The mediastinal pleura was treated by embedding and the postoperative recovery was good. KEY WORDS: Abscess, Fistula, Pericardial fat patch, Tuberculous bronchial lymphatic, Tuberculosis bacillus, Type mediastinal lymphatic tuberculosis. Gli autori riportano un raro caso di un ascesso mediastinico di natura tubercolare. Durante l&#x2019;intervento eseguito per toracotomica destra gli autori hanno riscontrato la presenza di una fistola di considerevoli dimensioni del bronco principale sinistro (circa 1,5 x 1,5 cm di dimensione). Il tessuto circostante non era utile alla chiusura della fistola ed il difetto non poteva essere riparato direttamente. Pertanto nel corso dell&#x2019;intervento per riparare la fistola &#xe8; stato usato un patch dal pericardio destro con tessuto adiposo circostante di dimensioni adeguate che poi &#xe8; stato ricoperto con un tessuto biologico (Neoveil) di rinforzo. La pleura mediastinica &#xe8; stata inoltre anch&#x2019;essa incorporata ed il recupero clinico &#xe8; stato buono.

### PMID 34337728 (2021) — European review for medical and pharmacological sciences
TITLE: Endoscopic laser diverticulotomy in Zenker's diverticulum: experiences with basal wound sealing using a collagen-fibrin patch.
DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202107_26392 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Very few reports investigated techniques of closure of the basal wound area to reduce severe complications like mediastinitis after endoscopic laser diverticulotomy. In this study, we report our experiences after routine use of a collagen-fibrin sealant patch for basal wound covering after laser diverticulotomy in consideration of postoperative complications and recurrence rates.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective study was conducted in a tertiary referral center and university hospital. Endoscopic laser diverticulotomies performed in our hospital between January 2006 and July 2018 were included. After complete transection of the laser septum of the diverticulum, we placed a collagen-fibrin patch onto the basal wound area to cover the opening to the mediastinum. Patient records were evaluated to assess the occurrence of perioperative complications, and the data were compared with those reported in the literature.
RESULTS: A total of 127 endoscopic laser diverticulotomies were performed in 109 patients (71 men, 38 women) suffering from Zenker's diverticulum. Morality rate was 0%, in particular no mediastinitis was observed. Mediastinal emphysema was observed in two patients (1.6%), and temporary or persistent recurrent nerve palsy in one patient (0.8%) each. The mean follow-up period was 71.6&#xb1;5.16&#xa0;months. Recurrent symptomatic diverticulum was observed in 19.3% of the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that use of a collagen-fibrin sealant patch in endoscopic laser diverticulotomy may contribute to the safety of endoscopic controlled laser diverticulotomy without comprising the success rates.

### PMID 33651250 (2021) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: Negative-pressure wound therapy in combination with bronchial occlusion to treat bronchopleural fistula: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s40792-021-01144-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Bronchopleural fistula, which usually accompanies bronchial fistula and empyema, is a severe complication of lung cancer surgery. Negative-pressure wound therapy can enhance drainage and reduce the empyema cavity, potentially leading to early recovery. This therapy is not currently indicated for bronchopleural fistulas because of the risk of insufficient respiration due to air loss from the fistula.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 73-year-old man, who was malnourished because of peritoneal dialysis, was referred to our hospital for the treatment of lung cancer. Right lower lobectomy with mediastinal lymph node dissection was performed via posterolateral thoracotomy, and the bronchial stump was covered with the intercostal muscle flap. His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged. However, he was readmitted to our hospital because of respiratory failure and diagnosed as having bronchopleural fistula on the basis of the bronchoscopic finding of a 10-mm hole at the membranous portion of the inlet of the remnant lower lobe bronchus. Thus, thoracotomy debridement and open window thoracostomy were immediately performed. After achieving infection control, bronchial occlusion was performed using fibrin glue and a polyglycolic acid sheet was inserted through a fenestrated wound. Bronchial fistula closure was observed on bronchoscopy; therefore, a negative-pressure wound therapy system was applied to close the fenestrated wound. The collapsed lung was re-expanded and the granulation tissue around the wound increased; therefore, thoracic cavity size decreased and thoracoplasty using the latissimus dorsi was performed.
CONCLUSIONS: This bronchopleural fistula was treated successfully after a right lower lobectomy using an extra-pleural bronchial occlusion and negative-pressure wound therapy.

### PMID 33509880 (2021) — BMJ case reports
TITLE: Successful management of anastomotic leakage with endoscopic fibrin glue injection after primary repair of pure oesophageal atresia.
DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2020-238823 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anastomotic leakage (AL) occurs in 15% of cases of primary repair of oesophageal atresia. Urgent surgery is indicated in cases of complete anastomotic separation or severe mediastinitis. Otherwise, conservative management including keeping the patient nil per os (NPO), feeding via transanastomotic tube and prolonged parenteral nutrition, has been widely accepted as it can avoid multiple surgeries in neonates and allow oesophageal continuity to be preserved. However, complications relating to prolonged feeding tube use are common downsides to this approach and the negative impact of prolonged NPO on mastication and swallowing function cannot be ignored.In this case report, a novel approach for the treatment of AL with fibrin glue is reported, following primary repair of oesophageal atresia. It was endoscopically injected into the leakage site to enhance healing and early closure. This procedure was safely performed and achieved early establishment of oral feeding.

### PMID 33353370 (2021) — Asian cardiovascular &amp; thoracic annals
TITLE: Comparison of bone wax and chitosan usage on post-sternotomy bone healing.
DOI: 10.1177/0218492320984097 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Sternotomy is a standard approach performed in almost every surgical procedure on the heart and mediastinum. Effective hemostasis of the sternum is required to keep the operative field dry, avoid excessive blood transfusions during surgery, and prevent reoperation due to massive postoperative bleeding, which can further increase morbidity and mortality in patients. Bone wax is a mechanical hemostat commonly used after sternotomy and has been known to affect bone healing, trigger chronic inflammatory reactions, and increase the rate of infection. The application of chitosan, which has intrinsic hemostat ability, as hemostatic material is believed to improve bone healing following sternotomy. This study aimed to compare the effectiveness of bone wax and chitosan on bone healing after sternotomy.
METHODS: Median sternotomies were performed on 2 groups of New Zealand White rabbits. Each group of 16 animals received either bone wax or chitosan powder as hemostatic material. The degree of bone healing, the number of foreign-body giant cells, and the number of osteoblasts were evaluated after 6 weeks.
RESULTS: Radiographs showed that significantly more animals in the chitosan group had total sternal healing (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.033). Histopathology revealed that the number of foreign-body giant cells was significantly less (p = 0.036) and the number of osteoblasts was significantly greater (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.0001) in the group of animals that received chitosan.
CONCLUSION: The use of chitosan as hemostatic material can promote better bone healing compared to bone wax.

### PMID 34322783 (2021) — Updates in surgery
TITLE: An international multidisciplinary peer-driven consensus on the optimal use of hemostatic powders in surgical practice.
DOI: 10.1007/s13304-021-01136-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016446">Consensus Statement, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bleeding is a consequence of insufficient hemostasis and excessive bleeding at a surgical site is associated with an increased risk of post-operative infection, transfusion and re-operation, in addition to increased hospital length of stay and costs. Surgeons employ a range of methods to achieve hemostasis, including topical hemostatic agents of differing composition and properties. Hemostatic powders are a sub-group of topical hemostats, which can be used in helping as adjuncts to manage troublesome bleeding in a variety of situations. As this technology is relatively new and potentially not well known by the broad surgical community, no specific guidelines or recommendations for the optimal use of hemostatic powders in surgery currently exist. A steering group throughout Europe of multidisciplinary surgeons, expert in hemostasis and hemostatics, identified from literature and from personal experience, five key topics. When to use hemostatic powder, the evidence for use, benefits of use, safety remarks and considerations in various surgical specialties. Thirty-seven statements were subsequently drawn from these five key topics. An online survey was sent to 128 high-volume surgeons working in breast surgery, gynaecological and obstetric surgery, general and emergency surgery, thoracic surgery and urological surgery in Europe to assess agreement (consensus) with these statements. Consensus was defined as high if&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;75% and very high if&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;90% of respondents agreed with a statement. A total of 79 responses were received and consensus among the surgical experts was very high in 27 (73%) statements, high in 8 (22%) statements and was not achieved in 2 (5%) statements. Based on the consensus scores, the steering group produced 16 key recommendations which they considered could improve patient outcomes by reducing post-operative bleeding and its associated complications using hemostatic powder.

### PMID 32802424 (2020) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: The validity of infrared coagulator, and BioGlue with antibiotics to assist surgical treatment of infective endocarditis?
DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2020.03.95 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016421">Editorial, Comment
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 32732139 (2020) — European journal of vascular and endovascular surgery : the official journal of the European Society for Vascular Surgery
TITLE: BioGlue: A Nidus for Late Neck Abscess after Carotid Endarterectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2020.05.043 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 31731262 (2020) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Bioadhesives in neurosurgery: a review.
DOI: 10.3171/2019.8.JNS191592 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Neurosurgery presents unique surgical challenges arising from delicate neural structures, limited accessibility, and the risk of CSF leakage that can lead to CNS infections. Sutures and staples may have limited applicability in the complex anatomical constraints of cranial and spinal surgeries, especially in trauma settings when time is of the essence. Surgical bioadhesives are emerging as attractive alternatives because they avoid traumatic application methods, provide a stress-distributed fixation, and provide good cosmesis and outcomes. This article presents the history of the development of surgical bioadhesives, and is also a review of current applications of commercial surgical bioadhesives within neurosurgical procedures and the unmet clinical needs that should be addressed in bioadhesives technologies.
METHODS: A PubMed literature search was performed using the terms "(glue OR bioadhesive OR fibrin OR tisseel OR evicel OR tachosil OR cyanoacrylate OR duraseal OR bioglue) AND (neurosurgery OR spine OR spinal OR dural OR microvascular decompression OR transsphenoidal OR endovascular)." Of 2433 records screened, 168 studies were identified that described the use of bioadhesives in neurosurgical procedures.
RESULTS: The greatest number of studies describing the use of bioadhesives in neurosurgery were identified for endovascular embolization, followed by dural closure and transsphenoidal surgeries. Other common areas of application were for microvascular decompression, skin closure, peripheral nerve repair, and other novel uses. Numerous case reports were also identified describing complications associated with bioadhesive use.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the paucity of approved indications, surgical bioadhesive use in neurosurgical procedures is prevalent. However, current bioadhesives still each have their own limitations and research is intense in the development of novel solutions.

### PMID 32626623 (2020) — Cureus
TITLE: Cerebrospinal Fluid Leaks and Pseudomeningocele after Posterior Fossa Surgery: Effect of an Autospray Dural Sealant.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.8379 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background Posterior fossa craniotomies can be complicated by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks, infection, meningitis, neurologic deficits, and intracranial hypotension caused by defective closure of the dura. Secondary dural closures such as pericranial graft, muscle graft, glue, sealants, or fat graft are used. However, there have been few studies examining the use of sealants with a polyethylene glycol and polyethylenimine component. Objective We studied the effect of one such sealant, Adherus&#xae; (HyperBranch Medical Technology, Durham, NC, USA), as an adjunct to secondary closure methods in the reduction of the use of abdominal fat grafting and lumbar puncture/drains. Methods We retrospectively reviewed the surgical records of all patients undergoing posterior fossa cranial surgery during a two-year period at a tertiary university affiliated medical center. Results Overall, data a total of 122 patients (62 in the no Adherus and 60 in the Adherus group) were collected. There was no statistically significant difference in the 30-day incisional CSF leak rate (4.1% vs. 6.5%; p=0.183), 30-day non-incisional CSF leak rate (11.3% vs. 5.0%; p=0.205), and 30-day pseudomeningocele rate (16.1% vs. 13.3%; p=0.663) in the no Adherus and Adherus groups, respectively. However, there was a significant reduction in the use of abdominal fat grafting (0% vs. 30.7%; p&lt;0.001) and intraoperative CSF diversion techniques (58.1% vs. 23.3%; p&lt;0.001). Every instance of the use of Adherus saved on average, $809.36. Conclusions A statistically significant reduction in the use of CSF shunting procedures during posterior fossa craniotomy/craniectomy was achieved after the introduction of Adherus with no increase in CSF leak rate.

### PMID 32917640 (2020) — Science advances
TITLE: LiQD Cornea: Pro-regeneration collagen mimetics as patches and alternatives to corneal transplantation.
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aba2187 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Transplantation with donor corneas is the mainstay for treating corneal blindness, but a severe worldwide shortage necessitates the development of other treatment options. Corneal perforation from infection or inflammation is sealed with cyanoacrylate glue. However, the resulting cytotoxicity requires transplantation. LiQD Cornea is an alternative to conventional corneal transplantation and sealants. It is a cell-free, liquid hydrogel matrix for corneal regeneration, comprising short collagen-like peptides conjugated with polyethylene glycol and mixed with fibrinogen to promote adhesion within tissue defects. Gelation occurs spontaneously at body temperature within 5 min. Light exposure is not required-particularly advantageous because patients with corneal inflammation are typically photophobic. The self-assembling, fully defined, synthetic collagen analog is much less costly than human recombinant collagen and reduces the risk of immune rejection associated with xenogeneic materials. In situ gelation potentially allows for clinical application in outpatient clinics instead of operating theaters, maximizing practicality, and minimizing health care costs.

### PMID 32435571 (2020) — Global spine journal
TITLE: Cyanoacrylate Dermal Closure in Spine Surgery: Systematic Review and Pooled Analysis.
DOI: 10.1177/2192568219861619 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Systematic review.
OBJECTIVES: Cyanoacrylate glue closure has been utilized for dermal closure in surgical incisions. Its safety and efficacy in spine surgery are not established. The authors perform a systematic review to determine the rate of surgical site infection (SSI), wound dehiscence, and wound erythema with cyanoacrylate dermal closure in spine surgery.
METHODS: A systematic review adhering to PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines was performed utilizing the PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane databases on patients undergoing spine surgery with cyanoacrylate dermal closure. Pooled analysis was performed with stratification of patients according to spinal level and the presence/absence of instrumentation. Risk-of-bias and methodological quality was appraised using 17 prespecified criteria.
RESULTS: Five articles (1 retrospective cohort study, 4 cases series) with a total of 1282 patients were included. A total of 967 patients, all diagnosed with degenerative spine disease, were suitable for pooled analysis. In 290 patients who underwent anterior cervical discectomy and fusion, and in 23 patients with posterior cervical decompression (without instrumentation), there was 0% rate of SSI, wound dehiscence, and erythema. In 489 patients who underwent lumbar microdiscectomy, there was 0.41% rate of SSI, 0.20% rate of wound dehiscence, and 0.20% rate of wound erythema. In 165 lumbar laminectomy patients, there was a 1.82% rate of SSI, 0.61% rate of wound dehiscence, and 0% rate of wound erythema.
CONCLUSION: Cyanoacrylate dermal closure for the aforementioned procedures is associated with low rates of wound complications (SSI, dehiscence, and erythema). Further studies should be performed, especially in nondegenerative surgery, instrumented thoracic and lumbar spine surgery.

### PMID 32055262 (2020) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Balloon-occluded retrograde glue embolization for intractable lymphorrhea from bilateral iliac lymphatics following surgery for rectal cancer.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2020.01.017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Lymphorrhea is a rare complication of rectal surgery. Although percutaneous embolization of thoracic or lymphatic ducts is now increasingly being reported for various types of lymphatic leakage, there are only sparse data on lymphatic interventions for lymphorrhea following rectal surgery. A novel balloon-occluded retrograde lymphatic embolization (BRLE) technique can be a simple and effective option for intractable lymphorrhea. We report a case of a man with infected lymphorrhea after rectal resection. Transperineal drainage was performed; however, lymphatic leakage persisted after 1 month of conservative treatment. Lymphangiography revealed multifocal leaks from bilateral iliac lymphatics. The proposed BRLE technique was performed via a balloon catheter inserted through the transperineal drainage. The balloon allowed occlusion of lymphatic outflow and forceful retrograde injection to achieve denser accumulation of n-butyl cyanoacrylate. Tight embolization of bilateral iliac lymphatics and drastic improvement of the leakage was achieved. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of percutaneous embolization for lymphorrhea after rectal surgery. This case supports the efficacy of the BRLE as a simple and effective therapeutic option for such persistent multifocal lymphatic leaks.

### PMID 31741738 (2020) — Respirology case reports
TITLE: Extensive bronchial occlusion with N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate for bronchopleural fistula and a destroyed lung.
DOI: 10.1002/rcr2.500 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 72-year-old Japanese man who had undergone resection of a left upper lung carcinoma developed chronic empyema with bronchopleural fistula and destroyed lung 12&#x2009;years after surgery. Open-window thoracotomy and bronchial occlusion with an endoscopic Watanabe spigot (EWS) were performed to control infection. However, the EWS was easily dislodged due to remarkable bronchial deformation, and he experienced repeated episodes of pneumonia. We performed extensive bronchial filling with N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate. Stable occlusion was achieved, and there was no recurrence of pneumonia. N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate was a useful embolic agent because it moulded to the shape of the tracheal lumen and remained in place.

### PMID 32938449 (2020) — BMC surgery
TITLE: Chronic rhinosinusitis due to cyano-acrylic glue after endoscopic transsphenoidal pituitary surgery.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-020-00866-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To reduce the risk of cerebrospinal fluid leak, clinicians utilize a filling material placed in the sella followed by floor reconstruction with various materials, including glue sealing. Cyano-acrylic glue Glubran&#xae;2 glue is commercially available and is generally used as embolizing agent and for the prevention of cerebrospinal fluid leakage.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 25-year-old woman underwent endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery for pituitary adenoma. After tumor resection, sellar floor reconstruction was performed by mucosal graft and Glubran&#xae;2 glue. The early post-operative period was uneventful. However, 2&#xa0;months after surgery, the patient complained of headache, facial pain and greenish foul-smelling nasal discharge with solid particles dripping from the nose. Medical treatment was unsuccessful. Brain MRI showed inflammation and thickening of the sphenoidal and para-sphenoidal mucosa. The patient underwent endoscopic endonasal surgery and a solid glass-like mass surrounded by inflamed infected mucosa was seen in the inferior and lateral aspects of the sphenoid sinus. Efforts were made to erupt and de-crust the solid mass until total resection was achieved. Early post-operative period was uneventful, and a course of antibiotics was continued until total disappearance of the discharge.
CONCLUSION: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case reporting of acrylic glue (Glubran&#xae;2)-related sinusitis. Surgeon should be aware about similar side effects for the glue material that would complicate the surgery.

### PMID 32766138 (2020) — Frontiers in oncology
TITLE: Retrospective Evaluation of the Effectiveness of a Synthetic Glue and a Fibrin-Based Sealant for the Prevention of Seroma Following Axillary Dissection in Breast Cancer Patients.
DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2020.01061 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Introduction: Seroma formation represents one of the most frequent postoperative complications of axillary dissection in breast cancer (BC) patients. We aimed to retrospectively explore the effectiveness of the intraoperative use of a synthetic cyanoacrylate glue (specifically Glubran&#xae;2) vs. the intraoperative use of a fibrin sealant (specifically Tisseel) in reducing seroma formation compared to the use of nonsealant in BC patients who underwent breast surgery and axillary dissection. Materials and Methods: We conducted a retrospective, monocentric observational study on BC patients who underwent axillary dissection associated with breast surgery. The axillary dissection was completed with the application of a closed suction drain and was preceded by the application of either Glubran&#xae;2 glue or Tisseel sealant or nonsealant. We analyzed the quantity of serum drained in the first 3 postoperative days, length of hospitalization, days of permanence of axillary drain, seroma development, and presence of postoperative infection signs. Results: Forty-one BC patients were considered. Based on the device used during the surgical treatment, the patients were divided into three groups: group A (17 patients), to whom suction axillary drain was applied; group B (7 patients), to whom Tisseel and axillary suction drain were applied; and group C (17 patients), to whom Glubran&#xae;2 and axillary suction drain were applied. Among the three groups, we did not find significant differences in terms of amount of serum drained in the first 3 postoperative days, length of hospitalization, and incidence of seroma. Group C maintained the axillary drain in a significantly lower number of days compared to the other two groups (p = 0.02); it also had a lower incidence of postoperative infections (6%) compared to group A (23%) and group B (57%) (p = 0.02). Conclusions: We did not find any evidence that the use of surgical glues may reduce the formation of seroma following axillary dissection in BC patients. Nevertheless, the use of cyanoacrylate glue in association with closed suction axillary drain seems to contribute to the reduction in days of axillary drain permanence and of postoperative infections, which are known factors delaying the schedule of any adjuvant oncological therapies.

### PMID 33091461 (2020) — Neuro-Chirurgie
TITLE: Tisseel&#xae; versus Hemopatch&#xae; for dural sealing in neurosurgery. A prospective study in a tertiary center.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuchi.2020.09.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Dural repair is a potential source of complications in neurosurgery. We make a comparison in pseudomeningocele and CSF leak incidence with the sealants Tisseel&#xae; and Hemopatch&#xae;.
METHODS: We collected 147 patients from September 2017 to December 2018 in a prospective observational study. Inclusion criteria were adult patients with an intradural cranial or spinal surgery whose dura was closed with a fibrin sealant. Primary endpoints were the incidence of pseudo meningocele and CSF leak. Secondary endpoints were the surgical-site infection, epidural hematoma, and the influence of previous surgery.
RESULTS: In 65 and 82 patients Tisseel&#xae; and Hemopatch&#xae; were used as sealants respectively. The incidence of CSF leak presented a significant statistical relation with the use of Tisseel&#xae; in a univariate and multivariate analysis. Infratentorial surgery presented a higher incidence of pseudomeningocele and CSF leak, but the approach used was not a significant factor in multivariate analysis. Patients who were operated previously had a higher risk present a postoperative complication.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of pseudomeningocele and CSF leak was higher with Tisseel&#xae; compared with Hemopatch&#xae; with a statistic significant relation in case of CSF fistulae. The procedure done may be a confusion factor in our study. There was no report of adverse effects or a higher incidence of complications. However, it is recommended to plan randomized trials with larger samples to get stronger evidence.

### PMID 32830078 (2020) — The journal of sexual medicine
TITLE: Multicenter Prospective Study of Grafting With Collagen Fleece TachoSil in Patients With Peyronie's Disease.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jsxm.2020.07.079 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A xenograft consisting of equine collagen coated with human fibrinogen and thrombin (TachoSil; Baxter, CA) has recently been introduced in grafting procedures for Peyronie's disease (PD).
AIM: To describe the results of a multicenter prospective registry on patients with PD undergoing plaque incision or and grafting (PIG) or plaque excision and grafting (PEG) with collagen fleece TachoSil, to evaluate the efficacy and safety of this procedure.
METHODS: A prospective non-controlled multicenter study of patients with PD was performed between May 2016 and March 2018. Patients from 10 centers with stable PD for at least 3 months, difficulties in sexual intercourse, normal erectile function with or without pharmacological treatment, curvature &gt;45&#xb0;, and/or penile shortening and/or complex deformities were included. All patients underwent PIG/PEG with collagen fleece TachoSil.
OUTCOMES: The main outcome measure of this study were penile curvature correction (intraoperative), penile shortening (intraoperative), erectile function with the 5-item version of the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF-5) and the Erection Hardness Score, subjective patient outcomes with non-validated questionnaires, and complications.
RESULTS: A total of 52 patients were enrolled in the study. The mean (SD) preoperative penile curvature was 72.8&#xb0; (17.0). PIG was the preferred technique (80.8%). Intraoperatively, complete curvature correction was achieved in 92.3%, and no significant penile shortening was recorded in 80.8% of subjects. Subjective penile shortening was reported in 83.3% of patients at 6 months. No objective measurement of penile curvature and length was recorded during follow-up. No statistically significant difference from the baseline was found in IIEF-5 and Erection Hardness Score at 3 or at 6 months, although 16.7% of men experienced a worsening of IIEF-5 scores and 14.3% required de novo phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor use. 6 months after surgery, 78.5% of men were satisfied with intervention. Swelling and ecchymosis/hematoma were the most common perioperative complications (40.4%). 2 cases (3.8%) of wound infection were recorded. At 6 months, 35.7% of patients reported mild penile hypesthesia.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Our results confirm the high success rate of grafting with TachoSil, and the surgeon perceived low percentage of penile shortening.
STRENGTH &amp; LIMITATIONS: This is the first multicentre study on patients with PD undergoing grafting with TachoSil without concomitant placement of penile prosthesis. The main limitations are the short follow-up and the relatively small sample size.
CONCLUSION: Grafting with TachoSil after PIG/PEG in patients with PD is an effective and safe procedure. Among the main advantages of this technique, there are ease of use of the graft and reduced operative time. Fern&#xe1;ndez-Pascual E, Manfredi C, Torremad&#xe9; J, et&#xa0;al. Multicenter Prospective Study of Grafting With Collagen Fleece TachoSil in Patients With Peyronie's Disease. J Sex Med 2020;17:2279-2286.

### PMID 32198103 (2020) — The journal of sexual medicine
TITLE: Multicenter Experience Using Collagen Fleece for Plaque Incision With Grafting to Correct Residual Curvature at the Time of Inflatable Penile Prosthesis Placement in Patients With Peyronie's Disease.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jsxm.2020.02.019 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Adjuvant maneuvers are often necessary to correct residual curvature during inflatable penile prosthesis (IPP) placement in patients with Peyronie's disease (PD).
AIM: We present our multicenter experience using collagen fleece as graft material for plaque incision and grafting (PIG) during IPP placement in patients with moderate to severe PD.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 51 patients with IPP from 3 sites who underwent PIG with Tachosil (Baxter, IL) collagen fleece. Coloplast (Minneapolis, MN) IPP devices were used. Factors associated with residual curvature, revision, and patient satisfaction were performed using chi-squared analysis.
OUTCOMES: We evaluated postoperative outcomes including factors associated with residual curvature, revision, and patient satisfaction.
RESULTS: The mean compound curvature was 69.6&#xb0;. The mean follow-up was 10.6 (range 1-38) months. All patients reported erections sufficient for penetrative intercourse at the last follow-up. Residual curvature &lt;15&#xb0; was noted in 6 of 51 (12%) patients. 3 patients required device revision. 2 patients experienced temporary glanular paresthesia, and no patients experienced device infection.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: In our multicenter study, patients experienced substantial curve correction with minimal complications, and in the few patients who had persistent mild curvature, severe preoperative curvature (&gt;60&#xb0;) was found to be the only risk factor.
STRENGTHS &amp; LIMITATIONS: Our study represents the largest series of patients coming from multiple centers undergoing surgical correction of PD with IPP and collagen fleece grafting. Limitations of this study include the retrospective study design, lack of a comparison group, and modest follow-up.
CONCLUSION: PIG using collagen fleece is a safe and effective means of correcting residual curvature after IPP placement in patients with moderate to severe PD. Hatzichristodoulou G, Yang DY, Ring JD, et&#xa0;al. Multicenter Experience Using Collagen Fleece for Plaque Incision With Grafting to Correct Residual Curvature at the Time of Inflatable Penile Prosthesis Placement in Patients With Peyronie's Disease. J Sex Med 2020;17:1168-1174.

### PMID 31338720 (2020) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Could we reduce adhesions to the intra-abdominal mesh in the first week? Experimental study with different methods of fixation.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-019-02005-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Adhesion formation is a major problem when a mesh is exposed to intraabodminal viscera, with potential severe complications (bowel occlusion, fistulas or abscesses). New methods for preventing adhesions from a polypropylene mesh placed intra-abdominally or to solve difficult situations, such as when the peritoneum cannot be closed during a TAPP repair for an inguinal hernia, are still being seeked. This study mimics in an animal model a situation that can be found in clinical practice during laparoscopic inguinal hernioplasty. A polypropylene mesh could be exposed to the intra-abdominal cavity even when the peritoneum is closed due to different circumstances, with no options to guarantee the prosthetic material of being exposed to the intrabdominal viscera. Different options have been suggested to solve these situations, being proposed in this study to cover the visceral surface of the mesh with an absorbable sponge containing thrombin, fibrinogen, and clotting factors (Tachosil&#xae;, Nycomed, Takeda, Osaka, Japan), to assess its use as a barrier to prevent postoperative adhesion formation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thirty Wistar white rats (300-450&#xa0;mg) were included in this study as experimental animals, being randomized into three groups (A, B, and C). We performed a bilateral prosthetic repair with conventional polypropylene mesh (2&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;2&#xa0;cm, 82&#xa0;kD). Prosthesis fixation was performed as follows. Group A: absorbable suture; group B: metal staples; group C: metal tackers. A piece of insulating absorbable sponge (Tachosil&#xae; 5&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;5&#xa0;cm) was placed to cover the visceral surface of mesh placed at the right side of each animal. After 10&#xa0;days, we performed a gross examination (by laparoscopy and laparotomy), measuring the quantity and the quality of the adhesions. Samples were taken for histopathological analysis.
RESULTS: Tachosil&#xae;-treated prostheses showed a statistically significant decrease in the quality of the adhesion found (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05). In addition, a smaller quantity of adhesions was identified in barrier-treated animals, although this lacked statistical significance. The histologic analysis showed no significant differences: more edema with the untreated mesh and increased angiogenesis and a lower degree of necrosis in mesh covered with Tachosil&#xae;.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of Tachosil&#xae; as a barrier material led to the absence of strong adhesions as it prevented direct contact between the mesh and the internal organs, preventing major problems associated with strong adhesions.

### PMID 33447702 (2020) — European heart journal. Case reports
TITLE: Surgicel mimicking early onset prosthetic valve endocarditis: case report.
DOI: 10.1093/ehjcr/ytaa334 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Surgicel is one of the commercial forms of oxidized regenerated cellulose used as a bioabsorbable topical haemostatic agent during surgical procedures. However, its presence can mimic an abscess, tumour, lymph node or retained foreign body on imaging studies. The challenge in cardiac surgery is to differentiate the haemostatic material from an abscess that might be mistaken for an early onset prosthetic valve endocarditis.
CASE SUMMARY: A 56-year-old woman was admitted to our department for a suspicion of early onset prosthetic valve endocarditis after an aortic valve replacement. An early clinical and biological improvement, features on a chest computed tomography scan, as well as a surgical correlation were able to rectify the diagnosis. The acute fever was linked to urinary tract infection, whereas the periaortic echogenic mass shown at the transoesophageal echocardiography corresponded to Surgicel.
DISCUSSION: Oxidized regenerated cellulose can mimic an abscess on cardiac imaging, especially when used in excess during cardiac surgery. Fortunately, some radiographic features can help differentiate the haemostatic material from an abscess. Hence, sharing the use and location of Surgicel between the surgeon, radiologist, and cardiologist is very important and necessary to make the correct diagnosis.

### PMID 32657258 (2020) — Neurological research
TITLE: In vivo evaluation of bilayer ORC/PCL composites in a rabbit model for using as a dural substitute.
DOI: 10.1080/01616412.2020.1789383 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: After a neurosurgical procedure, dural closure is commonly needed to prevent cerebrospinal fluids (CSF) leakage and to reduce the risk of complications, including infections and chronic inflammatory reactions. Although several dural substitutes have been developed, their manufacturing processes are complicated and costly and that many of them have been implicated in causing postoperative complications. This study aimed to assess the effectiveness and safety of new bilayer ORC/PCL composites in a rabbit model.
METHODS: Two formulations of bilayer oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC)/poly &#x3b5;-caprolactone (PCL) knitted fabric-reinforced composites and an autologous graft (pericranium) were employed for dural closure in forty-five male rabbits. Systemic reaction and the local reaction of the samples were assessed and compared at one-, three- and six-months post-implantation by blood chemistry and gross, and microscopic assessment using hematoxylin-eosin and Masson's trichrome stains.
RESULTS: No signs of CSF leakage or systemic infection were seen for all samples. All samples demonstrated minimal adhesion to adjacent tissues. The degree of host fibrous connective tissue ingrowth into both composites was comparable to that of the autologous group, but bone formation and osteoclast activities were significantly greater. Both composites progressively degraded over times and the residual thickness of the nonporous layer was 50% of the initial thickness at six months post-implantation.
DISCUSSION: Bilayer ORC/PCL composites were successfully employed for dural closure in the rabbit model. They were biocompatible and could support dural regeneration comparable to that of the autologous group, but induced greater osteogenesis.

### PMID 32277068 (2020) — Annali italiani di chirurgia
TITLE: Non-antibiotic prophylaxis in thyroid surgery. Experience of a single Institution and revision of literature.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: AIM: To evaluate the incidence of SSI and systemic infectious complications in a consecutive series of patients undergoing thyroid surgery in the absence of prophylactic antibiotic (NO-AP).
METHODS: Prospective observational study including 77 patients who underwent total thyroidectomy and completion of previous hemithyroidectomy in NO-AP. The surgical intervention was performed by surgeons who were experienced in the procedure, and involved the use of Ligasure Harmonic Ethicon&#xae;, absorbable hemostat in oxidized regenerated cellulose (Tabotamp&#xae;), and skin incision suture device Skin Stapler&#xae;. The following risk factors were assessed: gender, age, BMI, alcohol consumption, habitual smoking, co-morbidities, ASA score, indication to surgery, duration of anesthesia and procedure lenght, type of surgical procedure, fever, white blood cells count, dosage of the pre-operative C Reactive Protein in the five first post-operative day, and histological diagnosis. The data were collected and processed using IBM SPSS software v.23.0.
RESULTS: No factors of increased infectious risk have been identified. No infectious surgical and systemic complications have been reported causes of prolongation of the length of the hospital stay.
CONCLUSIONS: Fever, neutrophilic leukocytosis and increased PCR cannot be assessed as predictive factors of infectious complication in thyroid surgery. The cutaneous antisepsis of the operative field with chlorhexidine gluconate, the improvement of the surgical technique, the protection of the cutaneous margins of incision, the use of new devices, the accurate hemostasis and the reduction of surgery time lead to a lack of SSIs and systemic infection complications in all patients undergoing thyroid surgery in NO-AP.
KEY WORDS: Antibiotic prophylaxis, Surgical site infections, Thyroid surgery, Thyroidectomy.
SCOPO: Le infezioni del sito chirurgico (SSIs) e le complicanze infettive sistemiche dopo chirurgia tiroidea sono di non comune riscontro. La profilassi antibiotica nei pazienti a basso rischio infettivo (ASA &#x2264;3) sembra priva di significativi vantaggi sull&#x2019;incidenza delle SSIs e delle complicanze settiche sistemiche. Scopo dello studio &#xe8; stato quello di valutare l&#x2019;incidenza delle SSI e delle complicanze infettive sistemiche in una serie consecutiva di pazienti sottoposti a chirurgia della tiroide in assenza di profilassi antibiotica (NO-AP).
PAZIENTI E METODI: Lo studio di tipo osservazionale prospettico includeva 77 pazienti (57 F; et&#xe0; media 57.1 anni; 20 M; et&#xe0; media 56.8) sottoposti a chirurgia tiroidea nel periodo Gennaio 2018-Dicembre 2019 presso l&#x2019;ospedale universitario &#x201c; A. Fiorini&#x201d; di Terracina. Nessun paziente veniva sottoposto a profilassi antibiotica. L&#x2019;intervento chirurgico era eseguito da chirurghi esperti della procedura e prevedeva l&#x2018;utilizzo del Ligasure Harmonic Ethicon&#xae;, di emostatico riassorbibile in cellulosa ossidata e rigenerata (Tabotamp&#xae;) e dispositivo di sutura dell&#x2019;incisione cutanea Skin Stapler&#xae;. Venivano valutati i seguenti fattori di rischio: sesso, et&#xe0;, BMI, consumo di alcool, fumo abituale, comorbilit&#xe0;, ASA score, indicazione all&#x2019;intervento, durata dell&#x2019;anestesia e dell&#x2019;intervento chirurgico, procedura chirurgica adottata, febbre, conta dei globuli bianchi e dosaggio della Proteina C Reattiva pre-op e in I,II,III,IV,V giornata p.o, diagnosi istologica. I dati venivano raccolti ed elaborati mediante software IBM SPSS v.23.0.
RISULTATI: Una tiroidectomia totale &#xe8; stata eseguita in 72 pz, completamento di pregressa emitiroidectomia in 5 pz, linfoadenectomia del compartimento centrale di &#x201d;necessit&#xe0;&#x201d; in 11 pz. In tutti i casi l&#x2019;indicazione al trattamento chirurgico era rappresentata da gozzo multinodulare funzionante in 19 (24,6%) pz, non funzionante in 58(75.3%) pz, endotoracico 10(12.9%) pz. Non sono state riportate complicanze infettive del sito chirurgico e sistemiche causa di prolungamento della durata della degenza clinica. Pertanto la febbre, la leucocitosi neutrofila e l&#x2019;aumento della PCR non possono essere valutati come fattori predittivi di complicanza infettiva.
CONCLUSIONI: Non sono stati identificati fattori di aumentato rischio infettivo. L&#x2019;antisepsi del campo operatorio con Clorexidina gluconato, il miglioramento della tecnica chirurgica, la protezione dei margini cutanei di incisione, l&#x2019;utilizzo dei nuovi devices, l&#x2019;emostasi accurata e la riduzione dei tempi operatori si sono associati al mancato riscontro di SSIs e di complicanze infettive sistemiche in tutti i pz sottoposti a chirurgia tiroidea in assenza di profilassi antibiotica.

### PMID 32055465 (2020) — Translational andrology and urology
TITLE: An update on oxidized regenerated cellulose (fibrillar&#x2122;) in reducing postoperative corporal bleeding following inflatable penile prosthesis surgery.
DOI: 10.21037/tau.2019.08.05 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Scrotal hematoma formation is a dreaded complication of penile prosthesis surgery that increases patient pain and healthcare costs, as well the risk for eventual device infection and failure. The efficacy of hemostatic agents in reducing the incidence of scrotal hematoma development has not been extensively studied in urologic prosthetic surgery. In this paper we further evaluate our experience with oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC; Surgicel Fibrillar&#x2122;) as an adjunct to standard hemostatic practices in inflatable penile prosthesis (IPP) implantation.
METHODS: From April 2016 onward, intracorporal ORC pledgets were placed during corporotomy closure in all patients undergoing IPP implantation or revision by a single surgeon using an identical surgical technique. Perioperative parameters and outcomes-primarily postoperative cumulative drain output, secondarily patient phone calls in the postoperative period-were compared among successive cases with ORC (April 2016 to February 2019) and without ORC (April 2013 to March 2016).
RESULTS: A total of 274 men underwent IPP implantation during the study period; 175 (64%) had ORC included in their corporotomy closures. Median drain output was significantly reduced in the ORC patients relative to the non-ORC group (50 vs. 65 mL; P=0.0001). A significant reduction in patient-initiated phone calls regarding scrotal pain, swelling, or discomfort in the first 4 weeks following surgery was also observed in the ORC group (average 0.69 vs. 1.1 calls per patient; P=0.03). A total of 9 patients underwent IPP explantation during the study period, all due to device infection; 5 of these were in the ORC group, while 4 were in the non-ORC group (P=0.73). ORC use did not constitute any additional infection risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Bilateral incorporation of ORC pledgets during corporotomy closure in IPP surgery significantly decreases postoperative scrotal drain output, a well-documented risk factor for scrotal hematoma formation.

### PMID 31904533 (2020) — Journal of stomatology, oral and maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Drainless resection of the submandibular gland with facial vessel preservation: A comparative study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jormas.2019.12.017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Resection of the submandibular gland (SMG) is a common surgery and many surgeons leave a drainage system in the surgical field. However, surgical drain may increase risk of complication and related prolonged hospitalization time. The purpose of this study was to investigate the safety of SMG resection without any surgical drainage system.
METHODS: This retrospective trial on SMG surgery was conducted between 2016 and 2019. Patients were assigned into one of two main groups: surgical drain (+) (n=20) and surgical drain (-) (n=17). All surgical procedures were done via a standardized surgical technique. Facial vessels were dissected and only glandular branches were ligated. Also, non-identification method was applied for marginal mandibular nerve (MMN) protecting. In surgical drain (-) group, before the wound closure, oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) was placed in the surgical field. Moreover, a closed suction drain was inserted in surgical drain (+) group.
RESULTS: A total of 37 SMG resections were performed: 15 patients had sialolithiasis, 14 patients had pleomorphic adenoma and 8 patients had chronic sialadenitis. There were 20 women (54%) and 17 men (46%), with an age range of 23-70&#xa0;years. No major complications were observed in surgical drain (-) group. There were two cases with minor complications. One patient (5.8%) occurred transient paralysis of the MMN. Other patient developed seroma and it was easily managed with repeated punctures. ORC related allergic reaction or adverse incident were not detected in any of the patients. On the other hand, in surgical drain (+) group, 2&#xa0;patients (10%) developed a hematoma on the first postoperative day and local wound infection was detected in 4&#xa0;patients (20%). We found that the surgical drain usage was related to prolonged hospitalization, worse wound healing and problems with scarring.
CONCLUSION: Our findings provide evidence for the safe drainless resection of the SMG using ORC. It may be possible to prevent all of these undesirable conditions by a surgery which performed without drain insertion.

### PMID 33070884 (2020) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue as a dural sealant in cranial and spinal surgery. A technical note with a review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2020.07.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: A major complication in cranial and spinal surgery is the post-operative occurrence of a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak. Here we reported a technical note firstly describing the use of Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue as a dural sealant in cranial and spinal neurosurgical procedures. Moreover we carried out a review of the literature. Further to the best of our knowledge this was the first series including patients submitted to different spinal surgeries in whom Hemopatch&#xae; was used as dural sealant. We prospectively collected the data of 22 patients. In all procedures, fibrin glue was applied after Hemopatch&#xae;. The mean age was 59.68&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;10.79&#xa0;years and the mean follow-up (FU) was 3.63&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;1.46&#xa0;months, respectively. Overall, Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue was used in 8 cranial procedures (36.36%; all were retrosigmoid craniotomies) and 14 spinal procedures (63.64%). 9/14 spinal cases (64.28%) were incidental durotomies during a spinal decompression procedure. No CSF leak, no postoperative infection, no adverse reaction were observed during the FU in all cases. The literature search revealed only two retrospective series, reporting only patients submitted to cranial surgery for a total of 56 patients and a CSF leak occurring in 3 patients (5.35%). In conclusion, we firstly reported the feasibility and the safety of using Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue as dural sealant in cranial surgery and different spinal procedures. Further larger comparative studies are needed to confirm our initial encouraging results.

### PMID 32664170 (2020) — Medicine
TITLE: Fatal vascular complications during transradial percutaneous coronary intervention: A case report.
DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000021205 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: RATIONALE: Vascular complications of transradial percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) are rare and usually occur at the access site below the elbow. However, vessels along the tract of the wire or catheter can be injured at any point, causing various types of bleeding complications.
PATIENT CONCERNS: A 57-year-old man visited due to chest discomfort. Coronary angiography showed significant stenosis at the distal right coronary artery (RCA). Immediately after the coronary guidewire was passed through the distal RCA, he started a vigorous cough. The voice changed, dyspnea occurred within minutes, and lip cyanosis and stridor were observed. After endotracheal intubation, successful stenting of the distal RCA was achieved. He was extubated at 30&#x200a;minutes after coronary stenting, but 1-hour post-extubation, his blood pressure suddenly decreased to 70/50 mmHg.
DIAGNOSIS: Mediastinal widening was newly noted on chest X-ray, and blood hemoglobin was decreased. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography showed mediastinal hematoma, tracheal compression, and hemothorax. Contrast extravasation was noted in the terminal branches of the inferior thyroid artery on brachiocephalic angiography.
INTERVENTIONS: Successful hemostasis was achieved with endovascular embolization therapy using a Tornado embolization microcoil, Gelfoam gelatin sponge, and Histoacryl glue. The next day, the mediastinal hemorrhage was drained by mediastinoscopy. The endotracheal intubation and ventilator care were maintained for 2 days, and 6 units of packed red blood cells were transfused. Antithrombotics were used to prevent stent thrombosis, and antibiotics to control infection, respectively.
OUTCOMES: After successful hemostasis, thrombocytosis and high on-treatment platelet reactivity that disappeared at 2 weeks post-discharge were noted. Follow-up chest imaging showed the normalized mediastinal widening. At 14 months post-discharge, the patient remains healthy.
LESSONS: As life-threating vascular complications, such as brachiocephalic, subclavian vessel dissection, and vessel perforation in the internal mammary, costocervical, and thyrocervical arteries, can occur anytime during transradial PCI, the intervention cardiologist should be well aware of it and have the appropriate countermeasures implemented in the routine procedure.

### PMID 32352902 (2020) — Innovations (Philadelphia, Pa.)
TITLE: A Novel Technique for the Management of Massive Hemoptysis: The Customized Endobronchial Silicone Blocker.
DOI: 10.1177/1556984520904351 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Massive hemoptysis (MH) has a high mortality rate. Therapeutic options include bronchoscopy for endobronchial lesions, bronchial artery embolization (BAE), and emergency surgery. Scant options exist for patients who are not candidates for these modalities. Culprit bronchial segment occlusion is an option to prevent "spillover flooding &#x2192; hypoxia." Applying this concept, we describe a case series of MH control using a novel bronchoscopically inserted customized endobronchial silicone blocker (CESB). We analyzed the safety and efficacy of CESBs in a select subset of patients with MH.
METHODS: Inclusion criteria were patients with MH who were unstable for surgery/BAE, failed BAE, or relatively contraindicated/refused BAE. CESBs were manufactured on-site by modifying silicone stents, inserted using rigid bronchoscopy and reinforced with glue. The CESB was removed after 6 weeks when possible. A successful outcome was defined as immediate bleeding control with no recurrence after removal.
RESULTS: Over 4.5 years, 13 episodes of MH in 12 patients meeting the criteria specified earlier were treated with CESBs. Seven of 12 patients had tuberculosis, 4 active and 3 inactive. One patient had mucormycosis, 1 post-lobectomy, 1 endobronchial renal cell carcinoma, 1 fibrosing mediastinitis, and 1 patient had metastatic laryngeal Ca. Eight of 12 patients were taken for primary-CESB placement. Four of 12 patients were sent for BAE, which was unsuccessful, and rescue-CESB was done for definitive management. The success rate, as defined earlier, was 92.3%, with no deaths from MH.
CONCLUSIONS: Innovative bronchoscopically inserted CESBs are an effective strategy in MH when patients are unstable or fail conventional management.

### PMID 32983675 (2020) — Cureus
TITLE: Successful Management of Life-threatening Pelvic Hemorrhage From Acquired Factor V Deficiency With immunosuppressive Therapy.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.9972 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Acquired Factor V deficiency is a rare and challenging condition to treat. It has been associated with major surgeries, antibiotics, blood transfusions, infections, autoimmune disorders, malignancy and exposure to bovine thrombin. The clinical presentation can be heterogeneous and can manifest as asymptomatic laboratory abnormalities to fatal hemorrhage with mortality rates around 15-20% . We report a case of acquired factor V deficiency in which the patient developed a life-threatening bleeding coagulopathy with elevated prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time and factor V inhibitor titers following multiple surgical procedures that were performed after a motor vehicle accident. The patient was successfully treated with immunosuppressive therapy including steroids and cyclophosphamide resulting in the complete elimination of inhibitor levels.

### PMID 32758653 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Gas Embolism After Hydrogen Peroxide Use During Spine Surgery: Case Report and Literature Review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.07.210 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: As an irrigant, an antiseptic, and a hemostatic agent, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is widely used in surgical treatment, but it has been surrounded by persistent controversy. Fatal or near-fatal embolic events caused by H2O2 have been reported sporadically in spine surgery.
CASE DESCRIPTION: In this report, we present an 87-year-old man who underwent lumbar instrumentation removal and debridement consequent to surgical site infection in a prone position. H2O2 was used to irrigate the infected screw tracks and surrounding tissues during the procedures. Soon after irrigation, the patient suddenly developed tachycardia, hypotension, and rapid oxygen desaturation, followed by bradycardia. Transesophageal echocardiography indicated gas embolism. After prompt first aid treatment, the patient's condition improved and the gas embolus disappeared within a few minutes without any evidence of organ embolism.
CONCLUSIONS: Spine surgeons should reconsider the pending results of using H2O2 during surgery. Prolonged prone positioning and semiclosed cavities may increase the risk of gas embolism. An early diagnosis and timely intervention may be the key measures to prevent the occurrence of fatal consequences caused by gas embolism.

### PMID 31192094 (2019) — Global spine journal
TITLE: DuraSeal Exact Is a Safe Adjunctive Treatment for Durotomy in Spine: Postapproval Study.
DOI: 10.1177/2192568218791150 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: A nonrandomized, two-armed prospective study.
OBJECTIVE: Water-tight dural closure is paramount to the prevention of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage and associated complications. Synthetic polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel has been used as an adjunct to sutured dural repair; however, its expansion postoperatively is a concern for neurological complications. A low-swell formulation of PEG sealant was introduced as DuraSeal Exact Spine Sealant System (DESS). A Post-Approval Study was performed primarily to evaluate the safety and efficacy of DESS for spinal dural repair compared to current alternatives, in a large patient population, reflecting a real-world practice.
METHODS: A total of 36 sites in the United States enrolled 429 patients treated with DESS as an adjunct to dural repair in the spinal sealant group and 406 patients treated with all other modalities in the control arm, from October 2011 to June 2016. The primary endpoint was the incidence of CSF leak within 90 days of operation. The secondary endpoints evaluated were deep surgical site infection and neurological serious adverse events.
RESULTS: The CSF leakage in the DESS group (6.6%) was not significantly different from the control group (6.5%) (p = .83), and there was no significant difference in the time to first leak. The two groups had no significant differences in deep surgical site infection (1.6% versus control 2.1%, p = .61) or proportion of subjects with neurological serious adverse events (2.9% versus control 1.6%, p = .516).
CONCLUSIONS: DuraSeal Exact Spinal Sealant is safe when compared to current alternatives for spinal dural repair.

### PMID 30476678 (2019) — Clinical imaging
TITLE: Embolization of a congenital arteriovenous malformation arising off the internal mammary artery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clinimag.2018.11.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Congenital arteriovenous malformations (AVM) of the internal mammary artery (IMA) are exceptionally rare. Patients with AVMs arising off the left IMA may present with continuous precordial murmurs and/or a pulsatile chest mass. AVMs in this location pose a risk of enlargement, rupture, infection, or high-output cardiac failure. The potential risks associated with AVMs warrant early therapeutic intervention. We describe a case of a congenital AVM originating from the left IMA, which was successfully embolized with n&#x2011;butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) using a transcatheter arterial approach.

### PMID 31143261 (2019) — Asian journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Analysis of the Surgical Technique and Outcome of the Thoracic and Lumbar Intradural Spinal Tumor Excision Using Minimally Invasive Tubular Retractor System.
DOI: 10.4103/ajns.AJNS_254_18 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Conventionally, intradural spinal tumor excision requires longer skin incision, bilateral subperiosteal muscle stripping, and total laminectomy, thereby decreasing the stability of the spine and increasing the morbidity. Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) for intradural spinal tumor excision preserves the posterior supporting structures of the spine in the midline and on the contralateral side and decreases morbidity and achieves the resection of the tumor.
AIMS: The aim is to analyze the surgical technique and outcome of the thoracic and lumbar intradural spinal tumor excision using minimally invasive tubular retractor system.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted in patients admitted with thoracic and lumbar intradural spinal tumors who had undergone tumor excision using minimally invasive tubular retractor system and satisfied the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Intradural tumors involving one or two vertebral levels were included in the study. Intramedullary spinal tumor, intradural tumor extending into intervertebral foramen, and intradural tumor involving more than two vertebral levels were excluded from the study. The study included the data of the 13 patients, who were operated between January 2017 and October 2018. The age and sex of the patients were noted. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging scan and X-ray of the spine were taken in all the patients. The pre- and postoperative data analyzed include pain using visual analog scale (VAS), power using Medical Research Council (MRC) grading, myelopathy using Nurick's grade, sensory changes, and bowel and bladder symptoms. The steps involved in the surgical technique, extent of resection, intraoperative blood loss, duration of surgery, postoperative complications, duration of stay after the surgery, and postoperative X-ray were analyzed.
RESULTS: Out of 13 patients, one case of dorsally placed meningioma was converted to open laminectomy and excision due to nonvisualization of the spinal cord and increased bleeding from the tumor. Hence, data of the remaining 12 patients were analyzed. The histopathology of these cases was meningioma (6), schwannoma (5), and neurenteric cyst (1). There were 5 men and 7 women with age group of 27-70 years (mean: 48 years). There were 8 thoracic and 4 lumbar tumors. The duration of symptoms was 2 days to 72 months (mean: 35 months). Eight cases were predominantly occupying on the right side and 4 cases on the left side within the spinal canal. The skin incision length was 25 mm to 35 mm (mean: 28 mm). We used tubular retractors with diameter ranging from 22 mm to 30 mm (mean: 24 mm). Expandable retractors were used in 9 cases (75%) and nonexpandable in 3 cases (25%). Tubular retractor of company Jayon (India) was used in 5 cases and PITKAR (India) in 7 cases. We have not found any significant difference in the usage of both the systems. The tumor size (craniocaudal) was ranging from 9.5 mm to 38 mm (mean: 19 mm). Intraoperative blood loss was 75-200 ml (mean: 115 ml). Gross total resection was achieved in 8 cases and near-total resection in 4 cases. Dura was sutured primarily in all the cases. The dural closure was done with continuous sutures in 6 (50%) cases and interrupted in 6 (50%) cases. Polypropylene suture was used in 10 cases and polyglactin suture in 2 cases of dural closure. The authors found it easy to suture the dura using 7-0 polypropylene. Fibrin sealant was used in 9 (75%) cases. The duration of the surgery was ranging from 160 min to 390 min (mean: 260 min). Cerebrospinal fluid leak and pseudomeningocele were noted in one case. One patient developed suture site infection. VAS for pain, sensory symptoms, Nurick's grade for myelopathy, and MRC grading for power were improved in all the affected patients. Out of two patients with constipation, one patient improved and the other developed incontinence, which was recovered on follow-up after 2 weeks. Out of the 4 patients with urinary symptoms, 3 were improved. Another patient of preoperative normal micturition developed urinary retention due to exacerbation of benign prostatic hypertrophy. Postoperative X-ray showed preserved spinous process and facet joints in all cases. The duration of the hospital stay was ranging from 2 days to 11 days (mean: 6 days).
CONCLUSION: Anteriorly or laterally placed intradural spinal tumors confined to the spinal canal can be excised safely and effectively using tubular retractor system, with adding the advantages of the MIS surgery. When in doubt, always convert the MIS to open surgery to avoid injury to vital structures.

### PMID 30644000 (2019) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: A successful surgical repair of intraoperative pneumothorax and the diffuse dissection of visceral pleura during liver transplantation surgery via trans-diaphragmatic approach.
DOI: 10.1186/s40792-019-0568-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Pneumothorax during surgery under general anesthesia is a life-threatening situation for the patient because it can progress easily to the tension pneumothorax due to positive pressure ventilation unless appropriate treatments such as inserting a drainage tube in the thoracic cavity are initiated. The authors experienced a case of intraoperative pneumothorax and the diffuse dissection of visceral pleura during liver transplantation surgery, and achieved successful repair by a trans-diaphragmatic approach without changing patient's body position.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 66-year-old male with multiple liver and renal cysts caused by autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) was admitted to the authors' hospital for treating the infection of the liver cysts. The infection was unable to be controlled by conservative treatments. Therefore, the patient was planned to undergo living-donor liver transplantation. Intraoperatively, the liver was found to swell markedly and to firmly adhere to the right diaphragm. After the extraction of the liver, because the right diaphragm swelled markedly, pneumothorax was suspected. Chest tube was inserted immediately, and the small incision was made in the right diaphragm. Thoracoscopic observation revealed that (1) the visceral pleura of the bottom of the right lung widely expanded like a giant cyst due to the dissection from the lung parenchyma and (2) a large air leakage from a pin hole appeared in the dissected pleura. After the completion of the liver transplantation, the thoracoscopic leakage-closing operation was performed through the right diaphragm incision. Because the dissection of visceral pleura was too wide to perform plication or cystectomy by a stapler or sutures, the dissected pleura was opened, and absorbable fibrin sealant patches and fibrin glue were put or injected between the lung parenchyma and the pleura. Although, after being observed postoperatively, prolonged minor air leakage disappeared by a conservative drainage treatment, and the cyst on the bottom of the right lung disappeared on chest computed tomography (CT).
CONCLUSIONS: Although intraoperative pneumothorax and broad dissection of visceral pleura during laparotomy is a complicated situation, the authors successfully repaired air leakage via a trans-diaphragmatic approach without changing the patient's body position.

### PMID 31565606 (2019) — Cureus
TITLE: Repair of Postoperative Cervical Pseudomeningocele with the Use of Bone Morphogenetic Protein.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.5200 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Recurrent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak carries significant morbidity and mortality. A 25-year-old Caucasian male developed a symptomatic pseudomeningocele eight days after surgical resection of a cervical schwannoma. With no improvement after lumbar drain placement, the dural sleeve defect over the left C3 nerve root was repaired with suturable DuraGen&#xae; (Integra LifeSciences, Plainsboro, NJ, USA). Muscle and fat graft were then laid over the repair site and covered by Tisseel&#xae; (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, IL, USA). Recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2) was applied via extra-small sponge laid over the graft. At 15-month clinical and 16-month radiographic follow-up, the patient had complete resolution of symptoms without any evidence of infection, ectopic bone formation, excessive inflammation, neoplasm, or recurrent CSF leak. This case demonstrates the successful use of BMP in the treatment of recurrent symptomatic cervical pseudomeningocele after tumor resection. We believe that the pro-inflammatory effects of rhBMP-2 lead to early scarring of dural defect and resolution of CSF leak.

### PMID 30797901 (2019) — Journal of stomatology, oral and maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Intraoperative injection of combined fibrin sealant and methylene blue dye for surgery of branchial cleft cysts: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jormas.2019.02.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Differential diagnosis of a lateral neck mass, especially in paediatric patients, should include branchial cleft cysts (BrCC). It is often difficult to identify and completely resect all cystic components, especially when the lesion becomes infected and/or gigantic. Incomplete excision increases the likelihood of recurrences. We reported a simple technique to facilitate the BrCC resection. Tisseel fibrin glue (FG: Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria) was mixed with methylene blue dye in inverse portion to the cyst size and/or the FG volume before injecting into the cystic lumen. After polymerisation of the dyed glue, the lesion was better visualised and extirpated in toto with the aid of the dye colour and gelatinisation by FG. An up-to-date diagnostic and therapeutic algorithm for BrCC was also presented.

### PMID 30792616 (2019) — Case reports in gastroenterology
TITLE: Successful Endoscopic Management of Double Iatrogenic Perforations Induced by Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography and Computed Tomography-Guided Colon Drainage.
DOI: 10.1159/000495245 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is a high-risk procedure with a significantly high rate of complications, such as pancreatitis, bleeding, perforation, and infection. Pancreatitis is the most common post-ERCP complication with an incidence of approximately 3.5%. Although perforation is a rare complication with an incidence of 0.1-0.6%, it may be associated with a high rate of mortality of 1.0-1.5%. Here, we report a rare case of ERCP-induced double iatrogenic perforations in the duodenum and colon complicated by an intra-abdominal abscess. The post-ERCP perforation was successfully sealed using fibrin glue (Tisseel). The intra-abdominal abscess was treated with a computed tomography-guided pigtail drainage; however, the pigtail spontaneously migrated and perforated the ascending colon. The pigtail was removed, and closure of the colon perforation was successfully achieved with endoscopic clipping. Tisseel spray can be a treatment option for post-ERCP perforations. Careful consideration of procedural complications, early detection of perforations, and prompt treatment can be life-saving.

### PMID 31658792 (2019) — Archives of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Wound healing effect of regenerated oxidized cellulose versus fibrin sealant patch: An in vivo study.
DOI: 10.7181/acfs.2019.00472 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical hemostatic agents are used when ligation, electrocauterization, or other conventional hemostatic methods are impractical. Because a hemostatic agent is a foreign body, it can cause foreign body reactions, inflammation, and infections that can interfere with the wound healing process. Therefore, we should select hemostatic agents after considering their effects on wound healing. Here, we compared the effects of hemostatic agents on wound healing in a rectus abdominis muscle defect in rats.
METHODS: Twelve Sprague Dawley rats were subjected to creation of a 6 &#xd7; 6 mm defect in the rectus abdominis muscle and divided into four groups: control group; group A, Tachosil fibrin sealant patch; group B, Surgicel Fibrillar oxidized regenerated cellulose; and group C, Surgicel Snow oxidized regenerated cellulose. For the histologic analysis, biopsies were performed on the 3rd, 7th, and 27th days.
RESULTS: The foreign body reaction was the weakest in group A and most significant in group C. The inflammatory cell infiltration was the weakest in group A and similar in groups B and C. Muscle regeneration differed among periods. The rats in group A were the most active initially, while those in group C showed prolonged activity.
CONCLUSION: Tachosil and Surgicel administration increased inflammation via foreign body reactions, but the overall wound healing process was not significantly affected. The increased inflammation in the Surgicel groups was due to a low pH. We recommend using Tachosil, because it results in less intense foreign body reactions than Surgicel and faster wound healing due to the fibrin action.

### PMID 31427638 (2019) — Scientific reports
TITLE: Postoperative bleeding and biliary leak after liver resection: A cohort study between two different fibrin sealant patches.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-48529-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Different topical products have been tested in liver resection to get a control of bleeding. This study compares the effectiveness and complications between two haemostatic agents Tachosil versus Hemopatch. A cohort study including patients who underwent liver resection since November 2014 to April 2016 was conducted. The study was performed in a single institution. Demographic variables, intraoperative characteristics and postoperative complications were analysed. A total of 92 patients (50 in Tachosil group and 42 in Hemopatch group) were included. No differences were found in patients who required intraoperative (Tachosil 6 (12%) vs Hemopatch 2 (4.8%); p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.28) and postoperative (Tachosil 4 (8%) vs Hemopatch 3 (7.1%); p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.87) blood transfusion. There were no differences in length of hospital stay (Tachosil 7.02&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4.1 days vs Hemopatch 7.63&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.1; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.67). Overall postoperative complications were similar between both patches (Tachosil 21 (42%) vs Hemopatch 14 (33%); p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.48). No differences were found in specific complications, however Hemopatch showed a higher incidence of intraabdominal abscess 5 (11.9%) and vs 0 (0%) p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01.In this study no differences have been found between Hemopatch and Tachosil in the effectiveness and overall postoperative complication after liver resection, although Hemopatch shows a higher incidence of intraabdominal abscess. Further studies are necessary to confirm these findings.

### PMID 31118780 (2019) — Cancer management and research
TITLE: Fibrin-thrombin sealant does not reduce lymphocele formation in patients with inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy for vulvar cancer.
DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S197143 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Purpose: Inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy (IFLD) is associated with very high morbidity. Fibrin sealant patches are used in various surgical procedures to prevent hematomas and lymphoceles. Here, we report a single-institution experience of fibrin sealants after IFLD in vulvar cancer and give an overview of the current literature. Patients and methods: We retrospectively analyzed outcome data on vulvar cancer patients who underwent bilateral IFLD between November 2014 and June 2016 at the University Hospital Basel. A fibrin sealant patch (Tachosil&#xae;) was placed in one groin only. Postsurgical fluid collection and complications were compared between both groins; time courses of lymphocele formation were analyzed using a linear mixed-effects regression model. Results: Postsurgical outcome of 11 consecutive patients with bilateral IFLD for vulvar cancer was assessed for a median follow-up of 32 days (range 12-77). Significantly larger lymphoceles were detected over time in the groin with the fibrin sealant patch (median 20 mL vs 5 mL without patch, p=0.002), and more punctures for symptomatic lymphocele were required on this side. The infection rate did not differ between sides. Conclusion: Fibrin sealant patches should not routinely be used for prevention of lymphoceles after IFLD for vulvar cancer. They do not seem to reduce lymph collection, the need for puncture or the infection risk after lymphadenectomy in our experience and according to a general literature review.

### PMID 30770074 (2019) — The journal of sexual medicine
TITLE: Surgical Technique for Complex Cases of Peyronie's Disease With Implantation of Penile Prosthesis, Multiple Corporeal Incisions, and Grafting With Collagen Fleece.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jsxm.2018.11.014 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Patients with Peyronie's disease (PD) and erectile dysfunction (ED) concomitant with shortening or other malformations benefit from prosthesis implantation and penile lengthening procedures.
AIM: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of a multi-incisional technique with penile prosthesis implantation with multiple corporeal incisions and collagen grafting for the surgical management of complex cases of PD with ED and severe penile shortening.
METHODS: From February 2015-May 2018, 43 consecutive patients with complex PD were treated using this technique. Implantation of a penile prosthesis (malleable or inflatable [IPP]) together with multiple relaxing tunica albuginea incisions and grafting with a self-adhesive collagen-fibrin fleece (TachoSil, Baxter Healthcare) was performed in all patients by a single surgeon (J.I.M.S.).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Penile length and curvature correction, operative time, and incidence of postoperative complications were recorded as outcome measures. Functional outcomes were measured with questionnaires (International Index of Erectile Function-5, Erection Hardness Score, modified Erectile Dysfunction Inventory of Treatment Satisfaction questionnaire, PD Questionnaire) before and 3 and 6 months after surgery.
RESULTS: With a median follow-up of 21 months (range 10-31), mean postsurgical penile lengthening was 2.5 (range 1-5) cm, with an improvement in the Bother domain of the PD Questionnaire of 4.4 (range 2-5) points. The average operative time was 86.7 and 71.6 minutes for the IPP and malleable penile prosthesis procedure, respectively. No glans ischemia was recorded; however, 1 IPP infection and 1 delayed distal corporeal erosion were recorded. Hematoma or bruising was observed in 23.2% of patients. The modified Erectile Dysfunction Inventory of Treatment Satisfaction questionnaire was completed by 39 (90.7%) patients. Overall, 89.7% would recommend this surgery. Patient satisfaction with straightness and length was 94.9% and 82.1%, respectively.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: The described technique helps restoration of penile length and erectile function in patients with complex PD.
STRENGTHS &amp; LIMITATIONS: The strength of the study is that it offers a simple, easy-to-apply technique for surgeons to correct shortening and other malformations in patients with ED and complex PD. The study is limited by the small number of patients, the short follow-up period and the performance of the technique by a single high-volume implanter.
CONCLUSION: The implantation of a penile prosthesis (malleable or inflatable) together with multiple incisions of&#xa0;the plaque/tunica albuginea and grafting with a collagen fleece is a safe and efficient treatment for patients with&#xa0;complex PD in addition to ED and significant shortening. Fern&#xe1;ndez-Pascual E, Gonzalez-Garc&#xed;a FJ, Rodr&#xed;guez-Monsalve M, et&#xa0;al. Surgical Technique for Complex Cases of Peyronie's Disease With Implantation of Penile Prosthesis, Multiple Corporeal Incisions, and Grafting With Collagen Fleece. J&#xa0;Sex&#xa0;Med 2019;16:323-332.

### PMID 30440066 (2019) — Journal of neurological surgery. Part A, Central European neurosurgery
TITLE: TachoSil Dural Reconstruction in Extracranial-Intracranial Bypass Surgeries.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1675565 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Superficial temporal artery to middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) bypass is a treatment option for hemodynamic insufficiency in the anterior cerebral circulation. Complications associated with extracranial-intracranial bypass surgeries are ischemic strokes caused by bypass failure, wound-healing disorders, and further issues from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. CSF leakage can provide pathways for infection. It is well known in general neurosurgery that watertight closure of the dura mater is necessary to prevent such complications.
OBJECTIVE: To provide a technical description of TachoSil dural reconstruction in standard STA-MCA bypasses and their follow-up analyses.
METHODS: In this technical report with observational follow-up, the dura mater was closed partially by adaptive sutures, and the perforation site of the donor vessel was sealed with TachoSil. TachoSil is a collagen sponge covered with clotting factors that provides hemostatic and sealing effects.
RESULTS: Our study included eight cases of standard STA-MCA bypasses that had been operated between July 2015 and September 2016. Follow-up examinations were completed for all patients at 1&#x2009;month and 6 months after surgery. Duplex and Doppler ultrasound demonstrated regular bypass patency in all patients without increased flow velocity at the perforation sites, which is a possible sign of stenosis. No wound-healing disorders or CSF leakage occurred. No cerebrovascular stroke events were observed.
CONCLUSION: Duraplasty with TachoSil enables the elastic reconstruction of the dura perforation gap in standard extracranial-intracranial bypass surgeries.

### PMID 30414810 (2019) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Results of TachoSil&#xae; associated with fibrin glue as dural sealant in a series of patients with spinal intradural tumors surgery. Technical note with a review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2018.10.138 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: A major problem of surgery for intradural spinal tumors (IST) is the occurrence in the post-operative period of a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak. To the best of our knowledge, here we report on the largest series of IST patients in whom the TachoSil&#xae; associated to fibrin glue was used as dural sealant in this kind of surgery. Moreover, we extensively reviewed the literature reporting the results of TachoSil&#xae; in spine surgery. The data of 35 consecutive surgically treated IST patients were reviewed. In all cases TachoSil&#xae; associated with fibrin glue was used as dural sealant. Mean age was 58.14&#x202f;&#xb1;&#x202f;15.56&#x202f;years and mean follow-up (FU) was 23.20&#x202f;&#xb1;&#x202f;9.76&#x202f;months. The Modified McCormick Scale (MMS) was used to assess the functional status of patients pre-operatively and at latest FU. All article dealing with the use of TachoSil&#xae; in spine surgery were included in the literature review. A CSF collection (treated conservatively with needle aspiration and bed rest with no consequence) was observed only in 1 out of 35 cases. No wound infection nor adverse reaction to the TachoSil&#xae; occurred during the FU. At latest FU we observed an improvement of MMS grade in 23 patients (65.71%) and a stable functional status in 12 cases (34.28%). According to our experience and the literature review using the TachoSil&#xae; after dural closure is safe and effective in IST surgery. Better standardized studies are needed to establish the usefulness of TachoSil&#xae; for incidental dural tear in degenerative spine surgery.

### PMID 31047059 (2019) — Carbohydrate polymers
TITLE: Internal surgical use of biodegradable carbohydrate polymers. Warning for a conscious and proper use of oxidized regenerated cellulose.
DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.04.036 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Oxidized regenerated cellulose has become a major local surgical hemostatic biomaterial because of its ease of use, favorable biocompatibility, bactericidal activity and bioabsorption characteristics. Additional clinical indications of oxidized regenerated cellulose include wound repair and tissue reconstruction. Sometimes, some unusual adverse events are described. Studies report cases of minor postoperative complications as nidus of infection or allergic reaction mainly presenting as acute dermatitis, eczema and sieroma. Also, rare and serious cases of foreign body reaction or impingement on nerve, due to not optimal bioabsorption, are showed in various surgical sites. Thus, on the one hand, patients should be informed by their clinicians of the possibility of these low incidence postoperative complications when considering preparations made of cellulose derivatives; and the clinicians should clearly indicate use of this biomaterial in the surgical procedure report so that radiologists may appropriately interpret any unusual findings potentially associated with this biomaterial use and thus avoid misdiagnosis and undue alarm in the follow-up of patients. On the other hand, the biomedical carbohydrate scientist must consider effective experimental design that substantially addresses the clinical adverse events associated with carbohydrate polymer use. Optimal development of carbohydrates for clinical use depends on excellent clinician/biomedical scientist communication.

### PMID 31037393 (2019) — Surgery today
TITLE: A prospective multi-center registry concerning the clinical performance of laparoscopic colorectal surgery using an absorbable adhesion barrier (INTERCEED&#xae;) made of oxidized regenerated cellulose.
DOI: 10.1007/s00595-019-01816-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The aim of this prospective multi-center registry was to evaluate the safety and clinical performance of INTERCEED&#xae; in laparoscopic colorectal surgery.
METHODS: This study was a prospective, multi-center, single-arm registry wherein patients who received INTERCEED&#xae; in laparoscopic colorectal surgery were registered consecutively (UMIN-CTR 00001872). The primary outcome was the incidence rate of postoperative adhesive small intestinal obstruction within 6&#xa0;months. The secondary outcomes were reoperation related to postoperative bleeding and anastomotic leak, surgical site infection (SSI) and anastomotic leak.
RESULTS: Between March 2012 and March 2015, a total of 202 patients were enrolled from six institutions. INTERCEED&#xae; was not applied in two patients, so 200 patients were analyzed using the full analysis set population. The incidence rate of postoperative adhesive intestinal obstruction was 1.0% (2/200). The total SSI rate was 3.5% (7/200), the deep incisional SSI rate was 0.0% (0/200), and the organ SSI rate was 0.0% (0/200). The incidence of anastomotic leak was 1.0% (2/200). Reoperation was performed in two cases: one for anastomotic leak and the other as cardiac surgery due to heart disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Using INTERCEED&#xae; in laparoscopic colorectal surgery is safe and may be useful for preventing postoperative adhesive small intestinal obstruction.

### PMID 31411610 (2019) — Journal of materials chemistry. B
TITLE: Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) grafted hyaluronic acid-based electrospun fibrous hemostatic fragments as a sustainable anti-infection and immunoregulation material.
DOI: 10.1039/c9tb00659a | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) copolymers are promising synthetic materials in the biomedical field. However, in wound management, their hydrophobic properties limit their further application because of their poor adhesion to the surface of moist wounds. Furthermore, the lack of hemostatic materials with sustainable anti-infection and immunoregulation functions remains a highly significant clinical problem, as commercially available hemostatic products, such as Arista&#x2122;, Celox&#x2122; and QuikClot&#x2122;, do not have sufficient infection prevention and immunoregulation properties. Herein, we employ electrospinning, ammonia dissociation and surface grafting techniques to develop a series of PLGA-based hemostatic materials, including a PLGA electrospun fibrous membrane, PLGA-NH2 fibrous particles and PLGA-hyaluronic acid fibrous fragments (PLGA-HA FFs). Notably, we load azithromycin on the PLGA-HA FFs to endow them with anti-infection and immunoregulation properties. The hemostatic mechanism analysis demonstrates that the PLGA-HA FFs show superior hemostasis performance compared to traditional gauzes. The results show that the PLGA-HA FFs can act as a versatile platform with high encapsulation of azithromycin (83.03% &#xb1; 2.81%) and rapid hemostasis (28 &#xb1; 2 s) as well as prominent cytocompatibility towards L929 cells, RAW 264.7 cells and red blood cells. We believe that the current research proposes a possible strategy to synthesize materials that achieve not only safe and effective hemostasis, but also have anti-infection and immunoregulation properties for the development of further hemostatic products.

### PMID 30765929 (2019) — Journal of orthopaedics
TITLE: Microporous polysaccharide hemosphere efficacy and safety in primary total knee arthroplasty.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jor.2018.11.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Absorbable hemostats such as microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPH) are used to manage hemostasis and prevent complications in total knee arthroplasty (TKA). We aimed to determine safety and effectiveness of MPH use in TKA. Records were reviewed for blood loss, hematomas, and infections. No differences existed regarding demographics, superficial infections (P&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.933) or hematomas (P&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.393). Positive correlation existed between hematoma and superficial infection (P&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.009). Blood loss was greater in the treatment group (P&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.014). MPH demonstrated inferior bleeding control and had no effect on complications. Our results suggest application of this agent may be unnecessary.

### PMID 31001467 (2019) — Cureus
TITLE: Clinical Experience with Hemopatch&#xae; as a Dural Sealant in Cranial Neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.4013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Herein,&#xa0;we report our clinical experience with the novel polyethylene glycol-covered matrix dural onlay, Hemopatch&#xae; (Baxter&#xa0;Deutschland GmbH, Unterschlei&#xdf;heim,&#xa0;Germany) for the prevention of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistulas.
METHODS: Retrospectively, 22 consecutive patients (11 females, 11 males, mean age: 49.8 years, range: 15-77 years) with oncological and vascular intracranial lesions were included in this study. In all patients, the Hemopatch&#xa0;was applied as the dural onlay. The accuracy of the primary dural sutures was distinguished into 1) no visible gaps, 2) small gaps &lt; 3 mm, and 3) large gaps &gt; 3 mm. We evaluated the patient charts, surgical reports, and postoperative images. The median follow-up was three months. We recorded any wound healing disorder, such as infection or CSF fistula, and postoperative hemorrhage resulting in surgical revision.
RESULTS: Supratentorial, infratentorial, and transsphenoidal approaches were conducted in 17, four, and one&#xa0;patient, respectively. Accurate sutures without visible gaps, small gaps, and large gaps were covered with the Hemopatch&#xa0;in 11, eight, and three patients. One patient developed a CSF fistula (4.5%), one patient had a wound infection (4.5%), and in one patient, a remote cerebellar hemorrhage occurred (unrelated to the dural closure) (4.5%). Thus, the surgical revision rate due to wound healing disorders was 9% (2/22).
CONCLUSION: It is safe and feasible to use the Hemopatch&#xa0;as a dural sealant. The rate of postoperative wound healing disorders in our population was in the lower range of reported surgical revision rates after supra-/infratentorial craniotomies. However, prospective and controlled clinical trials are still warranted.

### PMID 30557767 (2019) — Clinical neurology and neurosurgery
TITLE: Hemopatch&#xae; as a new dural sealant: A clinical observation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2018.12.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: We analyzed our results using Hemopatch&#xae; as a new dural sealant after durotomy in cranial and spinal neurosurgical procedures.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In our prospective single center study, we analyzed all patients who received Hemopatch&#xae; used as a dural sealant between October 2016 and May 2017. 34 patients received Hemopatch&#xae; used as a dural sealant in the study period. We included 23 (67.6%) female and 11 (32.3%) male patients. The mean age was 56 years (4-83 years). We included emergency and elective surgical procedures as well as spinal and cranial intradural surgery. We did not exclude any type of underlying pathology. We took note of the general patient data, the size of Hemopatch&#xae; used, the type of dural closure, and the postoperative stay. Additionally, we recorded the type of dural closure (watertight/ watertight with additional muscle patch/ not watertight with small or large defect (&gt;1&#x2009;cm) remaining) and of preoperative hydrocephalus as well as intraoperative ventricular opening.
RESULTS: Hemopatch&#xae; was used in addition to the following dural closures: 11 (32.4%) watertight suture, 23 (67.6%) non-watertight suture. Three (8.8%) surgeries were emergency procedures. The site of surgery was as follows: 18 (52.9%) supratentorial, 16 (47.1%) infratentorial. A ventricular opening was performed in 13 (38.2%) cases. A hydrocephalus was present in 2 (5.9%) cases. A revision surgery after use of Hemopatch&#xae; was performed in 2 (5.9%) patients. Postoperative CSF fistulas and infections were observed in 2 patients each.
CONCLUSION: We could demonstrate the safety and efficiency of Hemopatch&#xae; used as dural sealant after durotomy in microneurosurgical procedures. To confirm our promising results a larger prospective randomized controlled trial will be needed.

### PMID 30785856 (2019) — Surgical infections
TITLE: Cellulose-Derived Absorbable Hemostatic Product as a Risk Factor for Mediastinitis after Cardiac Surgery.
DOI: 10.1089/sur.2018.268 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: We describe the management and control of an outbreak of mediastinitis in a cardiac surgery department. Method: We performed a retrospective cohort study of 87 patients who underwent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), valve replacement, or both during a five-month period with a higher than normal number of cases of post-operative mediastinitis. In addition to medical records review, a survey was conducted among surgeons to estimate the frequency of cellulose-derived absorbable hemostatic (CDAH) use. Results: Eleven patients (12.5%) developed mediastinitis during the period. None of them died, and the course of the infections was benign. No differences were found between the infected and non-infected patients regarding clinical or demographic characteristics. The rate of infection by surgeon ranged from 0 to 21.4%. (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.38). We found a significant linear relation between the frequency of CDAH use and the risk of infection, from 3.3% to 22.6% (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.024). Cultures of unused CDAHs were negative. Cessation of product use led to no new cases for the following year and to a mediastinitis rate &lt;1% for the following 24 months. Conclusion: We identified a cluster of undesired clinical outcomes compatible with mediastinitis that added morbidity and associated cost, but not deaths, related to the use of CDAH as a hemostatic. These data suggest keeping the use of CDAH in cardiothoracic surgery to a minimum.

### PMID 31689633 (2019) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Transcatheter embolization of the esophagomediastinal fistula with N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2019.10.054 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Acute mediastinitis with esophageal perforation is a very fatal condition and must be treated promptly. Esophagomediastinal fistula is a rare complication of acute mediastinitis with esophageal perforation. There are many treatment options such as surgery or endoscopic treatment, but it is most important to start treatment immediately.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 69-year-old female presented with chest pain and fever. Contrast enhanced chest computed tomography was compatible with acute mediastinitis and esophageal perforation. Esophagography revealed esophagomediastinal fistula in the upper esophagus. Endoscopic clipping with fibrin was failed and endoscopic vacuum therapy (EVT) was not effective for esophagomediastinal fistula. We performed the successful transcatheter embolization of the esophagomediastinal fistula with N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue.
DISCUSSION: There are many considerations in the treatment of acute mediastinitis with esophageal perforation, but surgery is the mainstay of treatment. Recently non operative management is appropriate in certain well-defined situations. Like our case patients, non-operative management may be considered if the diagnosis is delayed and the surgical treatment period is missed. Currently, endoscopic treatment such as covered stenting, clipping and application of fibrin glue are useful and a less invasive rather than surgical treatment. However, if endoscopic or surgical procedure are not possible, we considered transcatheter NBCA glue embolization.
CONCLUSION: Transcatheter embolization with NBCA glue was proven to its effectiveness as an alternative therapeutic option in the treatment of esophagomediastinal fistula which endoscopic or surgical treatment are impossible or fails.

### PMID 31589810 (2019) — Cancer cytopathology
TITLE: FNA cytology of postoperative pseudotumoral lesions induced by oxidized cellulose hemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.1002/cncy.22194 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The use of topically applied hemostatic substances during surgery has become a common practice. In some cases, the material is not absorbed or induces a granulomatous reaction resulting in a pseudotumoral lesion. With imaging studies, it is not possible to differentiate this from a tumor recurrence or abscess. This study describes the authors' cytologic experience with a large series of pseudotumoral lesions induced by oxidized cellulose, one of the most commonly used hemostatic agents. Almost no cytologic descriptions are available in the medical literature.
METHODS: Sixteen patients were evaluated, and the most common sites of fine-needle aspiration (FNA) were the mediastinum and thyroid surgical bed. Other locations were the axilla, neck, vulva, liver, and retroperitoneum. All these lesions appeared after surgical procedures in which oxidized cellulose was used as a topical hemostatic agent. The interval time between surgery and FNA varied from 4 to 46&#xa0;months with a mean of 15&#xa0;months.
RESULTS: Cytology samples showed very similar findings. In all cases, foreign-body material with a variable granulomatous reaction was present. Oxidized cellulose was seen as laminated inorganic fragments and most often showed an elongated, quadrangular appearance. Amorphous, ill-defined fragments as well as a dense proteinaceous background with phagocytic cells were also present.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study demonstrates that FNA cytology is a very useful method for the detection of pseudotumoral lesions induced by hemostatic agents. Pathologists must be familiarized with this finding because cytology permits easy differentiation from tumor recurrence.

### PMID 31348840 (2019) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Application techniques of a novel hemostat in cardiac operations: HEMOBLAST.
DOI: 10.1111/jocs.14171 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative bleeding complications are associated with less favorable outcomes in cardiac surgery and contribute to excessive overall healthcare costs. HEMOBLAST (Biom'up, Lyon, France) (HB) is a novel ready-to-use hemostatic powder that consists of porcine collagen, bovine chondroitin sulfate, and human pooled plasma thrombin that may help reduce surgical bleeding.
AIMS: The aim of this study was to describe the techniques of application for this new combination powder-based hemostat, HB, and demonstrate its use employing photographs of application methods during cardiac procedures.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The initial 24 procedures in which HB was used at our institution included: left ventricular assist device (LVAD) insertions, lung transplants, heart transplants, aortic valve replacements, coronary artery bypass grafting, and mitral valve repair.
RESULTS: Hemostasis was achieved in all cases and there were no instances of mediastinitis, sternal infections, allergic reactions, or 30-day mortality.
DISCUSSION: This report describes the best methods of application of HB including use for treatment of mediastinal bleeding in a re-operative procedure in a patient on antiplatelet agents and sternal bleeding during an LVAD insertion. Proper application can facilitate excellent hemostasis using this powder.
CONCLUSION: HB is a novel powder-based multiple component hemostatic agent that promotes focal or large area hemostasis. We have presented the techniques of use that are important to the successful application of HB to facilitate hemostasis.

### PMID 31194062 (2019) — Journal of orthopaedic translation
TITLE: Translation of bone wax and its substitutes: History, clinical status and future directions.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jot.2019.03.005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Bone wax, primarily composed of beeswax and softening agent, is a century-old material used to control bleeding of disrupted bone surfaces by acting as a mechanical barrier to seal the wound. The current bone wax products are commonly packed in easy-to-open foil in the form&#xa0;of sterile sticks or plates, with excellent malleability and smooth consistency, enabling cost-effective and easy handling approach for bleeding control. It has also been reported that the inert nature of bone wax causes complications including foreign body reaction, infection promotion&#xa0;and bone healing inhibition. With the advances in biomaterials and the market boost of bone haemostatic materials, the arena of bone wax substitute research has expanded to a wide spectrum of material formulations and forms. However, the development of substitutes of bone wax for translation is a pivotal yet challenging topic&#xa0;because currently a potential candidate is recommended to be just as simple to use, effective&#xa0;and inexpensive to produce as traditional bone wax but also be absorbable and osteogenic. This review provides an overview of bone wax including its history, clinical applications and associated complication. In addition, emerging substitutes of bone wax and outlooks of future directions including the standardised evaluation methods are also discussed&#xa0;as an effort to catalyse the innovation and translation of bone haemostatic agents in the near future. The translational potential of this article: Occurrence of osseous haemorrhage is common in surgically incised or traumatically fractured bone. It is essential to stop bone bleeding to avoid further pathologic consequences such as tissue necrosis and eventually mortalities due to blood loss. Medical sterile bone wax is a classical material for haemostasis of bone during orthopaedic surgeries, thoracic surgeries, neurological surgeries and so on. Along with its widespread use, complications such as foreign body reaction, bone healing inhibition and infection promotion associated with bone wax are observed. With the growing knowledge in biomaterials and the boost of market of bone haemostatic materials, bone wax substitute research is thriving. An overview of bone and its substitutes together with evolution of their design criteria is carried out in this work, providing information for the innovation and translation of bone haemostatic agents in the near future.

### PMID 31548314 (2019) — Infection and immunity
TITLE: Role of Supramolecule ErpY-Like Lipoprotein of Leptospira in Thrombin-Catalyzed Fibrin Clot Inhibition and Binding to Complement Factors H and I, and Its Diagnostic Potential.
DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00536-19 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Leptospirosis is one of the most widespread zoonoses caused by pathogenic Leptospira spp. In this study, we report that the LIC11966/ErpY-like lipoprotein is a surface-exposed outer membrane protein exclusively present in pathogenic species of Leptospira The recombinant ErpY (rErpY)-like protein is recognized by the immunoglobulins of confirmed leptospirosis sera of diverse hosts (human, bovine, and canine), suggesting the expression of the native leptospiral surface protein during infection. Circular dichroism of pure rErpY-like protein showed the secondary structural integrity to be uncompromised during the purification process. Analysis of the rErpY-like protein by native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, chemical cross-linking, dynamic light scattering, and field emission transmission electron microscopy demonstrated it undergoes supramolecular assembly. The rErpY-like protein can bind to diverse host extracellular matrices, and it presented a saturable and strong binding affinity (dissociation constant [KD ] of 70.45&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4.13&#x2009;nM) to fibrinogen, a central host plasma component involved in blood clotting. In the presence of the rErpY-like supramolecule, thrombin-catalyzed fibrin clot formation is inhibited up to 7%, implying its role in inhibiting blood coagulation during Leptospira infection. In addition, binding of the rErpY-like supramolecule to complement factors H and I suggests the protein also contributes to Leptospira evading innate host defense during infection by inactivating alternative complement pathways. This study reveals that rErpY-like protein is functionally active in the supramolecular state and performs moonlighting activity under the given in vitro conditions.

### PMID 30583318 (2018) — Sheng wu yi xue gong cheng xue za zhi = Journal of biomedical engineering = Shengwu yixue gongchengxue zazhi
TITLE: [Development of double-component rapid curing bioadhesive].
DOI: 10.7507/1001-5515.201805045 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Mussel foot proteins (MFp) could cure rapidly under water and adhere to different substrates. It has broad application prospects as an biocompatible bioglue. The soluble recombinant SUMO-MFp fusion protein (SFp3) was efficiently expressed in E.coli, and about 5% of tyrosine of SFp3 were converted into DOPA by using mushroom tyrosinase. The adhesion strength of the mixture of DOPA-containing SFp3 (DSFp3) and hyaluronic acid (MW = 1 500 kD) was more than twice that of the cyanoacrylate-based tissue adhesives, Dermabond &#xae;, and it reached 52% of its maximal strength within 5 minutes on cowhide. A layer-by-layer assembly of hyaluronic acid with DSFp3 was observed to form compact sheet structures through biofilm interferometry assay and scanning electron microscopy. This work provides a solution and theoretical basis for the low adhesion strength and slow curing of protein-based bioglue. &#x8d3b;&#x8d1d;&#x8db3;&#x4e1d;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#xff08;MFp&#xff09;&#x662f;&#x4e00;&#x7c7b;&#x80fd;&#x591f;&#x5728;&#x6c34;&#x4e0b;&#x8fc5;&#x901f;&#x56fa;&#x5316;&#xff0c;&#x5e76;&#x80fd;&#x9ecf;&#x9644;&#x5728;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x57fa;&#x6750;&#x8868;&#x9762;&#x7684;&#x7279;&#x6b8a;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x8d28;&#xff0c;&#x4f5c;&#x4e3a;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x7c7b;&#x751f;&#x7269;&#x9ecf;&#x5408;&#x5242;&#x5177;&#x6709;&#x5e7f;&#x6cdb;&#x7684;&#x5e94;&#x7528;&#x524d;&#x666f;&#x3002;&#x672c;&#x6587;&#x5728;&#x5927;&#x80a0;&#x6746;&#x83cc;&#x4e2d;&#x9ad8;&#x6548;&#x53ef;&#x6eb6;&#x6027;&#x5730;&#x8868;&#x8fbe;&#x4e86;&#x8d3b;&#x8d1d;&#x8db3;&#x4e1d;&#x878d;&#x5408;&#x86cb;&#x767d; Sumo-Fp3&#xff08;SFp3&#xff09;&#xff0c;&#x5e76;&#x901a;&#x8fc7;&#x8611;&#x83c7;&#x916a;&#x6c28;&#x9178;&#x9176;&#x5728;&#x67f1;&#x50ac;&#x5316;&#xff0c;&#x5c06;&#x5176;&#x4e2d;&#x7ea6; 5% &#x7684;&#x916a;&#x6c28;&#x9178;&#x6b8b;&#x57fa;&#x8f6c;&#x5316;&#x4e3a; DOPA&#x3002;&#x5728;&#x542b; DOPA &#x7684; SFp3&#xff08;DSFp3&#xff09;&#x4e2d;&#x52a0;&#x5165;&#x5206;&#x5b50;&#x91cf;&#x4e3a; 1 500 kD &#x7684;&#x900f;&#x660e;&#x8d28;&#x9178;&#x540e;&#xff0c;&#x5f62;&#x6210;&#x7684;&#x53cc;&#x7ec4;&#x5206;&#x751f;&#x7269;&#x80f6;&#x6c34;&#x5728;&#x725b;&#x76ae;&#x8868;&#x9762;&#x7684;&#x9ecf;&#x9644;&#x529b;&#x8d85;&#x8fc7;&#x6c30;&#x57fa;&#x4e19;&#x70ef;&#x9178;&#x76d0;&#x7ec4;&#x7ec7;&#x7c98;&#x5408;&#x5242;Dermabond &#xae;&#x7684;&#x4e24;&#x500d;&#xff0c;&#x5e76;&#x5728; 5 min &#x5185;&#x8fbe;&#x5230;&#x6700;&#x5927;&#x9ecf;&#x9644;&#x5f3a;&#x5ea6;&#x7684; 52% &#x3002;&#x901a;&#x8fc7;&#x751f;&#x7269;&#x819c;&#x5c42;&#x5e72;&#x6d89;&#x6280;&#x672f;&#x548c;&#x626b;&#x63cf;&#x7535;&#x5b50;&#x663e;&#x5fae;&#x955c;&#xff0c;&#x89c2;&#x6d4b;&#x5230;&#x900f;&#x660e;&#x8d28;&#x9178;&#x4e0e; DSFp3 &#x5b58;&#x5728;&#x9759;&#x7535;&#x5c42;&#x5c42;&#x7ec4;&#x88c5;&#x884c;&#x4e3a;&#xff0c;&#x5e76;&#x5f62;&#x6210;&#x7d27;&#x5bc6;&#x7247;&#x5c42;&#x7ed3;&#x6784;&#x3002;&#x672c;&#x7814;&#x7a76;&#x4e3a;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x8d28;&#x7c7b;&#x751f;&#x7269;&#x80f6;&#x6c34;&#x9ecf;&#x9644;&#x5f3a;&#x5ea6;&#x4f4e;&#x3001;&#x56fa;&#x5316;&#x6162;&#x63d0;&#x4f9b;&#x4e86;&#x4e00;&#x79cd;&#x89e3;&#x51b3;&#x65b9;&#x6cd5;&#x548c;&#x7406;&#x8bba;&#x57fa;&#x7840;&#x3002;.

### PMID 29385426 (2018) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Outcomes of valve-sparing root replacement in acute Type A aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezx463 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To investigate the long-term durability of aortic valves, we reviewed the outcomes of patients who underwent valve-sparing root replacement with acute Type A aortic dissection.
METHODS: We included patients who underwent emergent aortic repair for acute Type A aortic dissection at our university hospital between 2000 and 2016. We identified patients who underwent valve-sparing root replacement from the included cohort and assessed their survival and long-term valve durability.
RESULTS: We identified 24 of 328 patients who underwent valve-sparing root replacement (age: mean&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;SD 49&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;11&#x2009;years; 17 men). All patients underwent reimplantation procedures and 2 had concomitant cusp repairs (central plication). Prolapsed cusps caused by detached commissures in 12 cases were noted and reattached with buttress sutures with or without glue. There was no in-hospital mortality. Median follow-up period was 84&#x2009;months (range 1-202&#x2009;months) and survival was 100% at 5 and 10&#x2009;years. Freedom from moderate or greater aortic insufficiency was 82%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;10% at 5&#x2009;years and 65%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;13% at 10&#x2009;years. Freedom from aortic valve reoperation was 83%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9% at 5&#x2009;years and 69%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;12% at 10&#x2009;years. Valve reoperations were indicated for endocarditis in 1 patient, perforation of the aortic cusp in 1 patient and redetachment of commissures that had been attached with gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue at the initial operations in 3 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The durability of valve-sparing root replacement in acute aortic dissection was suboptimal. The major cause of late failure was commissure detachment after primary repair with buttress sutures and glue. Gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue should be avoided for commissural resuspension in patients with acute aortic dissection.

### PMID 35620775 (2018) — Journal of health economics and outcomes research
TITLE: A Cost-benefit Analysis of Using Polyethylene Glycol Hydrogel Sealant versus Fibrin Glue as a Dural Sealant for Posterior Fossa Surgery in the United States.
DOI: 10.36469/001c.35589 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks are a well-known complication of posterior fossa neurosurgery. The use of dural repair adjuncts has been associated with fewer CSF leaks and subsequently, lower medical costs. Objectives: To determine if the use of polyethylene glycol hydrogel sealant (DuraSeal dural sealant system [DuraSeal]), resulted in cost savings in the United States compared to use of fibrin glue in posterior fossa neurosurgery based on a published study of these two products. Methods: Primary analysis was based on a published cohort study (100 patients per cohort). Adjustments were made to account for the longer follow-up time of the fibrin glue cohort to better capture the incidence of CSF leaks, pseudomeningocele, wound infection, and meningitis using additional data from the literature. Resource utilization was calculated from literature studies and confirmed with consultations from two practicing neurosurgeons. The effective time horizon was 19 months. Undiscounted Medicare payments were used to calculate unit costs from a payer's perspective based on hospital stay, cost of sealant application, and cost of complications. One-way sensitivity analysis was used to examine changes in costs as a result of model input changes. Results: In the base case, the cost of the hospital stay for the original surgery, which excludes the cost of complications, dominated costs for both cohorts. On a per patient basis, the use of fibrin glue cost $1666 more than the use of DuraSeal. Sensitivity analysis showed that using lumbar drainage instead of operative repair for a CSF leak reduced cost savings to $680. Holding the incidence of CSF leaks constant for the fibrin glue cohort while increasing the incidence for the DuraSeal cohort by 50% or 300% resulted in cost savings of $1438 and $755, respectively. Conclusions: The results of this study demonstrate a positive, consistent cost-benefit of DuraSeal compared to fibrin glue based on a cohort study of real world patients who underwent posterior fossa neurosurgery.

### PMID 30119663 (2018) — BMC cancer
TITLE: A multi-center, double blind randomized controlled trial evaluating flap fixation after mastectomy using sutures or tissue glue versus conventional closure: protocol for the Seroma reduction After Mastectomy (SAM) trial.
DOI: 10.1186/s12885-018-4740-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017429">Clinical Trial, Phase IV, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Seroma formation is a common complication after mastectomy and is associated with delayed wound healing, infection, skin flap necrosis, patient discomfort and repeated visits to the out patient clinic to deal with seroma and its sequelae. Closing the dead space after mastectomy seems to be key in reducing seroma and its complications. Various methods have been described to reduce the dead space after mastectomy: closed suction drainage, quilting of the skin flaps and application of adhesive tissue glues. The aim of this trial is to compare seroma formation and its sequelae in the various methods of flap fixation.
METHODS: This is a multicenter, double-blind, randomized controlled trial in female breast cancer patients undergoing mastectomy, with or without axillary clearance. Exclusion criteria consist of breast conserving therapy, direct breast reconstruction and incapacity to comprehend implications and extent of study and unable to sign for informed consent. A total of 336 patients will be randomized. Patients will be randomly allocated to one of three treatment arms consisting of flap fixation using ARTISS tissue glue with a low suction drain, flap fixation using sutures and a low suction drain or conventional wound closure (without flap fixation) and low suction drainage. Follow up will be conducted up to twelve months post surgery. The primary outcome is the number of seroma aspirations and secondary outcomes consist of number of out patient clinic visits, surgical skin infection rate, shoulder function, cosmesis, health-related quality of life and costs and cost-effectiveness (cost/QALY).
DISCUSSION: This is the first study of its kind to evaluate the effect of flap fixation and its sequelae (ie seroma aspirations, number of out patient clinic visits, infection, shoulder function, patient assessed cosmesis, quality of life and cost-effectiveness) in a double blind randomized controlled trial.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial was approved by the hospitals' joint medical ethical committee (14-T-21, 2 June 2014). The SAM Trial is registered in ClinicalTrials.gov since October 2017, Identifier: NCT03305757 .

### PMID 28931468 (2018) — Annals of anatomy = Anatomischer Anzeiger : official organ of the Anatomische Gesellschaft
TITLE: Platelet-released growth factors inhibit proliferation of primary keratinocytes in vitro.
DOI: 10.1016/j.aanat.2017.09.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Autologous thrombocyte concentrate lysates as platelet-released growth factors (PRGF) or Vivostat Platelet Rich Fibrin (PRF&#xae;) represent important tools in modern wound therapy, especially in the treatment of chronic, hard-to-heal or infected wounds. Nevertheless, underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms of the beneficial clinical effects of a local wound therapy with autologous thrombocyte concentrate lysates are poorly understood. Recently, we have demonstrated that PRGF induces antimicrobial peptides in primary keratinocytes and accelerates keratinocytes' differentiation. In the present study we analyzed the influence of PRGF on primary human keratinocytes' proliferation. Using the molecular proliferation marker Ki-67 we observed a concentration- and time dependent inhibition of Ki-67 gene expression in PRGF treated primary keratinocytes. These effects were independent from the EGFR- and the IL-6-R pathway. Inhibition of primary keratinocytes' proliferation by PRGF treatment was confirmed in colorimetric cell proliferation assays. Together, these data indicate that the clinically observed positive effects of autologous thrombocytes concentrates in the treatment of chronic, hard-to-heal wounds are not based on an increased keratinocytes proliferation.

### PMID 29107157 (2018) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Efficacy, Reliability, and Safety of Completely Autologous Fibrin Glue in Neurosurgical Procedures: Single-Center Retrospective Large-Number Case Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2017.10.097 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Commercially available fibrin glue (Com-FG), which is used commonly worldwide, is produced with pooled human plasma from multiple donors. However, it has added bovine aprotinin, which involves the risk of infection, allogenic immunity, and allergic reactions. We evaluate the efficacy, reliability, and safety of completely autologous fibrin glue (CAFG).
METHODS: From August 2014 to February 2016, prospective data were collected and analyzed from 153 patients. CAFG was prepared with the CryoSeal System using autologous blood and was applied during neurosurgical procedures. Using CAFG-soaked oxidized regenerated cellulose and/or polyglycolic acid sheets, we performed a pinpoint hemostasis, transposed the offending vessels in a microvascular decompression, and covered the dural incision to prevent cerebrospinal fluid leakage.
RESULTS: The CryoSeal System had generated up to a mean of 4.51 mL (range, 3.0-8.4 mL) of CAFG from 400 mL autologous blood. Com-FG products were not used in our procedures. Only 6 patients required an additional allogeneic blood transfusion. The hemostatic effective rate was 96.1% (147 of 153 patients). Only 1 patient who received transsphenoidal surgery for a pituitary adenoma presented with the complication of delayed postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage (0.65%). No patient developed allergic reactions or systemic complications associated with the use of CAFG.
CONCLUSIONS: CAFG effectively provides hemostatic, adhesive, and safety performance. The timing and three-dimensional shape of CAFG-soaked oxidized regenerated cellulose and/or polyglycolic acid sheets solidification can be controlled with slow fibrin formation. The cost to prepare CAFG is similar compared with Com-FG products, and it can therefore be easily used at most institutions.

### PMID 29764229 (2018) — Current medical research and opinion
TITLE: Use of MPH hemostatic powder for electrophysiology device implantation reduces postoperative rates of pocket hematoma and infection.
DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2018.1476847 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Surgical site bleeding and infection are potential complications after electrophysiology (EP) device implantation procedures. To date, there is a wide variety of tools for management of intraoperative bleeding but it still remains unclear what methods are preferred.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study is to compare the rate of complications in patients who underwent cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED) implantation utilizing MPH hemostatic powder to the rate of complications in those patients who underwent standard procedure protocol without MPH hemostatic powder.
METHODS: In our study, a new plant-derived microporous polysaccharide hemostatic powder (Arista) was used. A total of 283 consecutive patients were retrospectively studied to assess the rate of complications in patients who underwent CIED implantation with MPH hemostatic powder (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;77, MPH hemostatic powder) and without (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;206, no MPH hemostatic powder). Patients were followed for 12 months.
RESULTS: The MPH hemostatic powder group of patients had a lower complication rate when compared to no MPH hemostatic powder, 0.3% vs. 1.7% (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.05), respectively. The rate of device implantation site MPH hematoma in the MPH hemostatic powder group was 0.4%, versus 0.9% in the other group. There were no postoperative infections in the MPH hemostatic powder group versus 3.2% infections in the other group. The main predictor of increased risk of post-procedural complication was the usage of anticoagulation with a hazard ration of 2.7.
CONCLUSION: Using MPH hemostatic powder for post-procedural hemostasis was shown to result in a significant reduction in the rate of overall post-procedural complications (a composite endpoint of hematoma and infections), and a trend in reduction of the infections rates and device implantation site hematoma rates.

### PMID 30187219 (2018) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Intracranial foreign material granulomas after cranial surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-018-3663-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Various synthetic materials are used in neurosurgery and left in place intentionally during surgery for several purposes such as hemostasis, dural closure, or cranioplasty. Although leaving such substances in surgical sites is considered safe, in general, foreign body granuloma may occur months or years after intracranial surgery. Thus, far relatively little is known about treatment and outcome of such lesions.
METHODS: A systematic review of 3466 histopathological examinations after cranial surgeries achieved over a 13-year period was performed. After excluding patients with Teflon granulomas or infection, a total of 12 patients with foreign body granulomas induced by synthetic material used in a prior surgery were identified. Patient records, imaging studies, and histopathological data were analyzed. Furthermore, postoperative outcome was assessed.
RESULTS: Mean age at the second surgery was 51&#xa0;years (range, 11-68&#xa0;years). The median time between the primary and the secondary surgery was 13&#xa0;months (range, 1-545&#xa0;months). Eight patients (75%) presented with signs and symptoms related to the foreign body granulomas. Total resection of the foreign body granulomas was performed in all patients. The granulomas were induced by oxidized cellulose polymer (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6), suture material (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3), Gelfoam (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1), methylmethacrylate (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1), and bone wax (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1). The mean postoperative follow-up time was 54&#xa0;months (range 1-137&#xa0;months). There was symptomatic improvement in all instances. Imaging studies did not demonstrate any recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Despite its rarity, foreign body granuloma should be taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis of intracranial mass lesions especially in cases of suspected tumor recurrence after prior surgery. The pathogenesis of foreign body granuloma still needs further clarification. Our study demonstrates that they have good prognosis after surgical removal.

### PMID 29891539 (2018) — Infection and immunity
TITLE: Identification, Cloning, and Characterization of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius Coagulase.
DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00027-18 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Coagulase activation of prothrombin by staphylococcus induces the formation of fibrin deposition that facilitates the establishment of infection by Staphylococcus species. Coagulase activity is a key characteristic of Staphylococcus pseudintermedius; however, no coagulase gene or associated protein has been studied to characterize this activity. We report a recombinant protein sharing 40% similarity to Staphylococcus aureus coagulase produced from a putative S. pseudintermedius coagulase gene. Prothrombin activation by the protein was measured with a chromogenic assay using thrombin tripeptide substrate. Stronger interaction with bovine prothrombin than with human prothrombin was observed. The S. pseudintermedius coagulase protein also bound complement C3 and immunoglobulin. Recombinant coagulase facilitated the escape of S. pseudintermedius from phagocytosis, presumably by forming a bridge between opsonizing antibody, complement, and fibrinogen. Evidence from this work suggests that S. pseudintermedius coagulase has multifunctional properties that contribute to immune evasion that likely plays an important role in virulence.

### PMID 29234733 (2017) — EJVES short reports
TITLE: Late Sterile Abscess Formation in Carotid Endarterectomy Following Use of BioGlue: A Word of Caution.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejvssr.2017.10.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: BioGlue (CryoLife Inc., Kennesaw, GA) is a commonly used surgical adhesive, designed to achieve haemostasis following large vessel cardiovascular operations.
REPORT: An 88-year-old female presents with an enlarging right sided neck mass 9 months after carotid endarterectomy with bovine pericardial patch repair which utilised BioGlue seal the patch suture line.
CONCLUSION: BioGlue should be used properly and with caution. In cases of late wound complication following BioGlue use, simple drainage, debridement, and removal of BioGlue remnants may be a satisfactory approach.

### PMID 28431719 (2017) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Mitral Valve Necrosis After Cardiac Surgery Using Gelatin-Resorcinol-Formaldehyde Glue.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2016.10.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a rare case of mitral regurgitation with anterior mitral leaflet perforation associated with gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde (GRF) glue. We performed mitral valve replacement for anterior mitral leaflet perforation occurred 7 years after aortic valve replacement and abscess cavity repair using GRF glue. Long-term follow-up is needed for patients who have undergone surgeries using GRF glue or BioGlue (CryoLife, Inc, Kennesaw, GA) because of the possibility of late complications. In particular, when an eccentric mitral regurgitation is observed after aortic root surgery using GRF glue or BioGlue, anterior mitral leaflet perforation should be considered.

### PMID 28640177 (2017) — International journal of gynecological cancer : official journal of the International Gynecological Cancer Society
TITLE: The Efficacy of Fibrin Sealant Patches in Reducing the Incidence of Lymphatic Morbidity After Radical Lymphadenectomy: A Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.1097/IGC.0000000000001051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Although pivotal in the oncological management of most tumors, radical lymphadenectomy is associated with a significant number of lymphatic complications. The aim of this meta-analysis is to evaluate the efficacy of fibrinogen sealant patches in reducing lymphadenectomy-related postoperative complications.
METHODS/MATERIALS: The electronic databases PubMed, Medline, and Scopus were searched using the terms "lymphadenectomy" or "lymph node dissection" and "TachoSil," "TachoComb," or "fibrin sealant patch." Series evaluating the efficacy of fibrin-thrombin collagen sealant patches were included in the meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Overall, 26 studies were retrieved through the literature search. Ten studies including 720 patients met selection criteria. The use of fibrin-thrombin sealant patches to the sole scope of reducing lymphadenectomy-related complications significantly reduced the incidence of lymphocele, symptomatic lymphocele, the need of percutaneous drainage procedures, the volume of lymph drained, and the duration of the drainage. No effect on wound and/or lymphocele infection was noted.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis demonstrates that the use of fibrin-thrombin sealant patches significantly reduces the total volume of lymph drained, the duration of the drainage, the incidence of lymphocele and symptomatic lymphocele, and the need for postoperative percutaneous drainage procedures. Its use does not affect the incidence of wound or lymphocele infections.

### PMID 28811680 (2017) — Mediators of inflammation
TITLE: The Antimicrobial Peptide Human Beta-Defensin-3 Is Induced by Platelet-Released Growth Factors in Primary Keratinocytes.
DOI: 10.1155/2017/6157491 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Platelet-released growth factors (PRGF) and its related clinically used formulations (e.g., Vivostat Platelet-Rich Fibrin (PRF&#xae;)) contain a variety of chemokines, cytokines, and growth factors and are therefore used to support healing of chronic, hard-to-heal, or infected wounds. Human beta-defensin-3 (hBD-3) is an antimicrobial peptide inducibly expressed in human keratinocytes especially upon wounding. The potent antimicrobial activity of hBD-3 together with its wound closure-promoting activities suggests that hBD-3 may play a crucial role in wound healing. Therefore, we analyzed the influence of PRGF on hBD-3 expression in human primary keratinocytes in vitro. In addition, we investigated the influence of Vivostat PRF on hBD-3 expression in artificially generated human skin wounds in vivo. PRGF treatment of primary keratinocytes induced a significant, concentration- and time-dependent increase in hBD-3 gene expression which was partially mediated by the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). In line with these cell culture data, in vivo experiments revealed an enhanced hBD-3 expression in experimentally produced human wounds after the treatment with Vivostat PRF. Thus, the induction of hBD-3 may contribute to the beneficial effects of thrombocyte concentrate lysates in the treatment of chronic or infected wounds.

### PMID 28686663 (2017) — PloS one
TITLE: In-vitro release pharmacokinetics of amikacin, teicoplanin and polyhexanide in a platelet rich fibrin-layer (PRF)-a laboratory evaluation of a modern, autologous wound treatment.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181090 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Platelet rich fibrin (PRF) is an autologous fibrin glue, produced from patients' blood, which, besides intraoperative use, has applications in the treatment of infected wounds. The combination with antimicrobial agents results in a prolonged antibacterial effect allowing for wound dressing change intervals of seven days even in infected wounds. The aim of this study was to evaluate release kinetics of amikacin, teicoplanin or polyhexanide from a PRF-layer.
METHODS: PRF mixed with teicoplanin, amikacin or polyhexanide was sprayed on a silicon gauze patch and put on a colombia agar with bacteria with known minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) and incubated for 24 hours and afterwards transferred to another agar with the same bacterial strain. Inhibition zones were measured every 24 hours. This was repeated on 7 consecutive days. Antibiotic concentrations were calculated by interpolation.
RESULTS: More than 1000 mg/L teicoplanin were released within the first 24 hours and 28.22 mg/L after 168 hours. Amikacin release was above 10,000 mg/L within the first 24 hours and still 120.8 mg/L after 120 hours. A release of polyhexanide could be verified for the first 24 hours only. Consequently teicoplanin and amikacin released from PRF showed antimicrobial in-vitro effects for almost a week, whereas an antimicrobial effect of polyhexanide could only be verified for the first 24 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: Our Results show that a weekly dressing regimen may be justified in wounds treated with PRF plus amikacin or teicoplanin, since bacteria will be eradicated over a considerable period of time after a single application of PRF.

### PMID 27088363 (2017) — The journal of knee surgery
TITLE: Thrombin-Based Hemostatic Agent in Primary Total Knee Arthroplasty.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0036-1582137 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: The present meta-analysis pooled the results from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to identify and assess the efficacy and safety of thrombin-based hemostatic agent in primary total knee arthroplasty (TKA). Potential academic articles were identified from the Cochrane Library, Medline (1966-2015.5), PubMed (1966-2015.5), Embase (1980-2015.5), and ScienceDirect (1966-2015.5). Relevant journals and the recommendations of expert panels were also searched by using Google search engine. RCTs assessing the efficacy and safety of thrombin-based hemostatic agent in primary TKA were included. Pooling of data was analyzed by RevMan 5.1 (The Cochrane Collaboration, Oxford, UK). A total of four RCTs met the inclusion criteria. The meta-analysis revealed significant differences in postoperative hemoglobin decline (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.00001), total blood loss (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.00001), drainage volume (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01), and allogenic blood transfusion (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01) between the treatment group and the control group. No significant differences were found regarding incidence of infection (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.45) and deep vein thrombosis (DVT; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.80) between the groups. Meta-analysis indicated that the application of thrombin-based hemostatic agent before wound closure decreased postoperative hemoglobin decline, drainage volume, total blood loss, and transfusion rate and did not increase the risk of infection, DVT, or other complications. Therefore, the reviewers believe that thrombin-based hemostatic agent is effective and safe in primary TKA.

### PMID 28606775 (2017) — Urology
TITLE: Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose (Fibrillar) Reduces Risk of Postoperative Corporal Bleeding Following Inflatable Penile Prosthesis Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.urology.2017.06.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To report our initial experience with oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC; Surgicel Fibrillar) as a hemostatic adjunct during inflatable penile prosthesis (IPP) surgery.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Beginning in April 2016, ORC pledgets were placed within the corporotomy closures of all men undergoing IPP insertion. Perioperative characteristics and outcomes including cumulative postoperative drain output were evaluated among consecutive cases with (April 2016 to October 2016) and without ORC (December 2015 to March 2016) using an identical surgical technique by a single surgeon.
RESULTS: During the study period, 64 men underwent IPP implantation, of whom 32 (50%) received ORC. There was a significant reduction in median drain output relative to controls (33&#x2009;mL vs 65&#x2009;mL; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.01). Postoperatively, ORC use was associated with a reduction in the number of patient phone calls for scrotal-related concerns in the immediate postoperative period (average 0.5 vs 1.1; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.03). There were 3 IPP explantations in the non-ORC group (2/3 for infection)-one of which was directly related to an infected hematoma. After controlling for other clinical features, the use of ORC (&#x3b2; -32, 95% confidence interval: -61 to -5; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.02) was independently associated with a reduction in drain output.
CONCLUSION: ORC use during IPP corporotomy closure reduces postoperative drain output, a known risk factor for hematoma-related complications.

### PMID 28843718 (2017) — International journal of cardiology
TITLE: Prospective randomized study evaluating the effects of PerClot&#xae; (Polysaccharide Hemostatic System) application in patients with high bleeding risk undergoing cardiac rhythm device implantation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2017.08.038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Thus far, the topic hemostatic agent PerClot&#xae; is used for surgical procedures. Data about the use of PerClot&#xae; for cardiac-rhythm-devices (CRD) implantation are missing. The aim of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of PerClot&#xae; in patients with high bleeding risk.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this prospective randomized study we planned to include 150 patients admitted for CRD-Implantation receiving anticoagulation and/or dual-antiplatelet-therapy. Participants were randomized to receive PerClot&#xae; versus standard-of-care. The primary endpoint was the incidence of pocket hematoma. Safety endpoint was pocket infection. After a planned safety-interim-analysis the study was terminated early because of safety concerns. 51 patients were included. The two groups were comparable with regard to age (73&#xb1;11years vs. 74&#xb1;10years; p=0.71), CHA2DS2VASc (3.6&#xb1;1.5 vs. 4.0&#xb1;1.5; p=0.27) and HASBLED-Score (2.4&#xb1;1.1 vs. 2.5&#xb1;1.0; p=0.98), CRD or procedure type, anticoagulant or anti-platelet therapy. The use of PerClot&#xae; resulted in a higher incidence of postoperative fever (7 (28%) vs. 0 (0%); p=0.004), higher C-Reactive Protein (66.1&#xb1;50.5mg/l vs. 25.9&#xb1;22.5mg/l; p=0.002); and higher postoperative white blood cell count (13.5&#xb1;4.3/nl vs. 8.8&#xb1;2.6/nl; p&lt;0.001). Hematoma formation did not differ significantly (p=0.14). Reoperation was not necessary in any patient.
CONCLUSION: This first randomized controlled study for the topical use of the hemostatic agent PerClot&#xae; in CRD implantation was terminated early by the safety monitoring board because of an augmented rate of fever and inflammatory markers in the PerClot&#xae; group. The addition of PerClot&#xae; does not suggest a benefit with regard to the frequency of pocket hematoma.

### PMID 28699088 (2017) — Intensive care medicine experimental
TITLE: Sepsis prediction in critically ill patients by platelet activation markers on ICU admission: a prospective pilot study.
DOI: 10.1186/s40635-017-0145-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Platelets have been involved in both immune surveillance and host defense against severe infection. To date, whether platelet phenotype or other hemostasis components could be associated with predisposition to sepsis in critical illness remains unknown. The aim of this work was to identify platelet markers that could predict sepsis occurrence in critically ill injured patients.
METHODS: This single-center, prospective, observational, 7-month study was based on a cohort of 99 non-infected adult patients admitted to ICUs for elective cardiac surgery, trauma, acute brain injury, and post-operative prolonged ventilation and followed up during ICU stay. Clinical characteristics and severity score (SOFA) were recorded on admission. Platelet activation markers, including fibrinogen binding to platelets, platelet membrane P-selectin expression, plasma soluble CD40L, and platelet-leukocytes aggregates were assayed by flow cytometry at admission and 48&#xa0;h later, and then at the time of sepsis diagnosis (Sepsis-3 criteria) and 7&#xa0;days later for sepsis patients. Hospitalization data and outcomes were also recorded.
METHODS: Of the 99 patients, 19 developed sepsis after a median time of 5&#xa0;days. These patients had a higher SOFA score at admission; levels of fibrinogen binding to platelets (platelet-Fg) and of D-dimers were also significantly increased compared to the other patients. Levels 48&#xa0;h after ICU admission no longer differed between the two patient groups. Platelet-Fg % was an independent predictor of sepsis (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0031). By ROC curve analysis, cutoff point for Platelet-Fg (AUC&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.75) was 50%. In patients with a SOFA cutoff of 8, the risk of sepsis reached 87% when Platelet-Fg levels were above 50%. Patients with sepsis had longer ICU and hospital stays and higher death rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Platelet-bound fibrinogen levels assayed by flow cytometry within 24&#xa0;h of ICU admission help identifying critically ill patients at risk of developing sepsis.

### PMID 29078663 (2017) — Journal of visualized surgery
TITLE: Endoscopic treatment with fibrin glue of post-intubation tracheal laceration.
DOI: 10.21037/jovs.2017.06.12 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Post-intubation tracheal laceration (PITL) is a rare and potential life-threatening condition requiring prompt diagnosis and treatment. A conservative treatment is indicated in patients with laceration &lt;2 cm in length while surgery is the treatment of choice for laceration &gt;4 cm. For laceration between 2-4 cm, the best treatment is debate; some authors recommend surgery while others do not definitely exclude endoscopic treatment. Herein, we reported the endoscopic treatment with fibrin glue of PITL. The procedure is performed using a standard video-bronchoscopy in operating room; the patient is in spontaneous breathing and deep sedation. After identification of tracheal laceration, the fibrin glue is injected through a dedicated double lumen catheter into the lesion. After mixing both components of fibrin glue, polymerization of fibrin occurs resulting in an elastic and opaque clot that closes the lesion. The key success of the procedure is based on accurate patient selection. Patients are eligible if (I) they are clinically stable and in spontaneous respiration; (II) with a small and superficial tracheal laceration (&#x2264;4 cm in length and without oesophageal injury); (III) localized at level of the upper or middle trachea; and (IV) without clinical and/or radiological signs of mediastinal collection, of emphysema or pneumomediastinum progression, and of infection.

### PMID 29492443 (2017) — JA clinical reports
TITLE: Breakage and retention of thoracic paravertebral catheter: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s40981-016-0074-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Paravertebral catheters are generally inserted and removed without complications. However, catheter breakage occurs rarely. This is the first report describing breakage of a thoracic paravertebral catheter and retention of the catheter fragment within the patient.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 65-year-old female patient complained of an unusual sensation in her back during postoperative chemotherapy for lung cancer. A catheter fragment was identified in the soft tissues of the back on computed tomography. The paravertebral catheter had been placed 2&#xa0;years prior left lower lobectomy. The patient had neither neurological symptoms nor infection signs around the fragment. However, the potential side effects of chemotherapy, including coagulopathy and immunosuppression, increased the risk of late-onset hematoma and abscess formation around the fragment. Therefore, we surgically removed the catheter fragment. Analysis of the fragment revealed that the catheter had been severed by the cutting edge of the Tuohy needle or the suture needle.
CONCLUSION: In this report, a paravertebral catheter fragment was retained in the posterior mediastinum for 2&#xa0;years. The catheter was likely damaged during the insertion procedure. We suggest that catheters should not be withdrawn through the Tuohy needle, but be withdrawn together with the Tuohy needle. Although secure fixation of the catheter can be achieved with sutures, to reduce the risk of damage to the catheter, alternative methods, such as surgical tapes or skin glue should be considered. After removal of a catheter, its tip should be checked to ensure that the entire catheter has been completely removed. If a catheter fragment is retained within the patient, removal of the fragment should be considered according to the patient's condition and risks.

### PMID 27365077 (2017) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Prevention of surgical site sternal infections in cardiac surgery: a two-centre prospective randomized controlled study.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezw225 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Surgical site infection (SSI) of the sternum is a devastating complication in cardiac surgery. The aim of this prospective randomized controlled two-centre clinical study was to compare the use of a gentamicin-collagen sponge (Genta-Coll&#xae; resorb) and of a cyanoacrylate-based microbial skin sealant (InteguSeal&#xae;) on the SSI rate of the sternum.
METHODS: We analysed data from 996 consecutive patients following isolated coronary artery bypass grafting between 2012 and 2014. The patients were randomized into three groups: standard group (S-group), Genta-Coll group (G-group) and InteguSeal group (I-group). The primary study end-point was to analyse the incidence of superficial and deep sternal SSI. The secondary study end-point was to determine independent risk factors for an increased SSI rate.
RESULTS: Of the 996 patients investigated, 332 patients were in S-group, 336 patients in G-group and 328 patients in I-group. The mean age was 67.7 &#xb1; 9.4 years, 18.6% were women and the overall SSI rate was 6.2% with 2.2% deep sternal wound infections. SSI rates were 8.3% (S-group), 5.4% (G-group) and 4.9% (I-group) (P 0.16). Multiple regression analysis demonstrated a preoperative body mass index (BMI) of &gt;30 kg/m2 (P 0.047), re-thoracotomy for postoperative bleeding (P &lt; 0.001) and sternum instability (P &lt; 0.001) as independent predictors for an increased SSI rate.
CONCLUSIONS: The application of InteguSeal&#xae; or Genta-Coll&#xae; resorb had no significant influence on the incidence of the sternal SSI rate in 996 consecutive cardiac surgery patients but demonstrated a trend towards a benefit from using these prophylactic approaches. Multiple regression analysis demonstrated a preoperative BMI of &gt;30 kg/m2, re-thoracotomy for bleeding and sternum instability as independent predictors for an increased sternal SSI rate.

### PMID 28197224 (2017) — Annals of thoracic medicine
TITLE: A foreign body reaction to Surgicel&#xae; in a lymph node diagnosed by endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration.
DOI: 10.4103/1817-1737.197780 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgicel&#xae; (Ethicon, North Ryde, NSW, Australia) is an absorbable sheet of oxidized cellulose polyanhydroglucuronic acid polymer used as an hemostatic in cardiovascular and thoracic surgery. In some cases, the retained material may cause foreign body granulomatous reactions and simulate tumor recurrence, an abscess, an hematoma, or an infection. We report the case of a 55-year-old patient who was operated of a lung adenocarcinoma. In the thoracic computed tomography scan 1 year after the surgery, a right paratracheal lymph node was detected, so endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) was performed suspecting recurrence of the tumor. The cytology results of the lymph node showed a nonnecrotizing granulomatous reaction secondary to Surgicel&#xae;, used as an hemostatic during the surgery. The objective of presenting this case is to consider foreign body reaction to Surgicel&#xae; in the differential diagnosis of postoperative suspicion of neoplastic recurrence, and on the other hand, to note that EBUS-TBNA enables diagnosis.

### PMID 29189062 (2017) — Archives of pathology &amp; laboratory medicine
TITLE: Factor V Inhibitors: A Diagnostic and Therapeutic Challenge.
DOI: 10.5858/arpa.2016-0445-RS | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Historically, inhibitors to coagulation factor V (FV) most often have developed in patients treated with bovine thrombin, a topical hemostatic agent used during surgical procedures. With the advent of newer hemostatic agents, and the concurrent diminished use of bovine thrombin, the incidence of FV inhibitors has fallen. Nevertheless, FV inhibitors are occasionally seen on an idiopathic basis as well as in association with medications, malignancies, autoimmune disorders, pregnancy, and infections. Factor V inhibitors may present with life-threatening bleeding or thrombosis, or they may be discovered incidentally as a coagulation screening test abnormality. Management of patients with FV inhibitors is challenging and consists of control of bleeding and eradication of the inhibitor. In this short overview we review the role of platelet and plasma FV in hemostasis and discuss the unique characteristics, clinical features, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis associated with FV inhibitors.

### PMID 28865228 (2017) — Polish journal of veterinary sciences
TITLE: The diagnostic importance of coagulation parameters in cattle having natural theileriosis.
DOI: 10.1515/pjvs-2017-0045 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The purpose of this study was to determine the diagnostic importance of coagulation parameters in cattle with natural theileriosis. Nine Holstein cross-breed cattle with theileriosis as infected group and 6 healthy Holstein cattle as control group were used in the present study. Mean fibrinogen level, thrombin time (TT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and prothrombin time (PT) were not statistically different when control and infected groups compared, except for the D-dimer concentration. Quantitative D-dimer concentrations were determined by immune-turbidimetric assay. D-dimer values increased significantly (p&lt;0.05) in infected group (631.55 &#xb1; 74.41 &#x3bc;g/L) compared to control group (370.00 &#xb1; 59.94 &#x3bc;g/L). D-dimer sensitivity and specificity were also determined at cut-off concentrations (372 &#x3bc;g/L). Sensitivity and specificity of D-dimer values were determined to be 88.89% and 83.33%, respectively. D-dimer is thought to be important indicator in the evaluation of the prognosis in theileriosis cases. Analysis of D-dimer values before and after treatment in controlled case studies were suggested in future studies to enlighten the issue.

### PMID 27428013 (2017) — Blood coagulation &amp; fibrinolysis : an international journal in haemostasis and thrombosis
TITLE: Acquired factor V deficiency in a patient with a urinary tract infection presenting with haematuria followed by multiple haemorrhages with an extremely low level of factor V inhibitor: a case report and review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1097/MBC.0000000000000581 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: : Acquired factor V deficiency (AFVD) is a rare haemostatic disorder that is primarily because of the development of factor V inhibitors. Approximately, 200 cases have been reported and the greatest portion of these cases was because of bovine thrombin exposure. We report a case of a man who presented with haematuria followed by multiple haemorrhages associated with an elevated prothrombin time and an activated partial thromboplastin time. A workup revealed reduced factor V activity and a factor V inhibitor level of 1.9&#x200a;BU, which were likely secondary to a urinary tract infection. Using corticosteroids, we successfully eliminated the inhibitor and controlled the bleeding. We review the published literature to identify the conditions that are associated with nonbovine thrombin AFVD. We assume that AFVD should be kept in mind for patients who present with multiple haemorrhages.

### PMID 28082214 (2017) — American journal of obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Are perioperative bundles associated with reduced postoperative morbidity in women undergoing benign hysterectomy? Retrospective cohort analysis of 16,286 cases in Michigan.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2016.12.173 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Healthcare teams that frequently follow a bundle of evidence-based processes provide care with lower rates of morbidity. Few process bundles to improve surgical outcomes in hysterectomy have been identified.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate whether a bundle of 4 perioperative care processes is associated with fewer postoperative complications and readmissions for hysterectomies in the Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative.
STUDY DESIGN: A bundle of perioperative care process goals was developed retrospectively with 30-day peri- and postoperative outcome data from the Hysterectomy Initiative in Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative. All benign hysterectomies that had been performed between January 2013 and January 2015 were included. Based on evidence of lower complication rates after benign hysterectomy, the following processes were considered to be the "bundle": use of guideline-appropriate preoperative antibiotics, a minimally invasive surgical approach, operative duration &lt;120 minutes, and avoidance of intraoperative hemostatic agent use. Each process was considered present or absent, and the number of processes was summed for a bundle score that ranged from 0-4. Cases with a score of zero were excluded. Outcomes measured were rates of complications (any and major) and hospital readmissions, all within 30&#xa0;days of surgery. Postoperative events that were considered a "major complication" included acute renal failure, cardiac arrest that required cardiopulmonary resuscitation, central line infection, cerebral vascular accident, death, deep vein thrombosis, intestinal obstruction, myocardial infarction, pelvic abscess, pulmonary embolism, rectovaginal fistula, sepsis, surgical site infection (deep and organ-space), unplanned intubation, ureteral obstruction, and ureterovaginal and vesicovaginal fistula. The outcome "any complication" included all those events already described in addition to blood transfusion within 72 hours of surgery, urinary tract infection, and superficial surgical site infection. Outcomes were adjusted for patient demographics, surgical factors, and hospital-level clustering effects.
RESULTS: There were 16,286 benign hysterectomies available for analysis. Among all hysterectomies that were reviewed, 33.6% met criteria for all bundle processes; however, there was wide variation in the rate among the 56 hospitals in the study sample with 9.1% of cases at the lowest quartile and 60.4% at the highest quartile of hospitals that met criteria for all bundle processes. Overall, the rate of any complication was 6.8% and of any major complication was 2.3%. The rate of hospital readmissions was 3.6%. After adjustment for confounders, in cases in which all bundle criterion were met compared with cases in which all bundle criterion were not met, the rate of any complications increased from 4.3-7.8% (P&lt;.001); major complications increased from 1.7-2.6% (P&lt;.001), and readmissions increased from 2.6-4.1% (P&lt;.001). After adjustment for confounders, hospitals with greater rates of meeting all 4 criteria were associated significantly with lower hospital-level rates of postoperative complications (P&lt;.001) and readmissions (P&lt;.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This multiinstitutional evaluation reveals that reduced morbidity and readmission are associated with rates of bundle compliance. The proposed bundle is a surgical goal, which is not possible in every case, and there is significant variation in the proportion of cases meeting all 4 bundle processes in Michigan hospitals. Implementation of evidence-based process bundles at a healthcare system level are worthy of prospective study to determine whether improvements in patient outcomes are possible.

### PMID 26835216 (2016) — Global spine journal
TITLE: Transcutaneous Drainage of Gel-Like Substance after Application of Hydrogel Dural Sealant: Report of Two Cases.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1550088 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Study Design&#x2003;Case report. Objective&#x2003;Incidental durotomy (IDT) is a common complication of spinal surgery. The use of collagen matrix graft along with hydrogel dural sealant is a common method of IDT repair. With this method, there have been several reported cases of detrimental dural sealant expansion in the literature. One case study reported an expansion rate greater than 300%; many report neurologic damage. This article reports the clinical course of two patients who developed postoperative transcutaneous drainage of a gel-like substance after the use of a dural sealant, which is a previously unreported complication. Methods&#x2003;The clinical course and treatment outcome of two patients is presented. Results&#x2003;Both patients experienced postoperative transcutaneous drainage of a gel-like substance at the surgical site. Case one began draining this substance on postoperative day 14. This patient required no further intervention, and the drainage ended after 3 mL of a gel-like substance was expressed from his incision while in the clinic. Case two began draining the gel on postoperative day 16. This patient underwent two washout procedures and resolution of the drainage. No infection was ever detected. Conclusions&#x2003;To our knowledge, our patients are the first reported cases of transcutaneous drainage of expanded dural sealant. It is important to take into consideration the unexpected expansion of a dural sealant when using it for the repair of IDT.

### PMID 26017909 (2016) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Transtracheal thoracic natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) in a swine model.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-015-4228-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) has the potential to be the final frontier in minimally invasive procedures in thoracic surgery. In order for thoracic pleural NOTES to 1 day be ready for clinical trials, each step of the procedure must be independently evaluated for both safety and efficacy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the trachea as a portal of entry for thoracic NOTES.
METHODS: Eight 40-kg swine underwent right thoracic pleuroscopy in a survival model. In order to avoid inadvertent injury to the superior vena cava, endobronchial ultrasound was employed to select the location of airway incision. A 7-mm linear incision was then performed at the chosen location using an endoscopic electrocautery needle knife through a therapeutic flexible videobronchoscope. The mediastinal fat and parietal pleura were then dissected with electrocautery, and complete right pleuroscopy was performed. The tracheal and mediastinal portal of entry were then sealed with 1-2 cc of fibrin sealant. The pigs were kept alive for 21 days postoperatively. Postmortem diagnostic bronchoscopy was performed to assess tracheal healing. All tracheal specimens underwent histologic examination for healing and signs of mediastinal infection.
RESULTS: Thoracic NOTES procedures on all eight pigs were successful. There were no intraoperative complications except for one minor bleeding episode within the mediastinal dissection site which stopped spontaneously. Two pigs died from severe laryngospasm in the early postoperative period. Six pigs survived for 21 days post-procedure and experienced uneventful postoperative courses. Postmortem examination demonstrated complete tracheal healing with appropriate scarring in all pigs.
CONCLUSIONS: The trachea appears to be a safe port of entry for thoracic NOTES procedures in a swine model. Smaller tracheal incisions followed by balloon dilatation are associated with less postoperative morbidity and mortality. Tracheal incisions sealed with fibrin sealant healed rapidly and without signs of mediastinal infection. This procedure represents a work in progress and is not yet ready for human trials.

### PMID 27429100 (2016) — Zeitschrift fur Gastroenterologie
TITLE: [Sealing of the hepatic resection area using hemostat devices does not improve results of adequate surgery].
DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-100284 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: In hepatic resections, there has been a high quality demand. The aim of this systematic clinical, prospective, unblinded unicenter observational study with two arms in an unselected patient cohort was to investigate whether hemostat device can significantly improve outcome in resective liver surgery, in particular, in high risk patients.
METHODS: All consecutive patients (mean age, 60.5 [range, 17&#x200a;-&#x200a;96] years) who underwent hepatic resection (ntotal&#x200a;=&#x200a;770) were prospectively documented in a computer-based registry at a university hospital (tertiary center) over a time period of 10&#xa0;years and retrospectively evaluated specifically with regard to the use (-/+; in daily practice and intraoperative decision-making) of hemostat device (Tissucol(&#xae;), n&#x200a;=&#x200a;59/Tachocomb(&#xae;), n&#x200a;=&#x200a;202/combination, n&#x200a;=&#x200a;55) indicated (among others) by drainage volume, inflammatory parameters and rate of specific complications (nvalidated&#x200a;=&#x200a;541 [100&#x200a;%]).
RESULTS: Most frequently, (a-)/typical segmental resections were used: n&#x200a;=&#x200a;192/90 (3-segment resection, only n&#x200a;=&#x200a;38). 1) For the assignment of patients to the two different groups (-/+ hemostat device), weight loss and type of resection were found as significant factors (trend: ASA, cirrhosis), for the amount of drainage volume, ASA, sex, Karnofsky Performance Scale and also type of resections using independent distributed statistical tests (such as &#x3c7;(2), U test [Mann/Whitney]; H test [Kruskal-Willis]; correlation coefficient by Spearman) - no impact: smoking, diabetes, BMI, ethanol. 2) Not taking into account these parameters, the use of hemostat device was characterized by an increased drainage volume (negative control &lt;&#xa0;Tissucol&#x200a;=&#x200a;Tachocomb &lt; combination). 3) Using multifactorial analysis of variance, it was found even under correction by the factors with significant impact elucidated in the single test that the application of hemostat device onto the hepatic resection area resulted unexpectedly rather in an increase than a&#xa0;decrease of the drainage volume but 4) under accompanying more pronounced increase of the white blood cell count (leucocytosis). 5) General and specific complications such as postoperative bleeding, biliary fistula and subhepatic abscess were not further lowered in a significant manner using hemostat device.
CONCLUSION: Adequate surgery in the operative management of hepatic resection area cannot further be improved or optimized using hemostat device. In this context, drainage volume may not be considered a sufficient rather an orienting parameter. However, there is an inflammatory response detectable most likely indicated by a(n un-)specific effusion and increase of white blood cell count, which can be interpreted as a) being characteristic for the problematic group of patients, in whom hemostat device was decided to be useful and was finally used in daily prectice, or b) reactive inflammation to foreign material.

### PMID 26816671 (2016) — GMS Interdisciplinary plastic and reconstructive surgery DGPW
TITLE: Reducing morbidity with surgical adhesives following inguinal lymph node dissections for the treatment of malignant skin tumors.
DOI: 10.3205/iprs000084 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Inguinal lymph node dissection (ILND) is associated with a high rate of morbidity. To evaluate the clinical benefit of surgical adhesives to reduce complications in patients undergoing ILND, we compared the use of TissuGlu(&#xae;) Surgical Adhesive and ARTISS(&#xae;) fibrin sealant with a control population.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of patients undergoing ILND for metastatic malignant skin tumors at one hospital, Fachklinik Hornheide (M&#xfc;nster, Germany), from January 2011 through September 2013, assessing 137 patients with a total of 142 procedures.
RESULTS: Complications occurred in 22/60 procedures in the TissuGlu group (TG), in 8/17 in the ARTISS group (AG), and in 29/65 in the control group (CG). Prolonged drainage and seroma were recorded in 16 (26.7%), four (23.5%), and 26 (40%) respectively (non-significant). TG showed less extended drainage vs. CG (p=0.082). Mean daily drain volumes were significantly lower in AG vs. CG (p=0.000). With regard to wound infection, there was a 15% reduction in TG and 74% increase in AG group. Revision surgery was reduced by 36% in TG and increased by 54% in AG. Mean daily drain volumes were significantly lower in AG vs. CG (p=0.000). Mean total post-operative drain volume was lower in TG and AG vs. CG (p&lt;0.001 among groups, CG vs. TG p&lt;0.001, CG vs. AG p&lt;0.001). The mean body mass index (BMI) was significantly higher in patients with complications, 29.4&#xb1;5.8 vs. 25.3&#xb1;4.1 (p=0.000).
CONCLUSION: The use of TissuGlu in our ILND patients was associated with a reduction in post-operative wound related complications and the need for revision surgeries compared to the control group. Daily drainage was significantly lower within the first 7 post-operative days with the use of ARTISS, but the benefit was lost due to the higher occurrence of wound infection and revision surgery. BMI above 29 is a risk factor for complications following ILND. (
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: level IV, retrospective case study).

### PMID 26904371 (2016) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Aulogous fibrin sealant (Vivostat(&#xae;)) in the neurosurgical practice: Part II: Vertebro-spinal procedures.
DOI: 10.4103/2152-7806.174894 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Epidural hematomas, cerebrospinal fluid fistula, and spinal infections are challenging postoperative complications following vertebro-spinal procedures. We report our preliminary results using autologous fibrin sealant as both fibrin glue and a hemostatic during these operations.
METHODS: Prospectively, between January 2013 and March 2015, 68 patients received an autologous fibrin sealant prepared with the Vivostat(&#xae;) system applied epidurally to provide hemostasis and to seal the dura. The surgical technique, time to bleeding control, and associated complications were recorded.
RESULTS: Spinal procedures were performed in 68 patients utilizing autologous fibrin glue/Vivostat(&#xae;) to provide rapid hemostasis and/or to seal the dura. Only 2 patients developed postoperative dural fistulas while none exhibited hemorrhages, allergic reactions, systemic complications, or infections.
CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary study, the application of autologous fibrin sealant with Vivostat(&#xae;) resulted in rapid hemostasis and/or acted as an effective dural sealant. Although this product appears to be safe and effective, further investigations are warranted.

### PMID 26843467 (2016) — Experimental dermatology
TITLE: Platelet-released growth factors induce the antimicrobial peptide human beta-defensin-2 in primary keratinocytes.
DOI: 10.1111/exd.12966 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Platelet-released growth factors (PRGF) and its related clinically used formulations [e.g. Vivostat platelet-rich fibrin (PRF(&#xae;) )] are thrombocyte concentrate lysates that support healing of chronic, hard-to-heal and infected wounds. Human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) is an antimicrobial peptide expressed in human keratinocytes exhibiting potent antimicrobial activity against wound-related bacteria. In this study, we analysed the influence of PRGF on hBD-2 expression in human primary keratinocytes and the influence of Vivostat PRF(&#xae;) on hBD-2 expression in experimentally generated skin wounds in vivo. Treatment of primary keratinocytes with PRGF caused a significant increase in hBD-2 gene and protein expressions in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. The use of blocking antibodies revealed that the PRGF-mediated hBD-2 induction was partially mediated by the epidermal growth factor receptor and the interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R). Luciferase gene reporter assays indicated that the hBD-2 induction through PRGF required activation of the transcription factor activator protein 1 (AP-1), but not of NF-kappaB. In concordance with these cell culture data, Vivostat PRF(&#xae;) induced hBD-2 expression when applied to experimentally generated skin wounds. Together, our results indicate that the induction of hBD-2 by thrombocyte concentrate lysates can contribute to the observed beneficial effects in the treatment of chronic and infected wounds.

### PMID 27199208 (2016) — Acta obstetricia et gynecologica Scandinavica
TITLE: Real-world surgical outcomes of a gelatin-hemostatic matrix in women requiring a hysterectomy: a matched case-control study.
DOI: 10.1111/aogs.12924 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to compare adverse events and surgical outcomes of hysterectomy with or without use of a gelatin-hemostatic matrix (SURGIFLO(&#xae;) ).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Prospective case-control study (Canadian Task Force classification II2) of total hysterectomy (Piver Type 1) provided by surgeons in Australia between November 2005 and May 2015. Data were collected via SurgicalPerformance, a web-based data project which aims to provide confidential feedback to surgeons about their surgical outcomes. Of 2440 records of women who received a hysterectomy, 1351 were eligible for these analyses; 107 received SURGIFLO(&#xae;) hemostatic matrix to prevent postoperative blood loss and 1244 did not.
RESULTS: Patients with or without SURGIFLO(&#xae;) differed in age, Charlson comorbidity index, and American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status classification system score (ASA), and also differed in clinical outcomes. After matching for patient's age and ASA at surgery, patients with and without SURGIFLO(&#xae;) had comparable baseline characteristics. Matched patients with and without SURGIFLO(&#xae;) had comparable clinical outcomes including risk of developing vault hematoma, return to the operating room, transfusion of red cells, surgical site infection (pelvis), readmission within 30 days and unplanned ICU admission.
CONCLUSIONS: In a sample matched by age and ASA, SURGIFLO(&#xae;) neither prevented nor caused additional adverse events in women undergoing hysterectomy. Surgeons used SURGIFLO(&#xae;) more commonly among women who were older, had more comorbidities and a higher ASA score. This indicates that it may be most useful in complicated surgery or cases.

### PMID 27199534 (2016) — Infectious diseases in obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Influence of Gelatin-Thrombin Matrix Tissue Sealant on Bacterial Colony Formation and Risk of Pelvic Infection.
DOI: 10.1155/2016/2649708 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Objective. Gelatin-thrombin matrix (GTM) tissue sealant use was previously identified as an independent predictor of pelvic infection following hysterectomies. We aim to elucidate contributing factors by assessing influence of GTM on bacterial colony formation and characterizing bacteria present at the vaginal cuff. Methods. Escherichia coli was incubated in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and pelvic washings with and without GTM to assess influence on colony formation. Pelvic washings of the vaginal cuff were collected from hysterectomies occurring from June through October 2015. In vitro techniques, 16S rRNA gene qPCR, and 16S amplicon sequencing were performed with washings to characterize bacteria at the vaginal cuff. Results. Mean bacterial colony formation in PBS was greater for E. coli incubated in the presence of GTM (1.48 &#xd7; 10(7)&#x2009;CFU/mL) versus without (9.95 &#xd7; 10(5)&#x2009;CFU/mL) following 20-hour incubation (p = 0.001). Out of 61 pelvic washings samples, 3 were culture positive (&#x2265;5000&#x2009;CFU/mL) with Enterococcus faecalis. Conclusion. In vitro experiments support a facilitating role of GTM on colony formation of E. coli in PBS. However, given the negative results of surgical site washings following adequate disinfection, the role of GTM in promoting posthysterectomy pelvic infections may be limited. Analysis of pelvic washings revealed presence of E. faecalis, but results were inconclusive. Further studies are recommended.

### PMID 30042962 (2016) — Tomography (Ann Arbor, Mich.)
TITLE: Computed Tomographic Characterization of Traumastem-A New Oxidized Cellulose Hemostatic Agent.
DOI: 10.18383/j.tom.2016.00238 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) is a commonly used surgical hemostatic agent. When retained at the surgical site, it is frequently misdiagnosed on postoperative computed tomography (CT) images as an abscess or a recurrent tumor. Oxidized nonregenerated cellulose (ONC) is a new, more effective version of ORC. It is more effective because of its unorganized fiber structure and greater material density, which may also alter its appearance on CT images relative to ORC. This image report compares the CT characteristics of ONC and ORC. A rabbit's bilateral femoral arteries were punctured to model peripheral vascular surgery. ORC was used to treat 1 of the femoral artery punctures and ONC to treat the contralateral puncture. Noncontrast CT imaging was performed immediately following surgery (day 0) and on postoperative day 14. On day 0, both ORC and ONC were isoattenuating relative to muscle and hyperattenuating to fat, although ONC appears more homogenous. On day 14, neither ORC nor ONC was clearly identifiable. Thus, postoperative retention of ONC can obscure immediate postoperative CT interpretation and, similar to ORC, lead to an erroneous diagnosis of an abscess. By day 14, ONC retention may not obscure CT interpretation. In noncontrast CT imaging, ONC appears more homogeneous than ORC, but is otherwise indistinguishable. The greater homogeneity of ONC may be caused by the unorganized fiber structure or greater material density. Intraoperative use of ONC should be clinically investigated before radiographically diagnosing a postoperative abscess or recurrent tumor.

### PMID 26884411 (2016) — Comparative medicine
TITLE: Granuloma Due to Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose in an Aged Rhesus Macaque (Macaca mulatta).
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bioabsorbable hemostatic agents such as oxidized regenerated cellulose are widely used to control intraoperative diffuse capillary bleeding. Compared with electrocautery or ligation, oxidized regenerated cellulose has the advantage of controlling bleeding without occluding the vessel lumen or causing thermal injuries to adjacent tissue. Although the manufacturer recommends removal of the material once hemostasis is achieved, oxidized regenerated cellulose is a bioabsorbable hemostatic agent and is often left in the surgical bed to prevent subsequent bleeding after surgical closure. However, noninvasive imaging techniques have revealed granulomatous foreign-body reactions that mimic infection or tumor recurrence. We present a case report of sterile peritonitis and granuloma formation secondary to the presence of oxidized regenerated cellulose after intestinal resection to excise a colonic adenocarcinoma in an aged rhesus macaque.

### PMID 26767606 (2016) — Vascular
TITLE: Long-term results of simplified frozen elephant trunk technique in complicated acute type A aortic dissection: A case-control study.
DOI: 10.1177/1708538115627728 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: To describe the long-term experience of a simplified frozen elephant trunk technique (sFETT) used in complicated acute type A aortic dissection (AAAD) treatment.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Between January 2001 and December 2012, 34 patients (mean age 59.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;11.0 years) with complicated AAAD (DeBakey I) underwent an emergency surgery including sFETT. sFETT consisted in gluing the dissected aortic arch wall layers with gelatine-resorcinol adhesive and video-assisted antegrade open arch aortic stent-graft deployment in the arch or proximal descending aorta. In addition to sFETT, the aortic root was addressed with standard techniques. A 30-day mortality was 14.7% (five patients) due to bleeding (1), multiple organ failure (2), and colon ischemia (2). Postoperative morbidity included neurological (2), renal (1) and cardio-pulmonary complications (4), as well as wound infection (1). Mean follow-up was 74.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;45.0 months. Actual survival rates were 73.5% at 1 year, 70.2% at 5 years, and 58.5% at 13 years of follow-up. Six patients died during long-term follow-up from heart failure (1) and unknown reasons (5). Five patients required reoperation for aortic arch (3) or aorto-iliac (2) progression of aneurysm during the mid- and long-term follow-up. The remaining patients showed favorable evolution of the dissected aorta with false lumen occlusion in most cases and stable aortic diameters.
CONCLUSIONS: In AAAD patients, sFETT as used in our series is an easy and safe technique to repair the aortic arch. Long-term results after sFETT showed false lumen occlusion and stable aortic diameter in up to 13 years of follow-up.

### PMID 26055002 (2015) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Resection of Ileoinguinal and Ileohypogastric Nerves Combined with Gluing in Modified Lichtenstein Repair.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We conducted a cohort trial to investigate the relevance of resection of the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves in combination with mesh fixation with BioGlue&#x2122; (CryoLife&#xae; Inc., Kennsaw, Georgia) in modified Lichtenstein repair to the development of chronic pain and hernia recurrence.1 In all, 430 patients underwent Lichtenstein repair. In 247 patients the mesh was fixed by means of glue, and in 183 patients it was fixed with conventional sutures. In all cases the inguinal nerves N. ilioinguinalis and N. iliohypogastricus were located and resected after identification to prevent nerve reaction to the mesh. The pain intensity was measured with a numeric analogous scale (NAS) 24 hours after surgery. All complications were recorded with a follow-up of up to 5 years. There was a significantly lower pain intensity level in the gluing group compared with the suture group 24 hours after surgery (0.016 t test). The level was 3.8&#xb1;2.4 in bilateral hernia and 3.3&#xb1;2.1 in unilateral hernia in the gluing group. It was 4.7&#xb1;3.3 in unilateral and 3.7&#xb1;2.2 in bilateral hernia in the suture group. The cut-suture time was lower in the gluing group. There were no severe pain syndromes (NAS&#x2265;4) in the gluing group and only 1.1% in the suture group. There was a higher incidence of non-bacterial wound infections in the gluing group (3.6%) than in the suture group (1.1%). The rate of recurrence after 5 years amounted to 2.0% in the gluing group and 2.2% in the suture group. The technique of using BioGlue&#x2122; for mesh fixation combined with systematic nerve dissection reduces acute and chronic postoperative pain after modified Lichtenstein repair. Only 2 of 430 patients suffered from severe chronic pain. Combined gluing and systematic resection of the inguinal nerves is more comfortable than standard Lichtenstein repair.

### PMID 25793325 (2015) — Inflammatory bowel diseases
TITLE: Reducing colorectal anastomotic leakage with tissue adhesive in experimental inflammatory bowel disease.
DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000336 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Anastomotic leakage after gastrointestinal surgery remains a challenging clinical problem. This study aimed to investigate the effectiveness of TissuCol (fibrin glue), Histoacryl Flex (n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate), and Duraseal (polyethylene glycol) on colorectal anastomotic healing during experimental colitis.
METHODS: We first performed colectomy 7 days after 10 mg trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis to validate a rat TNBS-colitis-colectomy model. Subsequently, this TNBS-colitis-colectomy model was used in 73 Wistar rats that were stratified into a colitis group (CG, no adhesive), a TissuCol group (TG), a Histoacryl group (HG), and a Duraseal group (DG). Anastomotic sealant was applied with one adhesive after constructing an end-to-end hand-sewn anastomosis. Clinical manifestations, anastomotic bursting pressure, and immunohistochemistry of macrophage type-one (M1) and type-two (M2) was performed on postoperative day (POD)3 or POD7.
RESULTS: TNBS-caused mucosal and submucosal colon damage and compromised anastomotic healing (i.e., abscess formation and low anastomotic bursting pressure). On POD3, higher severity of abscesses was seen in CG. Average anastomotic bursting pressure was 53.2 &#xb1; 35.5 mm Hg in CG, which was significantly lower than HG (134.4 &#xb1; 27.5 mm Hg) and DG (95.1 &#xb1; 54.3 mm Hg) but not TG (83.4 &#xb1; 46.7 mm Hg). Furthermore, a significantly higher M2/M1 index was found in HG. On POD7, abscesses were only seen in CG (6/9) but not in other groups; HG had the lowest severity of adhesion.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe the first surgical IBD model by performing colectomy in rats with TNBS-induced colitis, which causes intra-abdominal abscess formation and compromises anastomotic healing. Anastomotic sealing with Histoacryl Flex prevents these complications in this model. Alternative activation of macrophages seems to be involved in its influence on anastomotic healing.

### PMID 25646746 (2015) — Spine
TITLE: Spinal sealant system provides better intraoperative watertight closure than standard of care during spinal surgery: a prospective, multicenter, randomized controlled study.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000000810 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Prospective, 3:1 randomized, single-blind, multicenter investigational study.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the safety and efficacy of a low-swell spinal sealant when used as an adjunct to sutured dural repair compared with standard of care methods to obtain watertight dural closure in subjects undergoing spinal surgery.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Watertight dural closure is paramount in spinal surgery to avoid complications of cerebrospinal fluid leak. Prior reports have proven the efficacy of a synthetic, absorbable polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel sealant in spinal surgery compared with standard of care. Given the potential concerns of swelling in spinal applications, the hydrogel was modified to a low-swell formulation.
METHODS: The primary endpoint was success rate in obtaining intraoperative watertight dural closure in subjects receiving PEG hydrogel sealant versus a control group of subjects receiving any standard method designed to provide intraoperative watertight closure. Subjects were evaluated at discharge and at 30 and 90 days postprocedure for cerebrospinal fluid leaks, surgical site infections, and adverse events.
RESULTS: Between May 2007 and May 2009, 98 subjects (74 PEG hydrogel spinal sealant, 24 control) were randomized at 14 clinical sites in the United States. Patients treated with the PEG hydrogel spinal sealant had a significantly higher rate of watertight closure than the control (98.6% vs. 79.2%, P = 0.003). No statistical differences were seen in postoperative cerebrospinal fluid, infection, and wound healing. No neurological deficits were seen attributable to the sealant.
CONCLUSION: The low-swell PEG hydrogel spinal sealant evaluated in this study has been proven safe and effective for providing watertight closure when used as an adjunct to sutured closure of intentional durotomies during spinal surgery. PEG hydrogel sealants have again proved superior to other standard of care technologies for safe, efficacious dural closure.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 2.

### PMID 26350346 (2015) — Journal of applied biomaterials &amp; functional materials
TITLE: First impressions about Adherus, a new dural sealant.
DOI: 10.5301/jabfm.5000241 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The aim of the study is to report our first impressions about Adherus, a novel dural sealant, used in neurosurgical endoscopic transnasal procedures.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the clinical and surgical records of the first 11 patients with intraoperative high-flow cerebrospinal fluid leak treated with the aid of Adherus at our center between February and October 2014. The healing at the level of the dural plasty was monitored and evaluated radiologically and with regular endoscopic inspections.
RESULTS: With a median follow-up of 210 days, no postoperative CSF leak or surgical site infections were found in any of the cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our preliminary experience, this new dural sealant seems to provide an effective aid in dural plasty during endoscopic transphenoidal procedures.

### PMID 26265447 (2015) — The British journal of surgery
TITLE: Multicentre randomized clinical trial to investigate the cost-effectiveness of an allogeneic single-donor fibrin sealant after coronary artery bypass grafting (FIBER Study).
DOI: 10.1002/bjs.9877 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Reduction of blood transfusion in cardiac surgery is an important target. The aim of this study was to investigate the cost-effectiveness of the use of CryoSeal&#xae;, an allogeneic single-donor fibrin sealant, in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
METHODS: This randomized clinical study involved seven cardiac surgery centres in the Netherlands. Patients undergoing elective isolated CABG with the use of at least one internal thoracic artery (ITA) graft were assigned randomly to receive either CryoSeal&#xae; (5&#x2009;ml per ITA bed) or no CryoSeal&#xae;. Primary efficacy endpoints were units of transfused red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma and platelet concentrates, and duration of intensive care unit stay. Secondary efficacy endpoints were 48-h blood loss, reoperation for bleeding, mediastinitis, 30-day mortality and duration of hospital stay.
RESULTS: Between March 2009 and January 2012, 1445 patients were randomized. The intention-to-treat (ITT) population comprised 1436 patients; the per-protocol (PP) population 1292. In both the ITT and the PP analysis, no significant difference between the treatment groups was observed for any of the primary and secondary efficacy endpoints. In addition, no significant difference between the groups was seen in the proportion of transfused patients. Estimated CryoSeal&#xae; costs were &#x20ac;822 (95 per cent c.i. &#x20ac;808 to &#x20ac;836) per patient, which translated to &#x20ac;72,000 per avoided transfusion (unbounded 95 per cent c.i.).
CONCLUSION: The use of the fibrin sealant CryoSeal&#xae; did not result in health benefits. Combined with the high cost per avoided transfusion, this study does not support the implementation of routine CryoSeal&#xae; use in elective isolated CABG.
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NTR1386 ( http://www.trialregister.nl).

### PMID 25596939 (2015) — Obesity surgery
TITLE: Minimizing Hemorrhagic Complications in Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy--a Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s11695-015-1580-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) has gained worldwide popularity in recent years. Hemorrhagic complications (HC) are usually the result of stapler line bleeding and are probably underreported. The previous incidence of HC in our department including minor bleeding and late hematomas was 15.0 %. The objective of this study is to assess the impact of stapler line reinforcement (SLR) and intraoperative blood pressure control on HC after LSG.
METHODS: Between February 2013 and March 2014, patients who were admitted to our department for LSG were randomly assigned to one of three arms: stapler line application of biologic glue--Evicel&#x2122; (E), over suture of the stapler line (S) or control (C). Surgical technique in all arms included blood pressure elevation to 140 mmHg before termination of the procedure. Data is presented as mean &#xb1; SD or median (IQR 25-75).
RESULTS: One hundred sixty-five patients were randomized: 49 to E, 49 to S, and 67 to C. There were no demographic differences between arms. Operative time was significantly longer in S than in E and C arms (74 &#xb1; 21 vs. 64 &#xb1; 23 and 54 &#xb1; 19 min, respectively). &#x2206;Hb was significantly lower in the S group. Packed cells were used in two from E and one from C arms. Late infected hematoma occurred in three (1.8 %) patients: one from E and two from C arms. Leak rate was 1.2 %: one from S and one from C arms. LOS was the same. No patients were re-operated due to bleeding.
CONCLUSIONS: In this randomized trial, routine elevation of systolic blood pressure to 140 mmHg and over suture of the staple line in LSG minimized HC, with reasonable prolongation of the procedure.

### PMID 25339155 (2015) — Obesity surgery
TITLE: The use of a fibrin glue with a low concentration of thrombin decreases seroma formation in postbariatric patients undergoing circular abdominoplasty.
DOI: 10.1007/s11695-014-1467-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The serum collection under the abdominal flap is the most common complication after a lipo-abdominoplasty. The frequency of seroma increases further among obese patients, who have achieved massive weight loss after bariatric surgery. The purpose of this study is to demonstrate the effectiveness of fibrin glues with a low concentration of thrombin in reducing seroma formation after a lipo-abdominoplasty.
METHODS: Thirty patients, that had achieved a significant weight loss after an intervention of laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB), underwent a circular lipo-abdominoplasty at our bariatric surgery department. Patients were divided into two groups of 15 subjects each: group A underwent traditional surgery; in group B, we applied a slow-clotting variant of fibrin glue (ARTISS, Baxter) under the abdominal flap. All subjects were evaluated clinically using an ultrasound device on postoperative day 15. We considered positive for seroma, those cases with a liquid collection greater than 20 cc.
RESULTS: The groups were homogeneous for age, BMI, male/female ratio, and diabetic or smoker patients. The mean hospital stay was significantly longer in group A than in group B. We found eight cases of serum collection &gt;20 cc in group A and only one case in group B. Hematoma, umbilicus necrosis, and surgical site infection occurred in both groups, but overall complication rate was lower in group B.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of a fibrin glue with a low concentration of thrombin could be useful during wound closure and may decrease seroma formation in postbariatric patients undergoing lipo-abdominoplasty.

### PMID 25984391 (2015) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat(&#xae;)) in the neurosurgical practice: Part I: Intracranial surgical procedure.
DOI: 10.4103/2152-7806.156871 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemorrhages, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistula and infections are the most challenging postoperative complications in Neurosurgery. In this study, we report our preliminary results using a fully autologous fibrin sealant agent, the Vivostat(&#xae;) system, in achieving hemostasis and CSF leakage repair during cranio-cerebral procedures.
METHODS: From January 2012 to March 2014, 77 patients were studied prospectively and data were collected and analyzed. Autologous fibrin sealant, taken from patient's blood, was prepared with the Vivostat(&#xae;) system and applied on the resection bed or above the dura mater to achieve hemostasis and dural sealing. The surgical technique, time to bleeding control and associated complications were recorded.
RESULTS: A total of 79 neurosurgical procedures have been performed on 77 patients. In the majority of cases (98%) the same autologous fibrin glue provided rapid hemostasis and dural sealing. No patient developed allergic reactions or systemic complications in association with its application. There were no cases of cerebral hematoma, swelling, infection, or epileptic seizures after surgery whether in the immediate or in late period follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary study, the easy and direct application of autologous fibrin sealant agent helped in controlling cerebral bleeding and in providing prompt and efficient dural sealing with resolution of CSF leaks. Although the use of autologous fibrin glue seems to be safe, easy, and effective, further investigations are strongly recommended to quantify real advantages and potential limitations.

### PMID 26649116 (2015) — Radiology case reports
TITLE: Intraovarian oxidized cellulose (Surgicel) mimicking acute ovarian pathology after recent pelvic surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2015.08.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidized regenerated cellulose (Ethicon Surgicel) is often used during surgery to achieve hemostasis. The appearance of Surgicel on postoperative computed tomography (CT) may be mistaken for abscess. Meanwhile, the literature regarding its ultrasound appearance remains scant. We report the CT and sonographic appearances of Surgicel in the right ovary of a 21-year-old woman presenting to the emergency department with pelvic pain 7 days after ovarian cystectomy. The patient was discharged home with only supportive measures, and follow-up ultrasound obtained 26 days later demonstrated resolution of the sonographic abnormality. This case stresses the importance of familiarity with common imaging appearances of topical hemostatic agents and the need to correlate radiologic findings with the patient's clinical condition and prior operative reports to identify patients suitable for conservative management.

### PMID 25850629 (2015) — Techniques in coloproctology
TITLE: Treatment of recurrent anal fistula using an autologous cartilage plug: a pilot study.
DOI: 10.1007/s10151-015-1299-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The aim of the present study was to assess a novel autologous cartilage plug technique used to treat anal fistula in ten patients.
METHODS: All ten patients had undergone at least two prior operations for recurrent fistulas. The plugs were prepared using the patients' own cartilage, which was obtained from either the nose or the ear, diced into pieces, and wrapped with oxidized regenerated cellulose. During the same session, fistula tracts were curetted using cytology brushes, and then, the cartilage plug was inserted into the tract. Routine postoperative examinations were performed at 2, 4, 8, 12, and 24 weeks after surgery. Magnetic resonance imaging was performed before surgery and at 3 and 6 months postoperatively. Relief of symptoms, radiological healing, recurrence, and continence were evaluated.
RESULTS: The ten patients included six males and four females, with a median age of 39 years (range 25-70 years) and a median of three previous fistula operations (range 2-7 operations). Nine patients had cryptoglandular abscess, and one patient had Crohn's disease. The majority of the patients had transsphincteric fistulas with substantial anal sphincter involvement. The cartilage donor site was the nose for one patient and the ear for nine patients. The median follow-up time was 24 months (range 10-32 months). Of the ten patients, nine had fistula treatment without any short-term complications. The fistula failed to heal in one patient. Among the nine patients whose operations were initially successful, two late recurrences were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: The cartilage plug seems to be a promising alternative for anal fistula treatment.

### PMID 25733261 (2015) — Urology
TITLE: Contributing factors for fever after tubeless percutaneous nephrolithotomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.urology.2014.10.032 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the contributing factors for fever after tubeless percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL).
METHODS: Between May 2009 and December 2013, 395 tubeless PCNLs were performed at our hospital. After stone extraction, the bleeding points were cauterized for hemostasis to enable tubeless modification. In patients with troublesome bleeding after cauterization, oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel) strips were used to tamponade the access tract to facilitate bleeding control. The contributory factors for fever were evaluated by a retrospective chart review.
RESULTS: Forty-four patients (11.7%) developed fever after tubeless PCNL. There was no difference in gender, age, and body mass index in the development of fever. Episodes of febrile or septic urinary tract infection before PCNL were found to have occurred in 35 patients, but the incidence of postoperative fever was not significantly higher in these patients. There is no significant difference in the mean stone size in fever and nonfever patients. Complete staghorn stones were noted in 40 patients, and their fever rate was not significantly higher than patients with nonstaghorn stone. The operation time is not significantly higher in the group with urinary tract infection. Patients with postoperative fever had a high incidence of residual stones than the remaining patients (38.9% vs 20.4%). There was no significant difference in incidence of postoperative fever in patients with struvite stones than patients with nonstruvite stones. In patients who received Surgicel packing, the incidence of fever was not significantly higher.
CONCLUSION: Incomplete stone extraction is a major contributing factor for the development of fever after tubeless PCNL.

### PMID 25622592 (2015) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Novel hemostatic patch achieves sutureless epicardial wound closure during complex cardiac surgery, a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-015-0215-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Treatment of damaged cardiac tissue in patients with high bleeding tendency can be very challenging, damaged myocardial tissue has a high rupture risk when being sutured subsequently on-going bleeding is a major risk factor for poor clinical outcome. We present a case demonstrating the feasibility in using a novel haemostatic collagen sponge for the management of a myocardial wound. This report is the first description in cardiac surgery where Hemopatch sponges are used to successfully seal a left ventricle wound. Our patient was diagnosed with endocarditis, had a low pre-operative haemoglobin count and underwent cardiac surgery for multiple valve repairs. The procedure was performed on cardiopulmonary bypass, which meant our patient had to be heparinized. Despite these major risk factors for bleeding Hemopatch managed to contain bleeding and seal the wound, no sutures were needed.

### PMID 26191528 (2015) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: Results from a First-in-Human Trial of a Novel Vascular Sealant.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2015.00029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Suture hole bleeding from synthetic grafts presents a hemostatic challenge. The designs of many vascular sealants are not optimal (non-adherence to wet surfaces, excessive swelling, inflexible). PreveLeak&#x2122; (formerly ArterX ((&#xae;)) ) is a polyaldehyde-bovine serum albumin-based sealant whose efficacy, safety, and performance were evaluated in this first-in-human study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective, single-arm, multicenter study was performed in patients undergoing open vascular reconstructions with prosthetic grafts. Sealant was applied to the suture line after completion of the anastomosis. The primary endpoint was the incidence of immediate sealing (without clinically significant bleeding) upon clamp release. Secondary endpoints were time to sealing, safety, and assessment of product performance.
RESULTS: Fifty-six anastomoses were performed in 32 patients. Grafts were Dacron (66% of sites), polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE; 32%), or both Dacron and PTFE (2%). The femoral artery was the most common site of anastomosis (41% of sites). Immediate sealing after clamp release was achieved at all anastomoses (100%); 93% had no bleeding and 7% had oozing. No rebleeding occurred during 10&#x2009;min of observation. The three most common adverse events were graft or bypass occlusion (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5 patients), infection (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4), and seroma (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3); none were device related. The sealant was considered easy to apply, quickly forming a soft gel, and adhering to tissue and grafts.
CONCLUSION: PreveLeak effectively sealed anastomotic suture lines during vascular reconstruction procedures and was considered easy to use. Adverse events were consistent with those commonly observed in patients undergoing surgical procedures. These results provided the support for conducting a larger controlled clinical trial.

### PMID 25810290 (2015) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Effective and rapid sealing of coronary, aortic and atrial suture lines &#x2020;.
DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivv061 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Cardiac surgical procedures carry a high risk of perioperative bleeding. Surgical sealants are often used to prevent suture line bleeding. PreveLeak&#x2122; is a surgical sealant composed of bovine serum albumin, a polyaldehyde cross-linker, and other components that forms a soft, flexible, water-tight, mechanical seal that is biocompatible and bioresorbable.
METHODS: A prospective, multicentre study evaluated PreveLeak use in 44 subjects undergoing 63 cardiac procedures, primarily coronary artery bypass grafting (n = 23/63, 36.5%) and aortic valve replacement (n = 19/63, 30.2%). PreveLeak was applied to 127 suture lines and the time to sealing evaluated upon clamp release. The primary safety endpoint was the incidence of significant bleeding, infections, neurological deficits and immune/inflammatory allergic responses within 6 weeks post-treatment; subjects were followed for 3 months.
RESULTS: Immediate sealing was achieved at all sites in 42 of 44 subjects (95.5%) and 125 of 127 treatment sites (98.4%). There were nine primary safety events: eight infections and one transient neurological deficit. Most adverse events were mild (n = 46/71, 64.8%) or moderate (n = 18/71, 25.4%) in severity. One adverse event (transient vasospasm) was considered possibly sealant-related. One death occurred due to a cardiac arrest.
CONCLUSIONS: PreveLeak prevented bleeding at 98.4% of treated sites and was well tolerated; adverse events were consistent with those commonly observed in subjects undergoing surgical procedures. These results compared favourably with published studies of other sealants. The observed prevention of bleeding is clinically important in cardiac surgical patients. A randomized, comparative study is justified to further evaluate PreveLeak and confirm the findings from this study.

### PMID 26215747 (2015) — Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)
TITLE: Viscoelastic point-of-care testing to assist with the diagnosis, management and monitoring of haemostasis: a systematic review and cost-effectiveness analysis.
DOI: 10.3310/hta19580 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Patients with substantive bleeding usually require transfusion and/or (re-)operation. Red blood cell (RBC) transfusion is independently associated with a greater risk of infection, morbidity, increased hospital stay and mortality. ROTEM (ROTEM&#xae; Delta, TEM International GmbH, Munich, Germany; www.rotem.de), TEG (TEG&#xae; 5000 analyser, Haemonetics Corporation, Niles, IL, USA; www.haemonetics.com) and Sonoclot (Sonoclot&#xae; coagulation and platelet function analyser, Sienco Inc., Arvada, CO) are point-of-care viscoelastic (VE) devices that use thromboelastometry to test for haemostasis in whole blood. They have a number of proposed advantages over standard laboratory tests (SLTs): they provide a result much quicker, are able to identify what part of the clotting process is disrupted, and provide information on clot formation over time and fibrinolysis.
OBJECTIVES: This assessment aimed to assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of VE devices to assist with the diagnosis, management and monitoring of haemostasis disorders during and after cardiac surgery, trauma-induced coagulopathy and post-partum haemorrhage (PPH).
METHODS: Sixteen databases were searched to December 2013: MEDLINE (OvidSP), MEDLINE In-Process and Other Non-Indexed Citations and Daily Update (OvidSP), EMBASE (OvidSP), BIOSIS Previews (Web of Knowledge), Science Citation Index (SCI) (Web of Science), Conference Proceedings Citation Index (CPCI-S) (Web of Science), Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE), Health Technology Assessment (HTA) database, Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature (LILACS), International Network of Agencies for Health Technology Assessment (INAHTA), National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) HTA programme, Aggressive Research Intelligence Facility (ARIF), Medion, and the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO). Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were assessed for quality using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool. Prediction studies were assessed using QUADAS-2. For RCTs, summary relative risks (RRs) were estimated using random-effects models. Continuous data were summarised narratively. For prediction studies, the odds ratio (OR) was selected as the primary effect estimate. The health-economic analysis considered the costs and quality-adjusted life-years of ROTEM, TEG and Sonoclot compared with SLTs in cardiac surgery and trauma patients. A decision tree was used to take into account short-term complications and longer-term side effects from transfusion. The model assumed a 1-year time horizon.
RESULTS: Thirty-one studies (39 publications) were included in the clinical effectiveness review. Eleven RCTs (n=1089) assessed VE devices in patients undergoing cardiac surgery; six assessed thromboelastography (TEG) and five assessed ROTEM. There was a significant reduction in RBC transfusion [RR 0.88, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.80 to 0.96; six studies], platelet transfusion (RR 0.72, 95% CI 0.58 to 0.89; six studies) and fresh frozen plasma to transfusion (RR 0.47, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.65; five studies) in VE testing groups compared with control. There were no significant differences between groups in terms of other blood products transfused. Continuous data on blood product use supported these findings. Clinical outcomes did not differ significantly between groups. There were no apparent differences between ROTEM or TEG; none of the RCTs evaluated Sonoclot. There were no data on the clinical effectiveness of VE devices in trauma patients or women with PPH. VE testing was cost-saving and more effective than SLTs. For the cardiac surgery model, the cost-saving was &#xa3;43 for ROTEM, &#xa3;79 for TEG and &#xa3;132 for Sonoclot. For the trauma population, the cost-savings owing to VE testing were more substantial, amounting to per-patient savings of &#xa3;688 for ROTEM compared with SLTs, &#xa3;721 for TEG, and &#xa3;818 for Sonoclot. This finding was entirely dependent on material costs, which are slightly higher for ROTEM. VE testing remained cost-saving following various scenario analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: VE testing is cost-saving and more effective than SLTs, in both patients undergoing cardiac surgery and trauma patients. However, there were no data on the clinical effectiveness of Sonoclot or of VE devices in trauma patients.
STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42013005623.
FUNDING: The NIHR Health Technology Assessment programme.

### PMID 24384831 (2014) — European spine journal : official publication of the European Spine Society, the European Spinal Deformity Society, and the European Section of the Cervical Spine Research Society
TITLE: The use of surgical sealants in the repair of dural tears during non-instrumented spinal surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00586-013-3138-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare the success in repair of dural tears (DTs) using two different surgical sealants in non-instrumented lumbar spinal surgery and evaluate the incidence of associated short- and long-term complications.
METHODS: Twenty-three patients undergoing non-instrumented spinal surgery with intraoperative DTs were included both retrospectively and prospectively in this study. External signs of CSF leakage, neurological deficits, and infection-related complications were investigated postoperatively. The persistence of low-back pain was also evaluated and postoperative MRI was performed in all patients. DTs were repaired intraoperatively using suture with or without a dural patch. Eleven patients received an application of fibrin glue (Tissucol(&#xae;); Baxter, Inc., IL, USA) and 12 patients received an application of bovine serum albumin glutaraldehyde surgical adhesive (BioGlue(&#xae;) Surgical Adhesive; CryoLife, GA, USA). These patients were followed up at 3 months and 1 year postoperatively.
RESULTS: Successful intraoperative DT repair was obtained in all cases. Three patients in the Tissucol group presented with CSF leakage in the early postoperative period. There were no complications observed in the patients treated with BioGlue. At 3-month follow-up, no incidences of neurological or infection-related complications were observed in either group. There was no statistically significant difference in VAS between the two treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Intraoperative DTs can be easily repaired by many effective techniques. However, in our experience, the use of BioGlue is an effective adjunct to immediate dural repair, being comparable in terms of efficacy and safety to the use of fibrin glue, potentially decreasing the incidence of associated short- and long-term complications.

### PMID 25255850 (2014) — International journal of colorectal disease
TITLE: The prevention of colorectal anastomotic leakage with tissue adhesives in a contaminated environment is associated with the presence of anti-inflammatory macrophages.
DOI: 10.1007/s00384-014-2012-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Colorectal anastomoses created in a contaminated environment result in a high leakage rate. This study investigated whether using anastomotic sealants (TissuCol(&#xae;), Histoacryl(&#xae;) Flex, and Duraseal(&#xae;)) prevents leakage in a rat peritonitis model.
STUDY DESIGN: Sixty-seven Wistar rats were divided into control and experimental groups (TissuCol, Histoacryl, and Duraseal groups). Peritonitis was induced 1 day before surgery with the cecal ligation puncture model. On day 0, colonic anastomosis was constructed with sutures and then sealed with no adhesive (control group) or one select adhesive (experimental groups). Bursting pressure, abscess formation, and adhesion severity were evaluated on day 3 or day 14. Hematoxylin and eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining for CD4, CD8, CD206, and iNOS were performed.
RESULTS: On day 3, bursting pressures of the TissuCol group (120.1&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;25.3 mmHg), Histoacryl group (117.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;20.2 mmHg), and Duraseal group (123.6&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;35.4 mmHg) were significantly higher than the that of the control group (24.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;31.7 mmHg, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Abscesses around the anastomosis were found in the control group (6/7) and Duraseal group (2/9) but not in the TissuCol group or Histoacryl group. A higher number of CD206+ cells (M2 macrophages), a lower number of iNOS+ cells (M1 macrophages), a higher M2/M1 index, and a higher CD4+/CD8+ index were seen at the anastomotic site in all experimental groups compared with the control group on day 3. On day 14, abscesses were only found in the control group. Adhesion severity in the Duraseal group was significantly lower than that in the control group (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Anastomotic sealing using TissuCol(&#xae;), Histoacryl(&#xae;) Flex, or Duraseal(&#xae;) seems to be an effective and safe option to prevent leakage in contaminated colorectal surgery. The presence of large numbers of anti-inflammatory macrophages seems to be involved in preventing the leakage.

### PMID 25242751 (2014) — Transplantation proceedings
TITLE: Prevention of fluid effusion in kidney transplantation with the use of hemostatic biomaterials.
DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2014.07.048 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fluid effusion (blood, lymph, or urine) in kidney transplantation may give rise to several complications, directly, such as hematoma, seroma, lymphocele, and/or urinoma, or consequently, such as increased infection risk, longer hospital stay, graft compression--with or without functional impairment--and necessity of further hospitalizations. The aim of this study was to evaluate effectiveness of hemostatic biomaterials in prevention of fluid effusions, especially lymphocele in kidney transplant patients.
METHODS: We selected 40 patients who underwent kidney transplantation from 2009 to 2012 in which we used hemostatic biomaterials, and compared their results with those of other transplant patients from our center in which we did not used these biomaterials. Evaluated parameters were: fluid effusion, graft function, quality and quantity of drainage, blood count, and operative time.
RESULTS: There was no difference in operative time. The incidence of complications on which biomaterials can have a role decreased; particularly, we observed a reduction from 24.21% to 7.5% of fluid effusions (lymphocele). There was no evidence of complications due to biomaterials.
CONCLUSIONS: Hemostasis is important in surgery, and in kidney transplantations lymphostasis also has a significant role. In addition to the traditional hemostatic methods, recently some biomaterials, with the purpose of providing atraumatic hemostasis, were added. In our experience they are easy to use, and their use has proved to be effective for both hemostasis and lymphostasis with consequent reduction of fluid effusions.

### PMID 25216434 (2014) — International surgery
TITLE: Harmonic curved shears system prevent of bile leakage after liver resection in a pig model.
DOI: 10.9738/INTSURG-D-13-00078.1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We evaluated the efficacy of TachoComb (TC) collagen fleece and Harmonic Focus (HF) shears in a pig liver resection model. Pigs were divided into 3 groups of 7, in which vessels were tied with silk and TC was applied to the cut surfaces (Silk+TC group), sealed and sheared with HF and TC (HF+TC group), or sealed using HF alone (HF-TC group). After 1 month, we conducted a histologic evaluation and recorded the incidence of bile leakage with infected collections at the liver cut surface. Six pigs were evaluated in each group. In the Silk+TC group, 4 of the 6 pigs had infected collections at the cut surface. Histologically, the silk had remained under the fibrotic tissue, which contained remnants of TC fragments. In the HF+TC group, 5 of the 6 pigs also had infected collections, and histologically, TC had remained in the hard fibrotic tissues. In the HF-TC group, none of the 6 pigs had infected collections, and the histologic findings were normal. Use of the HF alone may be an effective method for preventing bile leakage in infected collections after liver resection.

### PMID 25162261 (2014) — Obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Association between gelatin-thrombin matrix use and abscesses in women undergoing pelvic surgery.
DOI: 10.1097/AOG.0000000000000406 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between the use of gelatin-thrombin matrix and the development of pelvic abscess during hysterectomy as well as factors associated with surgeons' use of this product.
METHODS: Data for patients undergoing hysterectomy for obstetric-gynecologic pathology were abstracted from databases at a tertiary hospital between 2009 and 2012. Open and minimally invasive hysterectomies were included and vaginal hysterectomies were excluded. Blood loss, surgery type, comorbidities, abscess formation, and use of gelatin-thrombin matrix were examined. Abscess was defined as a walled-off fluid collection (documented with computed tomography scan) with fever (greater than 38&#xb0;C) or leukocytosis (greater than 11,000/microliter). Standard statistical models were used.
RESULTS: Of the 413 patients identified, 213 (51%) underwent surgery for malignancy. Gelatin-thrombin matrix was used in 166 patients (40%). The overall rate of abscess was low (3%). In bivariate analyses, blood loss greater than 500 mL (odds ratio [OR] 3.9, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.1-12.9, P=.021], ascites (OR 6.5, 95% CI 1.6-26.1, P=.023), drain placement (OR 4.5, 95% CI 1.3-15.1, P=.009), and gelatin-thrombin matrix use (OR 7.0, 95% CI 1.5-32.9, P=.009) were significantly associated with abscess formation. Multivariate logistic regression revealed that only gelatin-thrombin matrix use predicted the development of pelvic abscess (OR 7.0, 95% CI 1.5-32.9, P=.013).
CONCLUSION: We found that gelatin-thrombin matrix use was associated with an increased risk of pelvic abscess. Although these products are important in the setting of bleeding, these data suggest that the liberal use of sealants is not without risk.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: III.

### PMID 25316253 (2014) — Journal of orthopaedic surgery and research
TITLE: The efficacy of a thrombin-based hemostatic agent in primary total knee arthroplasty: a meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1186/s13018-014-0090-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is a popular procedure in severe osteoarthritis. But perioperative bleeding remains a problem. Floseal&#xae; is a mixture of thrombin and bovine gelatin which can benefit a lot on reducing intraoperative and postoperative bleeding. However, there is no enough evidence judging its safety and efficiency. So a meta-analysis is conducted by us to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a thrombin-based hemostatic agent compared with conventional methods in TKA.
METHOD: Two independent reviewers selected literatures published before August 2014 from MEDLINE, Embase, and The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials. Other internet databases were also performed to identify trials according to the Cochrane Collaboration guidelines. High-quality randomized controlled trials (RCTs), prospective control trials (PCTs), and case controlled trials (CCTs) were selected. The meta-analysis was undertaken using RevMan 5.1 for Windows.
RESULTS: Three RCTs, one PCT, and one CCT met the inclusion criteria. There were significant differences in hemoglobin decline and calculated total blood loss between the Floseal&#xae; group and control group. There were no significant differences in postoperative drainage volume, rate of transfusion requirement, incidence of wound infection, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), and pulmonary embolism (PE) between treatment and control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The present meta-analysis indicates that a thrombin-based hemostatic agent can reduce hemoglobin decline and calculated total blood loss after TKA and is not related to adverse reactions or complications such as wound infection, DVT, and PE.

### PMID 26021417 (2014) — Acta chirurgica Belgica
TITLE: A belgian multicenter prospective observational cohort study shows safe and efficient use of a composite mesh with incorporated oxidized regenerated cellulose in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A variety of anti-adhesive composite mesh products have become available to use inside the peritoneal cavity. However, reimbursement of these meshes by the Belgian Governemental Health Agency (RIZIV/INAMI) can only be obtained after conducting a prospective study with at least one year of clinical follow-up. This -Belgian multicentric cohort study evaluated the experience with the use of Proceed&#xae;-mesh in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair.
METHODS: During a 25 month period 210 adult patients underwent a laparoscopic primary or incisional hernia repair using an intra-abdominal placement of Proceed&#xae;-mesh. According to RIZIV/INAMI criteria recurrence rate after 1 year was the primary objective, while postoperative morbidity, including seroma formation, wound and mesh infections, quality of life and recurrences after 2 years were evaluated as secondary endpoints (NCT00572962).
RESULTS: In total 97 primary ventral and 103 incisional hernias were repaired, of which 28 (13%) were recurrent. There were no conversions to open repair, no enterotomies, no mesh infections and no mortality. One year cumulative follow-up showed 10 recurrences (n = 192, 5.2%) and chronic discomfort or pain in 4.7% of the patients. Quality of life could not be analyzed due to incomplete data set.
CONCLUSIONS: More than 5 years after introduction of this mesh to the market, this prospective multicentric study documents a favorable experience with the Proceed mesh in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair. However, it remains to be discussed whether reimbursement of these meshes in Belgium should be limited to the current strict criteria and therefore can only be obtained after at least 3-4 years of clinical data gathering and necessary follow-up.

### PMID 24960506 (2014) — JSLS : Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons
TITLE: Oxidized regenerated cellulose resembling vaginal cuff abscess.
DOI: 10.4293/108680813X13693422518597 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Application of oxidized regenerated cellulose is commonly performed in laparoscopy to achieve hemostasis during surgery. The appearance of an abscess resembles oxidized regenerated cellulose, causing imaging studies to be difficult to interpret.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We describe the cases of 3 patients who underwent oxidized regenerated cellulose placement during laparoscopic gynecologic surgery. They subsequently presented with signs and symptoms resembling an abscess. Computed tomographic imaging can be challenging to interpret in such cases; radiologic findings can be used to differentiate between the characteristics of oxidized regenerated cellulose and those of abscess formation on the vaginal cuff.
DISCUSSION: Oxidized regenerated cellulose has an appearance that often mimics postsurgical abscess formation. There are distinct characteristics that distinguish both findings. It is essential that patients' records accurately describe the presence and location of regenerated oxidized cellulose when placed intraoperatively, and this information must be relayed to the interpreting radiologist to facilitate medical diagnosis and guide clinical management.

### PMID 24292855 (2014) — Journal of artificial organs : the official journal of the Japanese Society for Artificial Organs
TITLE: Comprehensive evaluation of fibrin glue as a local drug-delivery system-efficacy and safety of sustained release of vancomycin by fibrin glue against local methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection.
DOI: 10.1007/s10047-013-0746-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Infection of prosthetic grafts, especially with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), often becomes critical. Although topical administration of antibiotics has been applied empirically, no comprehensive data are available showing long-lasting effects and safety of local antibiotic usage. By means of animal experiments we assessed fibrin glue (FG) as a slow-release vehicle for vancomycin (VCM) against local MRSA infection. Preliminary in-vitro experiments were performed to confirm that the FG-VCM mixture maintained viscosity as a sealant and led to slow-release of VCM. We next created a subcutaneous pocket in a rodent back and implanted a 1 cm (2) woven graft with 1 ml FG alone, or with serial concentrations of VCM (0-120 mg/ml. n = 3 for each group). MRSA of 1 &#xd7; 10(7) colony-forming units (CFU) was injected into the pocket after wound closure. The graft was explanted 7 days later and was submitted for culture ("Culture-graft"). Blood samples were obtained for regular blood work, serum VCM concentration measurements, and blood culture ("Culture-blood"). The pocket tissue was also submitted for measurement of local VCM concentration. There was a remarkable infectious response in the group without vancomycin; however, no other groups developed any sign of infection. "Culture-graft" resulted in MRSA growth for V0 only. "Culture-blood" was negative in all groups, and only minimal serum concentrations of vancomycin were detected. One-dose topical administration of VCM via FG was effective against localized MRSA graft infection without systemic VCM administration. Topical administration of antibiotics may help treat difficult graft infections and reduce systemic use of potent antibiotics.

### PMID 25159369 (2014) — The journal of trauma and acute care surgery
TITLE: Platelet activation using electric pulse stimulation: growth factor profile and clinical implications.
DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000322 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Autologous platelet gel therapy using platelet-rich plasma has emerged as a promising alternative for chronic wound healing, hemostasis, and wound infection control. A critical step for this therapeutic approach is platelet activation, typically performed using bovine thrombin (BT) and calcium chloride. However, exposure of humans to BT can stimulate antibody formation, potentially resulting in severe hemorrhagic or thrombotic complications. Electric pulse stimulation using nanosecond PEFs (pulse electric fields) is an alternative, nonbiochemical platelet activation method, thereby avoiding exposure to xenogeneic thrombin and associated risks.
METHODS: In this study, we identified specific requirements for a clinically relevant activator instrument by dynamically measuring current, voltage, and electric impedance for platelet-rich plasma samples. From these samples, we investigated the profile of growth factors released from human platelets with electric pulse stimulation versus BT, specifically platelet-derived growth factor, transforming growth factor &#x3b2;, and epidermal growth factor, using commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits.
RESULTS: Electric pulse stimulation triggers growth factor release from platelet &#x3b1;-granules at the same or higher level compared with BT.
CONCLUSION: Electric pulse stimulation is a fast, inexpensive, easy-to-use platelet activation method for autologous platelet gel therapy.

### PMID 24757459 (2013) — Korean Journal of Spine
TITLE: Postoperative Cervical Cord Compression Induced by Hydrogel Dural Sealant (DuraSeal&#xae;).
DOI: 10.14245/kjs.2013.10.1.44 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a potential complication of cranial and spinal surgery. Postoperative CSF leakage can induce delayed healing, wound infection and meningitis. DuraSeal&#xae; (Covidien, Waltham, MA, USA) is a synthetic product which has been increasingly used to facilitate watertight repair of dural defects after cranial and spinal surgery. Despite some advantages of Duraseal&#xae;, the authors report a patient who developed cord compression following the use of DuraSeal&#xae; in cervical spine surgery in which the expansion of the DuraSeal&#xae; was believed to be the causative factor.

### PMID 24074508 (2013) — Journal of neurosurgery. Spine
TITLE: Comparative study of fibrin and chemical synthetic sealant on dural regeneration and brain damage.
DOI: 10.3171/2013.8.SPINE12998 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECT: Several materials, such as polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel and fibrin glue, have been used to seal dural incisions after brain and spinal surgeries. Although the use of PEG sealant is gaining popularity, it can be associated with postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage and infection. However, the reasons for this association are currently unknown. The present study aimed to investigate the effects of PEG sealant and fibrin glue on wound healing and brain damage in vivo.
METHODS: Oval-shaped bone defects and dural defects were created bilaterally over the parietal lobes of 22 Japanese white rabbits. The dural defects were covered with 0.5 ml of fibrin glue on one side and 0.5 ml of PEG sealant on the other side. Dural regeneration and brain damage were investigated in each harvested brain and dura mater using light microscopy.
RESULTS: Dural regeneration was more effective in the presence of fibrin glue than it was with PEG sealant (p = 0.014). Of the 22 rabbits, 11 showed thick (Grades ++ and +++) dural regeneration by 28 days postsurgery in the hemisphere where fibrin glue was used, whereas Grade +++ dural regeneration was not observed in the PEG hydrogel hemisphere, and only 4 rabbits showed Grade ++ regeneration. Abscess and granulation formation also tended to be more severe when PEG hydrogel sealant was used. No Grade ++ granulation/abscess formation was observed with fibrin glue, and Grade + was only observed in 13 of 22 rabbits. Conversely, with PEG hydrogel sealant, only 2 rabbits did not show granulation/abscess formation, and Grade +, ++, and +++ granulation/abscess formation was observed in 8, 7, and 5 rabbits, respectively. The extent of cortical damage was significantly greater in rabbits with abscesses and granulations, compared with rabbits without these lesions (p = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Dural regeneration tended to occur more rapidly with fibrin glue, whereas granulation was more likely with PEG hydrogel sealant, which led to postoperative complications. Histological analysis indicated that PEG hydrogel sealant inhibited the normal tissue healing process and that outcomes were improved by the use of fibrin glue.

### PMID 24159254 (2013) — HPB surgery : a world journal of hepatic, pancreatic and biliary surgery
TITLE: A randomized clinical trial comparing the effect of different haemostatic agents for haemostasis of the liver after hepatic resection.
DOI: 10.1155/2013/587608 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Introduction. Operative blood loss is still a great obstacle to liver resection, and various topical hemostatic agents were introduced to reduce it. The aim of the current study is to evaluate effects of 3 different types of these agents. Methods. In this randomized clinical trial, 45 patients undergoing liver resection were assigned to receive TachoSil, Surgicel, and Glubran 2 for controlling bleeding. Intraoperative and postoperative findings were compared between groups. Results. Postoperative bleeding (0 versus 33.3%, P = 0.04) and drainage volume first day after surgery (281.33 &#xb1; 103.98 versus 150.00 &#xb1; 60.82&#x2009;mL, P = 0.02) were significantly higher in Surgicel than in TachoSil group. Postoperative complications included bile leak (3 cases in Surgicel, 1 case in TachoSil and Glubran 2), noninfectious collection (2 cases in TachoSil and Surgicel and 1 case in Glubran 2), perihepatic abscess, and massive hematoma around hepatectomy site both in Surgicel group. There was no death during the study period. Conclusion. Due to higher complications in Surgicel group, its application as hemostatic agent after liver resection is not recommended. Better results in TachoSil in comparison to the other two are indicative of its better efficacy and superiority in controlling hemostasis.

### PMID 23563904 (2013) — Aesthetic surgery journal
TITLE: Randomized, controlled, phase 3 study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of fibrin sealant VH S/D 4 s-apr (Artiss) to improve tissue adherence in subjects undergoing rhytidectomy.
DOI: 10.1177/1090820X13479969 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Suction drains are commonly placed after rhytidectomy to avoid seroma formation that may result from dead spaces between skin layers. Fibrin sealants promote tissue adherence by crosslinking with extracellular matrix proteins, which may reduce the dead space under skin flaps.
OBJECTIVES: The authors evaluate the safety and efficacy of the fibrin sealant (FS) VH S/D 4 s-apr (Artiss; Baxter Healthcare Corp, Deerfield, Illinois), added to standard-of-care (SoC) treatment, in improving flap adherence and reducing dead space in patients undergoing rhytidectomy.
METHODS: Patients with planned facial rhytidectomy were enrolled in this phase 3, prospective, controlled, randomized, patient-blinded, multicenter trial. They received SoC treatment on 1 side of the face and adjunctive FS VH S/D 4 s-apr on the other.
RESULTS: Seventy-five patients completed the trial. The mean (SD) drainage volume was 7.7 (7.4) mL from the sides treated with sealant and 20.0 (11.3) mL from the SoC-only sides (P &lt; .0001). Rates of hematoma and seroma were similar for the 2 treatments, as were changes in postoperative skin sensitivity. Adverse events generally were mild; 2 serious adverse events were reported (wound abscess, dehydration).
CONCLUSIONS: Adjunct use of FS VH S/D 4 s-apr in rhytidectomy was proven safe in this study. It significantly reduced drainage volumes without increasing the incidence of hematoma or seroma, which suggests that it eliminates dead space through improved flap adherence.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 2.

### PMID 22851331 (2013) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: Ultrasound-guided thrombin-gelatin injection is effective for the treatment of iatrogenic femoral artery pseudoaneurysms: initial results.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.24330 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To describe the technique of ultrasound (US)-guided percutaneous thrombin-gelatin injection for the treatment of femoral artery pseudoaneurysms (FAPs).
BACKGROUND: FAPs are a possible complication from percutaneous angiographic procedures. US-guided thrombin injection is currently the preferential therapeutic option, limited by a low risk of potentially catastrophic femoral thrombosis; transluminal injection of collagen is another effective and safe option, although a more invasive one; surgical repair is associated with significant comorbidity. We hypothesized that US-guided combined thrombin and gelatin injection (UG-TGI) would also be effective while minimizing the risk of limb thrombosis.
METHODS: Review of the results, complications and length of hospital admission after the injection into the FAP sac of combined human-origin thrombin and bovine-origin gelatin matrix (FloSeal(&#xae;), Baxter), under direct US-guidance.
RESULTS: We treated 13 patients (mean age 64 &#xb1; 9.46 years, 38% male), who developed a FAP following a percutaneous procedure: isolated coronariography in five (38%); angioplasty in four (31%); other cardiac procedures in four (31%). Immediate success was obtained in all (100%) patients, assessed by US; no allergic reactions, local infection, or embolic events occurred on 30-day follow-up. Median (interquartile range) admission time after the UG-TGI was 2 days (1.25-2.0); median time of total admission was 8 days (6.5-16.25).
CONCLUSIONS: In this small study, UG-TGI for the treatment of FAP was feasible and had short-term effectiveness, without a learning curve effect. Despite the need for further experience, a trial comparing different therapies for FAP should include this procedure.

### PMID 23706532 (2013) — European journal of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive biology
TITLE: Accuracy of diagnosis on CT scan of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar: results of a prospective blind reading study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2013.04.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Oxidized regenerated cellulose is a hemostatic agent used in surgery to control bleeding. Some case reports have suggested that it could lead to a mistaken diagnosis of abscess on postoperative CT scan. The objective of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of CT scan for Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar.
STUDY DESIGN: We prospectively registered all patients who had Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar left in the operative site during one year. Patients who had a CT scan for medical reasons (e.g. fever, pain, or occlusive syndrome) were evaluated and we compared the radiologists' conclusions with or without information about the use of Surgicel&#xae; (two different radiologists, one blinded to the use of Surgicel&#xae;).
RESULTS: 18 patients who underwent pelvic laparotomy had Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar left in the operative site. On first interpretation, the radiologist's conclusion was an abscess in 11% of cases, hematoma in 28%, collections with hydro-aeric levels in 33%, lymphocele in 6% and no conclusion in 11% of cases. For only 2 patients (11%) was the conclusion Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar. After second interpretation by a radiologist aware of the presence of Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar, Surgicel&#xae; Fibrillar was the main conclusion on 15 CT scans (83%).
CONCLUSION: Oxidized regenerated cellulose is a differential diagnosis for abscess or collection. The radiologist should be informed about its presence to increase appropriate evaluation of CT scans and avoid inappropriate treatment.

### PMID 23344404 (2013) — Obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Oxidized regenerated cellulose imitating pelvic abscess.
DOI: 10.1097/aog.0b013e318276ce3f | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Oxidized regenerated cellulose is a topical hemostatic agent that is used commonly in abdominal and pelvic surgery. Although oxidized regenerated cellulose mimicking an abscess has been reported after different operations, little is known about its side effects after gynecologic surgery.
CASES: Two women were diagnosed with postoperative abscess and intra-abdominal oxidized regenerated cellulose was identified as an abscess or as part of an abscess on computed tomography imaging. Both women recovered after treatment with antibiotics with and without drainage.
CONCLUSION: Oxidized regenerated cellulose may be mistaken for an abscess or as part of an abscess on imaging studies. It is important to reveal information about oxidized regenerated cellulose use to the imaging department.

### PMID 23453132 (2013) — Journal of cranio-maxillo-facial surgery : official publication of the European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery
TITLE: Use of medical aural and encephalic glue-soaked gelfoam for frontal sinus repair: a single-centre experience.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2013.01.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Frontal sinus (FS) perforation is a common complication in frontal craniotomy. The primary goal of treatment is to seal the FS without destroying physiological function.
OBJECTIVE: This article describes a new FS cavity reconstruction technique using medical aural and encephalic glue (EC glue)-soaked gelfoam.
METHODS: Between 2007 and 2012, 118 patients underwent FS reconstruction using EC glue-soaked gelfoam. The FS cavity was reconstructed in all patients and no patient experienced intracranial infection, frontal sinusitis, or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage.
RESULTS: Restoring physiological function is the primary goal of FS reconstruction. Difficulty often arises in sealing the sinus opening, especially when the mucosa is damaged. Mucosal border dissection and electric coagulation of the mucosal laceration can help to reconstruct the mucosal cavity. Sealing the sinus with autogenous or exogenous material, such as fascia, bone flap or gelfoam carries increased risks of intracranial infection, frontal sinusitis, and CSF leakage in the short term, and increased the occurrence of a FS mucocoele in the long term. Gelfoam saturated with EC glue obtained good results.
CONCLUSION: We describe the application of gelfoam saturated with EC glue to treat an open FS with or without mucosal violation during frontal craniotomy. Gelfoam saturated with EC glue is a quick, effective, low-cost and reliable means of sealing the FS while preserving its physiological function.

### PMID 23801262 (2013) — Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift (1946)
TITLE: [Successful closure of a postoperative esophagobronchial fistula following esophageal resection using fibrin glue].
DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1343238 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: HISTORY AND INTERVENTION: A 52-year-old female patient underwent open abdominothoracic cardia and esophageal resection with gastric transposition because of histologically diagnosed Barrett metaplasia with "high-grade" intraepithelial neoplasia (HGIEN) and parts of an invasive adenocarcinoma. The anastomotic insufficiency on the 10th postoperative day including an esophagobronchial fistula prompted to a subsequent surgical re-intervention with suture of the fistula, lavage and additional drainage, an endoscopic stenting of the fistula from esophageal site, as well as repeated (n = 22) bronchoscopic applications of fibrin glue (1-3 ml each) into the lumen of the fistula after each bronchoscopic lavage of the fistula until the complete closure was achieved. The changeful clinical course of 77 days on the surgical ICU was characterized by secondary complications such as pneumonia, mediastinitis and respiratory insufficiency with long-term artificial respiration and creation of a percutaneous dilatation tracheotomy.
CONCLUSION: The application of fibrin glue can be considered a promising, minimally invasive therapeutic option in the management of postoperative fistula after esophageal resection, which requires expertise in decision-making and the finding-specific approach, in particular, if indicated inital steps of the sequential complication management such as surgical re-intervention and conventional endoscopic measures (stenting, Endo-VAC[-sponge]) do not provide great therapeutic potential any more due to the prolonged postoperative time course and the unfavorable local findings. In the presented case, modes of an assisted artificial respiration with low pressure and short phases of apnoe after fibrin glue application were the crucial predictions for an initial and favorable adhesion of this glue and finally for a successful sealing resulting in a sufficient closure of the fistula.

### PMID 23582278 (2013) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Prevention of retrosternal adhesion by novel biocompatible glue derived from food additives.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2013.02.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative retrosternal adhesion increases the risk of cardiac injury during cardiac reoperation. We created a novel biodegradable glue called "Lydex" that is derived from food additives. The purpose of this study is to evaluate this new biomaterial's biocompatibility and its preventive effect on retrosternal adhesion.
METHODS: We performed a median sternotomy and anterior pericardiectomy on Japanese white rabbits, and then closed the chest (control, group 1; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;12), implanted an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene membrane (group 2; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;12), or applied Lydex (group 3; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;12) before closure. After 4 weeks, we evaluated macroscopic adhesion (each group; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;6) and microscopic findings for fibrosis and macrophage infiltration (each group; n&#xa0;=&#xa0;6).
RESULTS: In group 3, the retrosternal adhesion score was significantly lower than in group 1 (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.0022). There was no significant difference between groups 2 and 3. The fibrotic area ratio was significantly lower in group 3 than in groups 1 and 2 (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.001 vs group 1; P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.001 vs group 2). In group 3, the macrophage count was significantly lower than in group 2 (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.001) and almost equal to that in group 1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that Lydex reduces retrosternal adhesion and attenuates the progression of fibrosis with excellent biocompatibility. Lydex is a next-generation substance for safer cardiac reoperation, with excellent capability for preventing adhesion, biocompatible and biodegradable properties, and lower potential for viral infections related to human plasma or other animal-derived products.

### PMID 23522239 (2013) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Propolis-induced descending necrotizing mediastinitis and aspiration pneumonia.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.09.086 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Propolis is a resinous substance collected by bees as a sealant for their hives. It is also used in traditional medicine as an antioxidant and antiinflammatory agent to treat ulcers, superficial burns, and microbial diseases. In this report, a 40-year-old woman who took liquid propolis for relief of her common cold experienced severe sore throat, dysphagia, and easy choking followed by fever and chills. Descending necrotizing mediastinitis and concomitant aspiration pneumonia were evident on the image studies. We performed video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery to achieve immediate and adequate drainage, and the patient resumed normal deglutition 2 months later. Early diagnosis and prompt video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery intervention are paramount to manage this life-threatening situation.

### PMID 23232299 (2013) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Esophageal perforation caused by a fish bone treated with surgically indwelling drainage and fibrin glue injection for fistula formation.
DOI: 10.5761/atcs.cr.12.01906 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We herein report a case of thoracic esophageal perforation caused by a fish bone. The patient was a 68-year-old female who presented with a persistent sore throat after eating sea bream four days previously. She was diagnosed with an esophageal perforation and posterior mediastinal abscess formation by chest computed tomography and inflammatory findings in her blood test. Surgically indwelling drainage was able to effectively control the leakage of contaminants and infection. Endoscopic injection of fibrin glue into the long-standing thoracic-esophageal fistula promoted closure of the esophageal wall defect and enabled her to restart oral intake. This case report suggests that effective drainage and the use of fibrin glue sealant may be one of the treatment options for esophageal perforation.

### PMID 22872707 (2012) — Journal of clinical pathology
TITLE: Complications of Bioglue postsurgery for aortic dissections and aortic valve replacement.
DOI: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-200809 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIMS: Bioglue is an adhesive used during cardiovascular surgery to improve hemostasis perioperatively and to strengthen and reinforce vascular anastomoses. It has also been used to 'seal' the false lumen in patients presenting with acute aortic dissections. Herein, we examine the complications of Bioglue, which may lead to redo sternotomy in selected patients.
METHODS: A review of pathology records at our institution from 2002 to 2010 found 4 cases of excised aortic tissue and/or aortic valves with previous Bioglue use at initial operation. Excised tissues and valves were examined, looking for the presence of Bioglue, inflammatory cells (acute, chronic, macrophage and giant cells) and micro-organisms. Patient demographics were also reviewed and recorded.
RESULTS: We identified four cases of Bioglue use found at redo surgery, after the formation of pseudoaneurysm (n=3) and aortic stenosis (n=1). Mean interval to redo surgery was 2.28 + 0.32 years (range 2-2.6 years). Pseudoaneurysm formation was thought to be caused by an inflammatory reaction to the Bioglue itself in two cases, while one case found no such reaction. One patient with previous aortic valve replacement had large annular abscesses filled with necrotic debris surrounding the prosthesis and pannus found on the sewing cuff, comprised of Bioglue itself.
CONCLUSIONS: The mechanisms leading to these complications include mechanical strain, inflammation and tissue necrosis. The judicious use of Bioglue when clinically indicated, and close follow-up of these patients with serial imaging, remain an integral part of avoiding future complications.

### PMID 22607106 (2012) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Aggregation of BioGlue(&#xae;) presenting as a right atrial mass: a case report.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2012.01466.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Use of biological glue during cardiovascular surgery is a common practice, rarely associated with immediate or long-term complications. We present a patient with a right atrial mass as a long-term complication associated with the use of biological glue. Surgical exploration revealed the mass to be an unabsorbed and infected aggregate of biological glue used to stop bleeding from a friable right atrium during previous surgery.

### PMID 22460340 (2012) — AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology
TITLE: The appearance of dural sealants under MR imaging.
DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A3078 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Dural sealants are an adjunct to obtain watertight closure after intradural procedures. This study aims to characterize the appearance on MR imaging of 3 commonly employed dural sealants: fibrin glue, PEGH, and BSAG. To this end, patients who underwent spinal intradural procedures that included the use of dural sealant during closure were identified retrospectively. Post-operative data on 15 patients, including complications such as pseudomeningocele formation and infection, were gathered. The appearance of dural sealants on follow-up MR imaging scans within 3 days of surgery was analyzed. Fifteen patients were identified (5 with fibrin glue, 5 with PEGH, and 5 with BSAG applied during closure) with appropriately timed post-operative MR imaging scans. All 3 substances were identifiable based on anatomic location and imaging characteristics on post-operative MR imaging in standard T1, T1 PGFS, and T2 FSE. Definite differentiation between CSF and fibrin glue or PEGH was not possible with the T1 or T1 PGFS, or with the T2 FSE. Differences in intensity between CSF and BSAG were also not significant on either T1 sequence, but they were statistically significant on the T2 FSE. All patients had an uneventful post-operative course, and no patients developed post-operative pseudomeningocele at 30 days. This study concludes that water-based dural sealants such as fibrin glue and PEGH are difficult to differentiate from CSF on standard T1, T1 PGFS and T2 FSE, while BSAG is easily recognized on the T2 FSE. Recognition of water-based sealants therefore requires communication between the neurosurgeon and the neuroradiologist to avoid post-operative misidentification.

### PMID 22381303 (2012) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: A multicenter, single-blind, prospective randomized trial to evaluate the safety of a polyethylene glycol hydrogel (Duraseal Dural Sealant System) as a dural sealant in cranial surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2011.12.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Incisional cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage after cranial surgery is a significant cause of morbidity due to poor wound healing and infection, meningitis, and pseudomeningocele formation. Many common dural closure techniques, such as sutures, autologous grafts, gelatin or collagen sponges, and fibrin glues, are used to achieve watertight closure, although none are US Food and Drug Administration approved for this use. DuraSeal Dural Sealant System is a polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for obtaining watertight dural closure when applied after standard dural suturing. This multicenter, prospective randomized study further evaluated the safety of a PEG hydrogel compared with common dural sealing techniques.
METHODS: A total of 237 patients undergoing elective cranial surgery at 17 institutions were randomized to dural closure augmented with the PEG hydrogel or a control "standard of care" dural sealing technique after Valsalva maneuver demonstrated an intraoperative nonwatertight dural closure. Data were collected on complications resulting in unplanned postoperative interventions or reoperations, surgical site infections, CSF leaks, and other neurological complications within 30 days. Surgeons also provided data on the ease of use of the dural sealing techniques, as well as preparation and application times.
RESULTS: The incidences of neurosurgical complications, surgical site infections, and CSF leaks were similar between treatment and control groups, with no statistically significant difference between the measures. In the PEG hydrogel group (n = 120), the incidence of neurosurgical complications was 5.8% (n = 7), the incidence of surgical site infections was 1.7% (n = 2), and the incidence of CSF leak was 0.8% (n = 1). In the control group (n = 117), the incidence of neurosurgical complications was 7.7% (n = 9), the incidence of surgical site infection was 2.6% (n = 3), and the incidence of CSF leak was 1.7% (n = 2). Sealant preparation time was less than 5 minutes in 96.6% of the PEG hydrogel group compared with 66.4% of controls (P &lt; 0.001). The dural augmentation was applied in less than 1 minute in 85.7% of the PEG hydrogel group compared with 66.4% of the control group (P &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The PEG hydrogel dural sealant used in this study has a similar safety profile to commonly used dural sealing techniques when used as dural closure augmentation in cranial surgery. The PEG hydrogel dural sealant demonstrated faster preparation and application times than other commonly used dural sealing techniques.

### PMID 22943229 (2012) — Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of England
TITLE: Safety trial of Floseal(&#xae;) haemostatic agent in head and neck surgery.
DOI: 10.1308/003588412X13171221590971 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Floseal(&#xae;) can be of value in reducing blood loss and haematoma rates. The manufacturer's warnings include allergic reaction, poor wound healing and intravascular thrombosis. We aimed to determine whether Floseal(&#xae;) is safe to use in various head and neck surgery procedures.
METHODS: A prospective trial was conducted using Floseal(&#xae;) in 42 various consecutive head and neck surgery procedures. Adverse incidents were used as the main outcome measure, including allergic reaction, wound breakdown, wound infection and thrombosis. Secondary outcome measures included haematoma formation, hospital stay, drain times and output.
RESULTS: No adverse incidents were recorded in the trial period. Two patients developed haematomas and required surgical exploration where a bleeding vessel was identified and dealt with.
CONCLUSIONS: Floseal(&#xae;) is safe to be used in head and neck surgery with no adverse effects. A larger number and a control group are required to ascertain its value in reducing blood loss, haematoma formation, drain usage and hospital stay.

### PMID 22623075 (2012) — The Journal of bone and joint surgery. American volume
TITLE: The efficacy of a thrombin-based hemostatic agent in unilateral total knee arthroplasty: a randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.K.00531 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Blood loss following total knee arthroplasty can lead to substantial morbidity and the need for blood transfusions. Hemostatic agents have been used to minimize blood loss and to decrease transfusion rates. Floseal is a thrombin-based hemostatic agent with unknown efficacy for achieving these goals in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty.
METHODS: We performed a prospective randomized controlled trial on the use of Floseal in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty, with the primary end point being blood loss as measured through drain output. Demographic characteristics, operative side, diagnosis, intraoperative details, implant choice, hospital course, laboratory values, visual analog scale pain scores, knee range of motion, adverse events, transfusion rates, and deviations from protocol were recorded.
RESULTS: A total of 196 patients were enrolled, with ninety-seven patients being randomized to the Floseal group and ninety-nine patients being randomized to the control group. There were no significant differences between the Floseal and control groups in terms of drain output at twenty-four hours (711 compared with 702 mL; p = 0.823). No differences were noted between the groups in terms of operative side, diagnosis, intraoperative details, implant choice, hospital course, laboratory values, visual analog scale pain scores, knee range of motion, or transfusion rates. Complications occurred infrequently. In the acute postoperative period, there were two cases of cellulitis (one in each group), two deep venous thromboses (one in each group), and one paralytic ileus (in the control group), all of which resolved with nonoperative measures. At the six-week follow-up, one patient in the Floseal group had died from a cause unrelated to surgery, two patients (one in each group) had suture abscesses with cellulitis that resolved with postoperative antibiotics, and four patients (two in each group) underwent knee manipulation under anesthesia to achieve improved knee motion. With the numbers available, there was no significant association between Floseal use and the occurrence of these adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study showed that Floseal had no demonstrable effect on blood loss as measured through drain output following total knee arthroplasty. There were also no notable adverse events associated with its use. The usefulness of Floseal as a hemostatic agent in total knee arthroplasty remains unclear.

### PMID 23103247 (2012) — The Journal of hospital infection
TITLE: Use of microbial sealant to prevent surgical site infections.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2012.09.014 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter, Comment
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 22705297 (2012) — The Journal of hospital infection
TITLE: Skin sealant InteguSeal&#xae; has no impact on prevention of postoperative mediastinitis after cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2012.04.024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Surgical site infections (SSIs) after median sternotomy represent a serious complication and a high potential risk for adverse clinical outcome after cardiac surgery. The antimicrobial skin sealant InteguSeal&#xae; was introduced as a novel tool in preventing development of SSI.
AIM: This single-centre investigation used two prospective registries to evaluate the prophylactic effect of a cyanoacrylate-based antimicrobial skin sealant (InteguSeal&#xae;) on the incidence of postoperative mediastinitis or any other form of chest skin incision SSI after elective cardiac surgery.
METHODS: Between October 2010 and April 2011 a total of 998 patients underwent elective cardiac surgical procedures with median sternotomy in our centre. In 496 patients InteguSeal&#xae; was included in standard preoperative preparation procedures before chest skin incision (group 1). In 502 patients standard preoperative skin preparation procedures were used without InteguSeal&#xae; (group 2). Freedom from mediastinitis and from any other form of SSI within 30 postoperative days were the primary and secondary endpoints, respectively.
FINDINGS: A total of 983 patients were eligible for inclusion in per-protocol analysis (488 vs 495 patients). The incidence of postoperative mediastinitis was 2.3% in group 1 vs 3.2% in group 2 (not significant). The incidence of any form of SSI was 10.9% in group 1 vs 11.5% in group 2 (not significant). Perioperative patient characteristics, complexity of surgical procedures performed and length of hospitalization were similar in both groups.
CONCLUSION: The use of InteguSeal&#xae; has no influence on the incidence of postoperative SSI and mediastinitis after cardiac surgery with median sternotomy.

### PMID 22633222 (2012) — Veterinary immunology and immunopathology
TITLE: Proteomic analysis of plasma from Holstein cows testing positive for Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP).
DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2012.05.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Johne's disease (JD) is a widespread and economically important chronic inflammatory disease of the small intestine of ruminants caused by Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP). Although there are several techniques available for diagnosis of JD, their sensitivity is questionable. New proteome profiling methods, such as serum/plasma protein fingerprinting by 2-Dimensional Fluorescence Difference Gel Electrophoresis (2D-DIGE), may therefore be useful for identifying novel protein biomarkers of MAP infection. In this study, plasma samples were collected from 380 Holstein cows and screened for the presence of MAP infection using the M.pt. Johne's antibody Kit (IDEXX). Five negative (MAP-), and 5 strongly positive (MAP+) cows were selected for proteomic analysis. Highly abundant proteins were depleted from the plasma samples using the ProteoMiner technology (Bio-Rad) to enhance the resolution of low abundance proteins. Plasma samples from MAP-, MAP+, and a pooled internal control were labelled with different fluorescent dyes and separated based on their isoelectrical point (IP) and then their molecular weight. Gel images of the fluorescent plasma protein maps were acquired using a Typhoon scanner and analyzed using the DeCyder software. Proteins that were differentially expressed were excised from the gels, trypsin digested, and subjected to MS/MS analysis for identification. Six proteins were identified as being up-regulated at least 2-fold in MAP+ cows including: transferrin, gelsolin isoforms &#x3b1; &amp; &#x3b2; (actin binding protein - ABP), complement subcomponent C1r, complement component C3, amine oxidase - copper containing 3 (AOC3), and coagulation factor II (thrombin) (p&lt;0.05). Two proteins that were down-regulated approximately 2-fold in the MAP+ cows included coagulation factor XIII -B polypeptide (COAFXIII), and fibrinogen &#x3b3; chain (FGG) and its precursor.

### PMID 22245545 (2012) — Biologicals : journal of the International Association of Biological Standardization
TITLE: Salmon fibrin glue in rats: antibody studies.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2011.12.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Fibrin sealants and topical thrombin preparations are often used for haemostatic and sealing applications in clinical practice. Some of these preparations contain coagulation factors from bovine sources. To minimize the risk of infection and immunogenicity connected with mammalian blood products, proteins derived from the plasma of farmed Atlantic salmon have been considered as an alternative to these mammalian sources. The purpose of this study is to characterize the immunogenicity of salmon fibrin glue in an animal model focusing on crossreactivity of IgG antibodies to host endogenous counterparts. After two immunizations with salmon fibrin glue, rats developed antibodies of IgG and IgM type to both fibrin glue components. Weak crossreactivity to endogenous fibrinogen and thrombin was seen in a subset of rats after the second application of salmon proteins. Coagulation tests showed that salmon fibrin application has no effect on coagulation profiles in mammalian hosts, consistent with previous reports that found no evidence of significant crossreactivity with host proteins. These studies support the potential suitability of salmon fibrin glue for the development of preparations with clinical impact. Before human use can be considered, however, additional data about safety of this preparation in other animal models, including large animal studies, should be obtained.

### PMID 21206312 (2011) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Prevention of cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea after transsphenoidal surgery by collagen fleece coated with fibrin sealant without autologous tissue graft or postoperative lumbar drainage.
DOI: 10.1227/NEU.0b013e318207b4ea | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Autologous tissue grafting and postoperative lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage (PLD) have been used to prevent CSF rhinorrhea after transsphenoidal surgery.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the technical details and efficacy of our techniques of using collagen fleece coated with fibrin sealant (TachoComb, Nycomed, Linz, Austria) instead of an autologous tissue graft and refraining from the use of PLD.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 307 consecutive patients who underwent a transsphenoidal surgery for pituitary adenoma from November 2005 to February 2008. Among them, 90 cases of intraoperative CSF leaks were repaired with TachoComb without an autologous tissue graft or PLD. The repair procedures were tailored according to CSF leakage type, and we used only Bioglue (Cryolife Inc, Atlanta, Georgia) for sellar floor reconstruction.
RESULTS: The overall rate of CSF rhinorrhea was 2.2% (2 of 90 cases). The 2 cases of CSF rhinorrhea resulted from large arachnoid defects, and there were no adverse effects from TachoComb such as transmission of viral disease or infection.
CONCLUSION: Our technique is an alternative method to the traditional autologous tissue graft technique. PLD is not an essential procedure for the prevention of CSF rhinorrhea if the intraoperative CSF leak is completely sealed off during the transsphenoidal surgery. However, in cases of large arachnoid defects, aggressive repair of the arachnoid defect and sellar floor reconstruction with bone or bony substitutes should be considered in conjunction with our methods.

### PMID 21264676 (2011) — Techniques in coloproctology
TITLE: Protection of intestinal anastomosis with biological glues: an experimental randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s10151-010-0674-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to compare the degree of healing and air tightness of hand-sewn colonic anastomoses provided by different biological glues.
METHODS: Thirty colonic anastomoses were fashioned in ten rabbits, at 5, 10, 15 cm from the ileocecal valve, with 4/0 PDS running sutures. Each suture was randomized to treatment with fibrin sealant (Tissucol&#xae;), a synthetic glue (Coseal&#xae;), or nothing (control). After 15 days, the rabbits were killed and the anastomoses examined for their integrity and resistance to bursting. The van der Hamm scale was used to evaluate postoperative adhesions. A blind histological evaluation of the newly formed tissue was made (Ehrlich-Hunt scale).
RESULTS: Two rabbits developed an intraabdominal abscess, one in the control anastomosis group without glue. Postoperative adhesions were present in all animals. Median anastomosis bursting pressures were 0.9 atm in all three groups: Tissucol, Coseal, and control. Pressure values were 0.9, 1.0, and 0.9 atm in the three different proximodistal sites, respectively. A trend toward an increased resistance was observed in the glued anastomosis, although this was not significant. Lymphocyte infiltration, fibroblast activity, blood vessel density, and collagen deposition were lower in controls. Anastomoses treated with Tissucol had the highest lymphocyte infiltration level. The Coseal group developed the highest rates of fibroblast activity, collagen deposition, and blood vessel neogenesis.
CONCLUSION: The use of biological glues did not result in a statistically significantly increased bursting resistance. Histological evaluation demonstrated more intense tissue neoformation in the glue groups, particularly in the Coseal group. The role of biological glues in decreasing the leakage rate of intestinal anastomoses is uncertain, and larger trials using different protective agents are warranted.

### PMID 22008746 (2011) — Spine
TITLE: Polyethylene glycol hydrogel spinal sealant (DuraSeal Spinal Sealant) as an adjunct to sutured dural repair in the spine: results of a prospective, multicenter, randomized controlled study.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0b013e3181fdb4db | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: A prospective, multicenter, randomized, two-arm, single-blind, investigational device exemption pivotal study.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy and the safety of a polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel spinal sealant (DuraSeal Spinal Sealant) as an adjunct to sutured dural repair compared with standard of care methods (control) to obtain a watertight dural closure in patients undergoing an intentional durotomy during spinal surgery.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: If a watertight dural closure is not achieved, cerebrospinal fluid leak with associated complications may occur. The PEG hydrogel spinal sealant is an Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved adjunct to sutured dural repair in spine surgery. This synthetic, absorbable hydrogel sealant works in the presence of fluid, conforms to irregular surfaces, and demonstrates strong adherence and compliance to tissue, without interfering with underlying tissue visibility.
METHODS: A total of 158 patients were treated at 24 centers after they were randomized on the basis of an approximately 2:1 ratio (sealant:control); 102 received the PEG hydrogel spinal sealant and 56 received standard care. The primary end point was intraoperative watertight closure. Secondary end points included evaluations of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak, infection, and wound healing.
RESULTS: Patients treated with the PEG hydrogel spinal sealant had a significantly higher rate of watertight closure than the control (100% vs. 64.3%, P &lt; 0.001). No statistical differences were seen in postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak, infection, and wound healing. No neurologic deficits were seen attributable to the sealant.
CONCLUSION: The PEG hydrogel spinal sealant evaluated in this study is safe and effective for providing watertight closure when used as an adjunct to sutured dural repair during spinal surgery. This readily available tool is superior to other standard of care technologies commonly used to achieve intraoperative watertight dural closure.

### PMID 21657162 (2011) — Annali italiani di chirurgia
TITLE: Transdiaphragmatic blockage of the lymphatic may reduce bacterial translocation.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Bacterial translocation is a spread of living and non-living bacteria and bacterial end-products, passing over the mucosal barrier distending mesenteric lymph nodes, blood and viscera. DuraSeal(polyglycolic acid glue) has adhesive power and it usually used in brain or spinal surgery. We aimed to show the barrier system effect using experiments, in which intraabdominal infection induced and translocation from diaphragm to thorax is researched.
METHODS: We used 90 Wistar Albino male rats weighing 200-250 grams in our experiment. Laparotomy was performed to all groups. After laparotomy, intraperitoneal 1 cc physiological saline was given in Group I (control). 1 x 109 cfu/m/kg (colony forming unit/mililiter/kilograms) E. Coli was injected intraperitoneally in Group II. In Group III, DuraSeal (Confluent Surgical, Inc., Waltham, MA) was sprayed on the diaphragm. After waiting for approximately 2 minutes to see the barrier effect, 1 x 109 cfu/ml/kg E Coli was injected intraperitoneally.
RESULTS: For the samples taken intraperitoneally, 100% breeding was determined in all groups except Group 1. While no positive staining was observed in the thoraxes of the rats in Group I and Group III at the first hour, the positive staining ratio in the Group II was 70%. The positivity ratio of Group II was 80% and the ratio was 50% in Group III at the third and sixth hours. Regarding hemoculture E Coli positivity, there was no proliferation in the hemoculture samples of Group I at all time periods, whereas it was positive in the other groups excluding the first hour.
CONCLUSIONS: The synthetic hydrogel Duraseal, which was designed to prevent postoperative fibrosis and air leakage, was able to partially block the translocation of the bacteria to the thorax via lymphatic or directly.

### PMID 21552173 (2011) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Evaluation of fibrin sealants for central nervous system sealing in the mongrel dog durotomy model.
DOI: 10.1227/NEU.0b013e318222ad63 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Watertight repair of the dura is imperative after neurosurgical procedures involving the brain or spinal cord because inadequately treated leakage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from punctured dura can have serious consequences such as meningitis, arachnoiditis, or epidural abscess.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of Evicel Fibrin Sealant (Human) to prevent CSF leakage using a 2.0-cm durotomy mongrel dog repair model and to compare the tissue response with Tisseel (a fibrin sealant) and Duraseal (a synthetic polyethylene glycol [PEG] hydrogel sealant).
METHODS: The canine durotomy repair model was used. This well-characterized model assesses the ability of sealants to achieve intraoperative watertight seals of the dura mater, as well as long-term safety and efficacy. This study included 27 mongrel dogs and had a 28-day duration.
RESULTS: The 3 sealants were 100% effective in preventing CSF leakage intraoperatively at 15 mm Hg. The 2 fibrin sealants were 100% effective in postoperative sealing; the PEG hydrogel was not. Microscopically, the tissue changes induced by Evicel at the durotomy site were similar in nature except for foamy macrophages seen only with the PEG hydrogel. The extent and severity of adhesions at 28 days were less with the fibrin sealants than with the PEG hydrogel.
CONCLUSION: Evicel, a fibrin sealant, was safe and effective in achieving and maintaining a watertight seal of the dura. The performance of the fibrin sealants was similar to that of the synthetic PEG hydrogel sealant with the exception of a Duraseal seal, which leaked.

### PMID 21491727 (2011) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Clinical managements for intractable pneumothorax with interstitial pneumonia].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intractable pneumothorax with interstitial pneumonia (IP) is famous for the disease finally to lead to death in case of persistent air leakage. It is because severe infection, respiratory insufficiency and tissue healing insufficiency by treatments with steroid hormones and immune-suppressants on IP. Pleurodesis is generally performed although the effect of it is questionable. It is important to stop immune-suppressants and reduce steroid hormones before the treatments to succeed in thoracoscopic surgery and thoracographic fibrin glue sealing method (TGF) if possible. Less invasive interventional treatments like TGF are recommendable because intractable pneumothorax with IP is in the high risk group to need to avoid surgery. Hand suturing, looping, covering and putting TachoComb on the air leak point instead of end-stapling should be performed in order to stop air leakage when forced to choose thoracoscopic surgery.

### PMID 22413166 (2011) — Khirurgiia
TITLE: [The use of modern hemostatics in surgery of long bones' ostheomyelitis and prosthetic infections of coxofemoral and knee joints].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 20703888 (2011) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Hemostatic matrix sealant in neurosurgery: a clinical and imaging study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-010-0762-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECT: The aim of this study was to investigate prospectively the efficacy and safety of Floseal hemostatic matrix.
METHODS: A total of 214 patients (87 males, 127 females; mean age 56.2 years) undergoing cranial (71.4%), craniospinal (0.9%), and spinal (27.5%) procedures with the use of gelatin thrombin hemostatic matrix (Floseal) were included in this prospective study. The indications for its use, surgical techniques, time to bleeding control, and associated complications were recorded.
RESULTS: Effective hemostasis, defined as cessation of bleeding, was achieved no later than 3 min after topical agent application in all patients except in 11 cases, in which the hemostatic application was repeated. Rebleeding was disclosed in four patients 1 day after initial surgery. In one case, an intracerebral abscess developed after a malignant glioma removal. No other patient developed allergic reactions or local or systemic complications associated with the hemostatic sealant.
CONCLUSION: In this study, matrix hemostatic sealant helped to control operative bleeding in cranial and spinal surgery, reducing damage to the surrounding healthy nervous tissue while shortening surgical timing. Other than safe, the immediate hemostatic effect is an advantage in the settings of refractory bleeding.

### PMID 22018261 (2011) — Il Giornale di chirurgia
TITLE: Extensive facial trauma caused by dog bites in woman suffering from systemic fluconazole-resistant Candida infection.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Dog bites present a complex problem. Extensive facial trauma is a challenging problem to treat with priority for functional outcome. This paper describes the conservative treatment in a very difficult case of facial trauma with unusual infections due to the bites.
CASE REPORT: A 45 year-old woman was admitted in hypovolaemic shock with amputation of nose, upper and lower lips, left cheek and chin caused by dog bites. After vital parameters and volaemy were stabilized, wound toilet was performed, followed by skin and mucosal rotation flaps and anterior nasal tamponade; the lesion has then been covered with a collagen/oxidized regenerated cellulose dressing and sterile gauzes. Culture test highlighted coagulase-negative Staphylococcus and Candida albicans. However after few days, the patient developed septic-undulant hyperpyrexia, retinitis, renal candidiasis, folliculitis. Systemic Candida infection resistant to fluconazole was diagnosed. Amphotericin B was given to the patient and the facial wound was managed conservatively with an active medication because of inoperability conditions. The outcome of the use of active medications was an immediate response with excessive granulation tissue followed by a rapid re-epithelization.
CONCLUSION: As our case has shown, conservative treatment can be a valid alternative therapy in the treatment of large wounds with invasive candidosis and candidaemia or other major contraindications to surgery. In fact, in cases where surgical reconstruction is not a feasible option, conservative treatment can allow a rapid repair of the skin barrier.

### PMID 21819765 (2011) — American journal of rhinology &amp; allergy
TITLE: Microporous polysaccharide hemospheres do not increase synechiae after sinus surgery: randomized controlled study.
DOI: 10.2500/ajra.2011.25.3619 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Many surgeons use absorbable packing materials after endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS). Despite their popularity, some of these agents have been shown to contribute to synechiae formation. Microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPH) is a plant-based hemostatic powder that does not interfere with regenerating sinus mucosa in the animal model. The goal of this study was to examine the impact of MPH on healing and synechiae formation after ESS in human subjects.
METHODS: A prospective, randomized, controlled, double-blind study was performed. Forty consenting adult patients with chronic sinusitis requiring symmetric ESS were randomized to receive MPH unilaterally at the conclusion of surgery. The opposite side was untreated. Standard postoperative care was performed bilaterally. Outcomes measured included blinded observer ratings for synechiae formation, edema, and infection. Each side was examined endoscopically and scored at postoperative days 7, 14, and 30.
RESULTS: Twenty men and 20 women with an average age of 48.2 years were included. There were no complications and all patients were discharged home the same day. There was no significant difference in synechiae formation at any point postoperatively. The rate of synechiae formation was determined to be 10% (4/40) on the MPH-treated side versus 7.5% (3/40) on the untreated side (p = 0.7639). In addition, there were no significant differences observed in edema (p = 0.7480) or infection (p = 0.5533).
CONCLUSION: The use of MPH after sinus surgery does not increase synechiae formation and does not appear to deleteriously affect the healing of postoperative sinus cavities.

### PMID 21600502 (2011) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Microporous Polysaccharide Hemospheres (MPH) for cerebral hemostasis: a preliminary report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2010.10.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To report preliminary experience in using Microporous Polysaccharide Hemospheres (MPH; Medafor, Inc, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) for cerebral and dural sinus hemostasis.
METHODS: Absorbable hemospheres for hemostasis were used in 10 patients (6 men, 4 women, mean age 56.2 years) undergoing cerebral procedures. The indication was corticosubcortical cerebral hemostasis after resection of meningiomas (n = 5) and gliomas (n = 5). In one case, absorbable hemospheres were applied for generalized oozing over the superior sagittal sinus. The surgical technique, time to bleeding control, and associated complications were recorded.
RESULTS: Effective hemostasis, defined as cessation of oozing bleeding, was achieved no later than 2 minutes after topical agent application in all patients except two, in whom the hemostatic application was repeated. Mean follow-up was 12 months. No patient developed allergic reactions or systemic complications in association with hemostatic absorbable hemospheres. There was no case of cerebral hematoma, swelling, or infection after surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary study, the direct application of absorbable hemospheres helped to control superficial cerebral bleeding, reducing the use of bipolar coagulation and shortening surgical time. Although use of absorbable hemospheres seems to be safe and effective, further investigations and prospective studies with longer follow-up are strongly recommended to arrive at final conclusions.

### PMID 22066364 (2011) — The Journal of heart valve disease
TITLE: Antibiotic pretreatment of heart valve prostheses to prevent early prosthetic valve endocarditis.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE STUDY: Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE), a rare but major complication after heart valve replacement surgery, has potentially catastrophic consequences despite maximal treatment. Thus, preventive measures are essential. The study aim was to investigate the effect of pretreating heart valve prostheses with the antibiotics baneomycin and daptomycin, with and without surgical sealant fibrin glue as a drug-releasing substance. The biocompatibility of baneocin and daptomycin was also investigated.
METHODS: Samples of polyethylene terephthalate (PTE), as used for the sewing cuffs of prosthetic heart valves, were tested; untreated samples served as controls. All samples were contaminated with Staphylococcus epidermidis, and colony-forming units (CFUs) then counted. Cytotoxicity tests were performed using the MTT-assay to evaluate the effects of baneomycin and daptomycin on cell proliferation and wound healing.
RESULTS: Untreated and fibrin glue-coated samples were directly infected with a bacterial count of 2.82 +/- 0.63 x 10(5) CFU/ml and 2.80 +/- 1.07 x 10(5) CFU/ml, on average. Baneocin-impregnated samples were sterile for 1.9 +/- 0.38 days, with a subsequent bacterial count of 2.26 +/- 0.6 x 10(5) CFU/ml, while daptomycin-impregnated samples were sterile for 2.9 +/- 0.38 days, with a subsequent bacterial count of 1.81 +/- 0.53 x 10(5) CFU/ml. Samples coated with a fibrin glue-baneocin mixture were sterile for 3.14 +/- 0.38 days, after which the bacterial count was 0.74 +/- 0.47 x 10(5) CFU/ml. After coating with a fibrin glue-daptomycin mixture, samples were sterile for 7.0 +/- 0.58 days, and the bacterial count was 0.70 +/- 0.56 x 10(5) CFU/ml.
CONCLUSION: In this in-vitro study, the pretreatment of prosthetic heart valves with antibiotics reduced the risk of bacterial adhesion and consequent infection. The combination of antibiotics with fibrin glue prolonged this preventive effect, with baneocin demonstrating a better biocompatibility than daptomycin. On the basis of its antibacterial efficacy, daptomycin appears to be a more suitable antibiotic to prevent early PVE with Gram-positive bacteria. The soaking of prosthetic heart valves in antibiotic solutions prior to implantation, in combination with fibrin glue in cases of suspected endocarditis, can prevent the development of early PVE. This preventive strategy should be investigated for use as a standard procedure in clinical practice.

### PMID 20512511 (2010) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: A comparison of a bovine albumin/glutaraldehyde glue versus fibrin sealant for hernia mesh fixation in experimental onlay and IPOM repair in rats.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-010-1094-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Research in hernia repair has targeted new atraumatic mesh fixation to reduce major complications such as chronic pain and adhesion formation. The efficacy and safety of two surgical adhesives, viz. Artiss&#xae; (FS, fibrin sealant containing 4 IU thrombin) and Bioglue&#xae; (AGG, bovine serum albumin/glutaraldehyde glue), were evaluated in this study. Primary study endpoints were tissue integration, dislocation, and adhesion formation. Foreign-body reaction formed the secondary study endpoint.
METHODS: Twenty-four polypropylene meshes (VM, Vitamesh&#xae;) were randomized to four groups (n = 6): two groups of onlay hernia repair (two meshes per animal) with mesh fixation by FS (O-FS) or by AGG (O-AGG), and two groups of IPOM repair (one mesh per animal) with mesh fixation by four sutures and FS (I-FS) or AGG (I-AGG). Eighteen rats underwent surgery. Follow-up was 30 days. Tissue integration, dislocation, seroma formation, inflammation, adhesion formation, and foreign-body reaction were assessed.
RESULTS: Meshes fixed with FS (O-FS, I-FS) showed good tissue integration. No dislocation, seroma formation, or macroscopic signs of inflammation were detectable. Adhesion formation of I-FS was significantly milder compared with I-AGG (P = 0.024). A moderate foreign-body reaction without active inflammation was seen histologically in O-FS and I-FS groups. Samples fixed with AGG (O-AGG, I-AGG) showed extensive scar formation. No dislocation and no seroma formation were observed. All of these samples showed moderate to severe signs of inflammation with abscess formation in the six meshes of O-AGG. Histology underlined these findings.
CONCLUSIONS: The fibrin sealant adhesive showed very good overall results of the primary and secondary outcome parameters. FS is a recommendable atraumatic fixation tool for the surgical onlay technique. AGG provides high adhesive strength, but shows low biocompatibility. Persisting active inflammation was seen in both the O-AGG and I-AGG groups, not favoring its use for these indications.

### PMID 20810099 (2010) — American journal of obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Two-component polyethylene glycol surgical sealant influence on intraperitoneal infection in a refined rodent model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2010.06.056 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study determined the influence of a 2-component polyethylene glycol surgical sealant (Coseal) as an adhesion prevention device on sepsis-related mortality and/or systemic bacterial translocation to the spleen.
STUDY DESIGN: A bacterial inoculum and telemetry probe were implanted in 50 treated and 49 untreated rats. Telemetry probes monitored core-body temperature to determine time of death. Spleens were collected on day 3 for quantitative bacteriology of Escherichia coli and Bacteroides fragilis.
RESULTS: Median survival time and mortality of treated rats (37.0 hours, 54.0%) were noninferior to untreated rats (47.5 hours, 55.1%). Median E coli titers in treated rats (2.24 log colony forming units/spleen) were significantly less than untreated rats (4.32 log colony forming units/spleen). B fragilis titers were not different.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates intraperitoneal administration of a 2-component polyethylene glycol surgical sealant as an adhesion prevention device does not alter time to death or sepsis-related mortality and/or systemic bacterial translocation to the spleen.

### PMID 19645538 (2010) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: The safety and effectiveness of a dural sealant system for use with nonautologous duraplasty materials.
DOI: 10.3171/2009.6.JNS081540 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECT: The DuraSeal dural sealant system, a polyethylene glycol hydrogel, has been shown to be safe and effective when used with commercial and autologous duraplasty materials. The authors report on the safety and effectiveness of this sealant when used in conjunction with nonautologous duraplasty materials.
METHODS: In this retrospective, nonrandomized, multicenter study, the safety and efficacy of a dural sealant system was assessed in conjunction with primarily collagen-based nonautologous duraplasty materials in a sample of 66 patients undergoing elective cranial procedures at 3 institutions. This cohort was compared with 50 well-matched patients from the DuraSeal Pivotal Trial who were treated with this sealant system and autologous duraplasty material.
RESULTS: The key end points of the study were the incidences of CSF leaks, surgical site infections, and meningitis 90 days after surgery. The incidence of postoperative CSF leakage was 7.6% in the study group (retrospective population) and 6.0% in the Pivotal Trial population. The incidence of meningitis was 0% and 4.0% in the retrospective and Pivotal Trial groups, respectively. There were no serious device-related adverse events or unanticipated adverse device effects noted for either population.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that the DuraSeal sealant system is safe and effective when used for watertight dural closure in conjunction with nonautologous duraplasty materials.

### PMID 20828762 (2010) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Prevention of early vascular graft infection using regional antibiotic release.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2010.05.029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Infections after prosthetic replacement of the aorta remain a serious and life-threatening complication. The only appropriate treatment is the surgical removal of the infected prosthesis. Accordingly, there is a need for new procedures to prevent the infection of vascular prostheses. This in vitro experiment investigated the effect of the pretreatment of vascular prostheses with antibiotics (daptomycin or baneocin) and the effect of antibiotics combined with fibrin sealant as possible prophylaxis of perioperative graft infection.
METHODS: Untreated prostheses served as controls. Pretreated prostheses of double woven velour vascular grafts were contaminated with Staphylococcus epidermidis, and colony-forming units were counted each day (CFU/mL).
RESULTS: The period of sterility differed significantly as a function of the pretreatment. Uncoated prostheses were immediately non-sterile and exhibited 2.63 &#xb1; 0.61 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL. Baneocin pretreatment resulted in sterility for 1.7 &#xb1; 0.6 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.0-2.4) d before we detected 2.14 &#xb1; 0.57 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL on the prostheses. Pretreatment with daptomycin yielded 2.9 &#xb1; 0.4 (CI 2.6-3.2) and fibrin sealant/baneocin compound yielded 3.1 &#xb1; 0.3 (CI 2.9-3.3) d of sterility, after which 1.81 &#xb1; 0.86 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL and 1.04 &#xb1; 0.77 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL were recorded. Finally, pretreatment with fibrin sealant/daptomycin led to sterility for 7.1 &#xb1; 0.3 (CI 6.9-7.3) d, after which 0.77 &#xb1; 0.60 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL were observed on the prostheses.
CONCLUSIONS: The risk of vascular graft infection is reduced by pretreating the prostheses with antibiotics. The antibiotic/fibrin compound exhibited an effect of delayed antibiotic release. Vascular prostheses should therefore be pretreated with antibiotic solution to reduce bacterial adhesion. This procedure might be an effective prophylaxis for perioperative vascular graft infection and provides suitable protection for the prosthetic material.

### PMID 20124293 (2010) — Asian cardiovascular &amp; thoracic annals
TITLE: Comparison of cryoprecipitate with commercial fibrinogen in bullectomy.
DOI: 10.1177/0218492309355329 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glues are widely used for various pulmonary operations, but commercially produced glues are made of heterogeneous fibrinogen that has infection risks. We used autologous cryoprecipitate and evaluated its clinical value as a fibrin sealant instead of the commercially available glue. One hundred patients who underwent thoracoscopic bullectomy for primary spontaneous pneumothorax were studied. The apical visceral pleura was covered with an absorbable mesh and a fibrin glue. Autologous cryoprecipitate glue was used in 30 patients (group A), and commercially produced fibrinogen was used in 70 (group B). The mean duration of postoperative chest drainage was 1.9 days in group A and 1.5 days in group B. The cumulative 2-year postoperative recurrence rate was 3.4% in group A and 6.5% in group B. There were no differences in clinical results after surgery for primary spontaneous pneumothorax, using either autologous cryoprecipitate or commercially produced fibrinogen. The production autologous cryoprecipitate was easy and low-cost. We propose that autologous cryoprecipitates be used in operations for primary spontaneous pneumothorax.

### PMID 20932376 (2010) — JSLS : Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons
TITLE: Laparoscopic incisional hernia repair with fibrin glue in select patients.
DOI: 10.4293/108680810X12785289144359 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Laparoscopic treatment of incisional hernias can be performed using different types of fixation devices and prosthesis. We present a case series of 19 patients with incisional hernias with a diameter of &lt; 6 cm, who underwent laparoscopic repair using Hi-tex dual-side mesh, positioned intraperitoneally, fixed to the abdominal wall by fibrin glue (Tissucol).
METHODS: Nineteen patients with incisional hernias &lt; 6 cm in diameter were enrolled in this study and treated laparoscopically with Hi-tex and Tissucol. Surgical complications and patient outcomes were assessed with a clinical follow-up.
RESULTS: Laparoscopic repair of incisional hernias by using Hi-tex mesh affixed to the parietal wall with fibrin glue was feasible and easy in patients with parietal defects &lt; 6 cm in diameter. Mean operating time was 30 minutes. Mean hospital stay was 1.5 days. Almost no postoperative pain, major surgical complications, seroma formation, relapses, or prosthesis infection occurred during a mean follow-up of 20 months.
CONCLUSIONS: In select patients, Hi-tex mesh affixed using fibrin glue allows laparoscopic repair of incisional hernias with very good patient outcomes, especially in terms of postoperative pain and seroma formation.

### PMID 19748275 (2010) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Tracheal lacerations after endotracheal intubation: a proposed morphological classification to guide non-surgical treatment.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2009.07.034 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Postintubation tracheobronchial lacerations (PITLs) are traditionally managed surgically. We sought to evaluate the rationale for non-surgical management of PITL.
METHODS: From January 2003 to November 2008, 30 patients with PITL were observed in our institution. PITL were graded as follows: Level I - mucosal or submucosal tracheal involvement without mediastinal emphysema and without oesophageal injury; Level II - tracheal lesion up to the muscular wall with subcutaneous or mediastinal emphysema without oesophageal injury or mediastinitis; Level IIIA - complete laceration of the tracheal wall with oesophageal or mediastinal soft-tissue hernia without oesophageal injury or mediastinitis; Level IIIB - any laceration of the tracheal wall with oesophageal injury or mediastinitis. All patients with Level I, II and IIIA PITL were treated conservatively with endoscopic instillation of fibrin glue (Tissucol, Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, MA, USA).
RESULTS: All patients with Level I (n=3), II (n=24) and IIIA (n=2) PITL were successfully treated conservatively. The patient with a Level IIIB injury underwent posterolateral thoracotomy repair of the trachea. No mortality was reported. Mean hospital stay was 12.9 days. Flexible bronchoscopy at 7, 28, 90 and 180 days showed no abnormalities. Complete healing was attained in all patients by day 28.
CONCLUSIONS: Level I or II PITL should be managed non-surgically. When adequate respiratory status is present, Level IIIA PITL can be managed conservatively in selected institutions only, because these injuries are high-risk injuries. Any PITL associated with injury involving the oesophagus or with mediastinitis (Level IIIB) must be treated as soon as possible by surgery.

### PMID 21119398 (2010) — The Journal of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Use of a collagen patch for management of pharyngocutaneous fistula after hypopharyngeal reconstruction.
DOI: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e3181f3c616 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Pharyngocutaneous fistula is one of the fatal complications occurring after head and neck reconstruction with neck node dissection. Even minor salivary leakage from the fistula could cause serious infection and threaten the viability of the transferred flap or even lead to the rupture of jugular vein. In such cases, proper management is difficult, and the chances for recurrence rise. We used a collagen patch (TachoComb) for fistula prevention and treatment. TachoComb, a collagen patch integrated with activated thrombin and fibrinogen, was used to prevent postoperative fistula formation in the initial reconstruction by applying them on sites with a high risk of salivary leakage. The patch was applied to 16 patients who had hypopharyngeal reconstruction, and the results were evaluated and compared with patients who had reconstruction without a collagen patch. A fistula occurred in 1 (6%) of 16 patients who received the collagen patch, whereas it occurred in 6 (14%) of 43 patients who underwent reconstruction without the collagen patch. In addition, the collagen patch was also used to treat postoperative fistula in 2 patients, and the results were successful after a single revision. Our results suggest that the collagen patch can be effective in the prevention and treatment of postoperative fistula after head and neck reconstruction, especially pharynx and cervical esophagus.

### PMID 20963698 (2010) — Turkish neurosurgery
TITLE: Radiological and histopathological comparison of microporous polysaccharide hemospheres and oxidized regenerated cellulose in the rabbit brain: a study of efficacy and safety.
DOI: 10.5137/1019-5149.JTN.3300-10.2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: Topical hemostatic agents are widely used in brain surgery but they have some disadvantages such as foreign body reaction, being a focus for infection and causing artifacts in radiological examinations. The purpose of this study is to compare the effectiveness and safety of microporous polysaccharide hemospheres (MPH) with a well known agent, oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC), histopathologically and radiologically.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Standard brain lesions (4x1mm) were created in 24 hemispheres in 12 New-Zealand rabbits. Animals were divided into three groups; control, ORC and MPH. Twenty-four hours later, all rabbits magnetic resonance brain imaging. After imaging, the animals were sacrificed and the brains were removed for histopathological analysis.
RESULTS: Histopathological analysis showed no significant difference between the groups. Radiological examination showed no significant difference between the MPH and ORC groups in terms of edema but the edema in control group was significantly prominent than MPH and ORC groups (p &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSION: A new agent (MPH) provides safe and effective hemostasis in the brain in this study. The most important advantage of microporous polysaccharide hemospheres is their rapid clearance from the surgical field and therefore having the potential of causing less imaging artifacts.

### PMID 20675248 (2010) — Cancer imaging : the official publication of the International Cancer Imaging Society
TITLE: CT appearances following laparoscopic partial nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma using a rolled cellulose bolster.
DOI: 10.1102/1470-7330.2010.0023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To describe the evolving computed tomography (CT) appearances of a cellulose surgical bolster used as a hemostatic agent in patients who undergo laparoscopic partial nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the follow-up CT studies of 33 patients with stage T1N0M0 renal carcinoma who underwent laparoscopic partial nephrectomy using a rolled, oxidized, regenerated cellulose sheet sutured in place as a bolster in the parenchymal defect. Thirteen patients undergoing laparoscopic partial nephrectomy without the use of a bolster were also evaluated to differentiate imaging features.
RESULTS: The bolster-related masses were significantly larger than those seen in the non-bolster patients. There was a decrease in size of the post-operative bolster-related mass with time. The bolster shape evolved with time, initially appearing oval, and becoming irregular with decreasing size. Equivocal increase in attenuation of 10-20 HU was seen in 6 patients. Increase in attenuation of greater than 20 HU was seen in 3 patients. There was no evidence of tumor recurrence in any of the patients. Invagination of fat was seen in two bolster-related masses at 18 months or greater.
CONCLUSIONS: Cellulose bolster has a variable appearance on follow-up CT exams. Evolutionary features include reduction in bolster size and shape with time leading finally to non-visualization. Bolster enhancement can mimic abscesses and tumor recurrence.

### PMID 20569542 (2010) — Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology Canada : JOGC = Journal d'obstetrique et gynecologie du Canada : JOGC
TITLE: Adhesion prevention in gynaecological surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/S1701-2163(16)34530-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Practice Guideline
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To review the etiology and incidence of and associative factors in the formation of adhesions following gynaecological surgery. To review evidence for the use of available means of adhesion prevention following gynaecological surgery.
OPTIONS: Women undergoing pelvic surgery are at risk of developing abdominal and/or pelvic adhesive disease postoperatively. Surgical technique and commercial adhesion prevention systems may decrease the risk of postoperative adhesion formation.
OUTCOMES: The outcomes measured are the incidence of postoperative adhesions, complications related to the formation of adhesions, and further intervention relative to adhesive disease.
EVIDENCE: Medline, EMBASE, and The Cochrane Library were searched for articles published in English from 1990 to March 2009, using appropriate controlled vocabulary and key words. Results were restricted to systematic reviews, randomized control trials/controlled clinical trials, cohort studies, and meta-analyses specifically addressing postoperative adhesions, adhesion prevention, and adhesive barriers. Searches were updated on a regular basis and incorporated in the guideline to March 2009. Grey (unpublished) literature was identified through searching the websites of health technology assessment and health technology assessment-related agencies, clinical practice guideline collections, clinical trial registries, and national and international medical specialty societies.
VALUES: The quality of evidence was rated using the criteria described in the Report of the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care SUMMARY STATEMENTS: 1. Meticulous surgical technique is a means of preventing adhesions. This includes minimizing tissue trauma, achieving optimal hemostasis, minimizing the risk of infection, and avoiding contaminants (e.g., fecal matter) and the use of foreign materials (e.g., talcum powder) when possible. (II-2). 2. The risk of adhesions increases with the total number of abdominal and pelvic surgeries performed on one patient; every surgery needs to be carefully considered in this context. (II-2). 3. Polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-Tex) barrier is more effective than no barrier or oxidized regenerated cellulose in preventing adhesion formation. (I). 4. Oxidized regenerated cellulose (Interceed) adhesion barrier is associated with a reduced incidence of pelvic adhesion formation at both laparoscopy and laparotomy when complete hemostasis is achieved. Oxidized regenerated cellulose may increase the risk of adhesions if optimal hemostasis is not achieved. (II-2). 5. Chemically modified sodium hyaluronate/carboxymethylcellulose (Seprafilm) is effective in preventing adhesion formation, especially following myomectomies. There is insufficient evidence on the effect of sodium hyaluronate/carboxymethylcellulose on long-term clinical outcomes such as fertility, chronic pelvic pain or small bowel obstruction. (II-2). 6. No adverse effects have been reported with the use of oxidized regenerated cellulose, polytetrafluoroethylene, or sodium hyaluronate/carboxymethylcellulose. (II-1). 7. Various pharmacological agents have been marketed as a means of preventing adhesions. None of these agents are presently available in Canada. There is insufficient evidence for the use of pharmacological agents in preventing adhesions. (III-C).
RECOMMENDATIONS: 1. Surgeons should attempt to perform surgical procedures using the least invasive method possible in order to decrease the risk of adhesion formation. (II-1B ). When feasible, for example, a laparoscopic surgical approach is preferable to an abdominal approach, and a vaginal or laparoscopic hysterectomy is preferable to an abdominal hysterectomy. 2. Precautions should be taken at surgery to minimize tissue trauma in order to decrease the risk of postoperative adhesions. These precautions include limiting packing, crushing, and manipulating of tissues to what is strictly required for safe completion of the procedure. (III-B). 3. Surgeons could consider using an adhesion barrier for patients who are at high risk of forming clinically significant adhesions (i.e., patients who have endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease or who are undergoing a myomectomy). If there is a risk of ongoing bleeding from the surgical site, oxidized regenerated cellulose (Interceed) should not be used as it may increase the risk of adhesions in this situation. (II-2B).

### PMID 20200643 (2010) — Texas Heart Institute journal
TITLE: Surgicel packing and an erroneous diagnosis of mediastinitis in a neonate.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Internal accumulation of the topical hemostatic agent Surgicel can mimic fluid collections that might be misdiagnosed as an abscess or a hematoma upon 3 common postoperative imaging methods. Herein, we report the unusual case of a neonate who underwent surgical repair of complex congenital heart conditions and then required early re-exploration, prompted by initial suspicion of mediastinitis on the basis of computed tomographic findings. During reoperation, it was determined that the mass on computed tomography was an accumulation of oxidized Surgicel. We discuss the capabilities and limitations of various imaging methods in the achievement of an accurate differential diagnosis.

### PMID 21106051 (2010) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Bone healing after median sternotomy: a comparison of two hemostatic devices.
DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-5-117 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Bone wax is traditionally used as part of surgical procedures to prevent bleeding from exposed spongy bone. It is an effective hemostatic device which creates a physical barrier. Unfortunately it interferes with subsequent bone healing and increases the risk of infection in experimental studies. Recently, a water-soluble, synthetic, hemostatic compound (Ostene&#xae;) was introduced to serve the same purpose as bone wax without hampering bone healing. This study aims to compare sternal healing after application of either bone wax or Ostene&#xae;.
METHODS: Twenty-four pigs were randomized into one of three treatment groups: Ostene&#xae;, bone wax or no hemostatic treatment (control). Each animal was subjected to midline sternotomy. Either Ostene&#xae; or bone wax was applied to the spongy bone surfaces until local hemostasis was ensured. The control group received no hemostatic treatment. The wound was left open for 60 min before closing to simulate conditions alike those of cardiac surgery. All sterni were harvested 6 weeks after intervention.Bone density and the area of the bone defect were determined with peripheral quantitative CT-scanning; bone healing was displayed with plain X-ray and chronic inflammation was histologically assessed.
RESULTS: Both CT-scanning and plain X-ray disclosed that bone healing was significantly impaired in the bone wax group (p &lt; 0.01) compared with the other two groups, and the former group had significantly more chronic inflammation (p &lt; 0.01) than the two latter.
CONCLUSION: Bone wax inhibits bone healing and induces chronic inflammation in a porcine model. Ostene&#xae; treated animals displayed bone healing characteristics and inflammatory reactions similar to those of the control group without application of a hemostatic agent.

### PMID 20360210 (2010) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Sustained release of vancomycin from a new biodegradable glue to prevent methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus graft infection.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2010.232447 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Prosthetic graft infection with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is one of the most serious complications of cardiovascular surgery. Seeking to prevent graft infection, we evaluated the efficacy of a new biodegradable hydrogel glue (new-glue) composed of aldehyded dextran and epsilon-poly(L-lysine) which acts as a local sustained-release carrier of vancomycin. Rats (n=40) were implanted with 1-cm(2) Dacron grafts in the subcutaneous pockets. Groups (n=10 each) were as follows: no treatment (group A), topical vancomycin solution (group B), new-glue without vancomycin (group C) or new-glue containing 1 mg of vancomycin (group D). Twenty-four h after the implantation, 2.0x10(7) colony-forming units of MRSA was inoculated onto the graft surface. Seven days thereafter, the graft was sampled and cultured. The quantity of MRSA was significantly lower in group D than in the other groups (P&lt;0.0001). About 95% of the total vancomycin was released from the new-glue over the 72 h experimental period, and the tissue concentration of vancomycin remained above the minimum inhibitory concentration for the MRSA strain throughout the experiment. This new vancomycin-containing glue effectively prevented prosthetic graft infection and thus may be a promising biodegradable drug vehicle.

### PMID 20150191 (2010) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Is skin closure with cyanoacrylate glue effective for the prevention of sternal wound infections?
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2009.230425 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: A best evidence topic in cardiac surgery was written according to a structured protocol. The question addressed whether cyanoacrylate glue was effective at preventing wound infection following sternotomy incision. Altogether more than 108 papers were found using the reported search, of which seven represented the best evidence to answer the clinical question. The authors, journal, date and country of publication, patient group studied, study type, relevant outcomes and results of these papers are tabulated. We conclude that applying cyanoacrylate glue to a sternal wound has superior outcomes in terms of infection rates, both if applied preoperatively (decreasing from 10.8% to 2.7% or 7.8% to 1.1%, according to two studies) and postoperatively (4.9%-2.1%). This trend is true of both deep surgical site infections (0.6%-0%) and superficial site infections (4.3%-2.1%). Furthermore, in patients who had developed mediastinitis following cardiac surgery rates of recurrent sternal detachment and osteomyelitis were significantly reduced in cases where sealant was applied compared to controls (35.3% vs. 0%). In all studies examining hospital stay, duration was reduced in cases where cyanoacrylate glue was used, both in patients treated for recurrent mediastinitis (24.06 vs. 14.16 days) and those with uncomplicated recovery following cardiac surgery (13 vs. 9 days). In addition, two studies examining the use of cyanoacrylate glue to secure the sternum in complicated cases of recurrent detachment report success rates of 86% and 100%.

### PMID 19646890 (2010) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: The laparoscopically harvested omental flap for deep sternal wound infection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2009.06.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To report our experience with the laparoscopically harvested omental flap in the treatment of deep sternal wound infection, and to present a modification and introduce two supportive techniques in the perioperative management.
METHODS: Between June 2005 and September 2007, six patients with grade IV (El Oakley-Wright classification) deep sternal wound infection following a median sternotomy for coronary artery bypass grafting underwent a reconstruction with a laparoscopically harvested omental flap. The median age of the cohort of six, consisting of one female and five males, was 67 years (range: 61-77 years). In five patients, an unilateral internal thoracic artery had been used. Considerable preoperative risk factors were present: one patient suffered from severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1)1L; two from moderate chronic obstructive airway disease, three from insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and three were on glucocorticoid steroid therapy preoperatively. Abdominal surgery had previously been performed in four patients. In all cases, the mediastinal wound was prepared with vacuum-assisted (&lt;or=125 mmHg) therapy following debridement and pulsed irrigation. White, small-pore foam was placed over the right ventricle when the risk of adhesion to the sternal remnants or secondary haemorrhage was a concern. In all cases, the position of the spread-out omental flap was maintained intrathoracically with autologous fibrin glue and in one case the split-skin graft covering the flap was also dealt with in this way. In the five other cases, the omental flap was covered by mobilising and advancing the local soft tissue and skin towards the midline. Portable sonography proved useful in monitoring the doubtful intrathoracic flap.
RESULTS: The 30-day perioperative mortality rate was zero, with a 2-year overall survival of 100%. One patient received a temporary colostomy due to a partial transverse colon necrosis. Follow-up ranged from 20 to 53 months (median: 39 months) for the group as a whole. Death occurred in one case 2.8 years after reconstruction due to reasons other than cardiac or mediastinal conditions.
CONCLUSION: The laparoscopically harvested omental flap can contribute to a successful outcome following deep sternal wound infection and deserves serious consideration in type IV mediastinitis in particular, regardless of the co-morbidity or previous abdominal surgery.

### PMID 19801731 (2009) — Georgian medical news
TITLE: Iatrogenic bronchopleural fistula occuring during redo cardiac surgery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cardiac re-operations are associated with increased morbidity and mortality rates due to adhesion of tissues in the anterior mediastinum. Especially, previous usage of left internal thoracic artery constitutes a major challenge for cardiovascular surgeons. In such cases, the left lung frequently adheres to the thoracic wall and may be injured during dissection. This leads to air leak and the complication may in turn increase the risk of mediastinal infections and the hospital stay. A bronchopleural fistula case treated by a novel technique is reported. In patient iatrogenic bronchopleural fistula occured during dissection of the adhesions which resulted due to the first coronary artery bypass grafting and left internal thoracic artery usage. The air leakage was successfully controlled and treated by a novel method: self adhesive BioGlue immersed and coated Surgicel patch. Although it is a single case experience it may be a promising method as it is less traumatic when compared to the classical treatment methods of bronchopleural fistula.

### PMID 19579199 (2009) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Less pain intensity after lichtenstein-repair by using BioGlue&#x2122; for mesh fixation.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D018848">Controlled Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A pre-trial was conducted to investigate the reliability of using the surgical adhesive, BioGlue&#x2122; (CryoLife&#xae;, Inc., Kennesaw, Georgia, USA) for mesh fixation in Lichtenstein repair of inguinal hernia. From February to August 2008, 60 patients with unilateral inguinal hernia underwent a Lichtenstein repair. In 30 of the patients, BioGlue&#x2122; was used for mesh fixation and in the other 30 cases a conventional suture was used. The patients were sorted into two groups (BioGlue&#x2122;-group and suture-group). No differences were noted in demographic characteristics. The main criteria for dropout were incarceration, relapse, operation, and/or scrotal hernia. Twenty-four hours postoperative, pain intensity was measured with a numeric analogous scale (NAS) that reached from 0 (no pain) to 10 (heavy pain). The pain intensity in the BioGlue&#x2122;-group was 2.4 points and 4.3 points in the suture-group. The cut-suture time was 30 minutes in the BioGlue&#x2122;-group and 56 minutes in the suture-group. In the first nine months, no relapses, no mesh infections, nor serom-formations were reported; however, one superficial wound infection did occur in the BioGlue&#x2122;-group. Lichtenstein-repair using BioGlue&#x2122; for mesh-fixation is a safe, new method without early recurrences and less pain-intensity in relation to suture-supported Lichtenstein repair.

### PMID 19217598 (2009) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Sealants after axillary lymph node dissection for breast cancer: good intentions but bad results.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2008.06.043 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study was conducted to evaluate the effect of 2 surgical sealants on postsurgical drainage and lymphocele formation after axillary surgery for breast cancer.
METHODS: This was a prospective, randomized study. Seventy-seven consecutive patients with breast cancer were included and randomized into a control group (18F vacuum drain) and 2 study groups (18F vacuum drain plus COSEAL or BioGlue).
RESULTS: The 3 groups were matched. Neither postsurgical drainage nor time to drain removal was affected by the use of either of the 2 sealants. Although no statistically significant difference in lymphocele formation and wound infection was noted, complications caused by intense foreign-body reaction that led to surgical intervention occurred in both study groups.
COMMENTS: The use of surgical sealants is not recommended after axillary lymph node dissection for breast cancer. Complications of their use may lead to reoperation.

### PMID 19482519 (2009) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: Complications associated with single-level transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2009.04.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: The transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) procedure has become an increasingly popular means of obtaining a circumferential fusion while avoiding the morbidity of the anterior approach. Concerns remain, however, regarding the clinical efficacy and safety of its use.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the complications of the single-level TLIF procedure. The difference in complications observed with the use of iliac crest autograft compared with rhBMP-2 will be assessed.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study; a review of complications.
METHODS: Patients who underwent a single-level TLIF between January 2004 to May 2007 with either autograft iliac crest or rhBMP-2 were identified. A retrospective review of these patients included operative reports, pre- and postoperative medical records, most recent postoperative dynamic and static lumbar radiographs, and computed tomography scans (when available).
RESULTS: A total of 130 patients met the study criteria; 119 patients were available for follow-up, with an average radiographic follow-up of 19.1 months and an average clinical follow-up of 27.6 months. Thirty-three patients received iliac crest autograft and 86 patients received rhBMP-2. Complications occurred in 40 of the 119 study patients (33.6%). The autograft group had a higher complication rate (45.5% vs. 29.1%), but the difference was not statistically significant (p=.09). Complications in the autograft group included persistent donor-site pain (30.3%), donor-site infection (3.1%), lumbar wound infection (6.1%), and postoperative radiculitis (3.0%). Complications in the rhBMP-2 group included postoperative radiculitis (14.0%), vertebral osteolysis (5.8%), ectopic bone formation (2.3%), and lumbar wound infection (3.5%). A hydrogel sealant (Duraseal; Confluent Surgical Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) was used in 37 out of 86 patients in the rhBMP-2 group. The use of this sealant decreased the rate of postoperative radiculitis in the rhBMP-2 group from 20.4% to 5.4% (p=.047). The radiographic nonunion rate at most recent follow-up was 3.0% in the autograft group and 3.5% (p=.90) in the rhBMP-2 group.
CONCLUSIONS: The most common complications in the autograft group were related to the donor site. The most common complication in the rhBMP-2 group was postoperative radiculitis, the incidence of which is reduced by the use of a hydrogel sealant.

### PMID 19027513 (2009) — American journal of otolaryngology
TITLE: A gelatin-thrombin matrix for hemostasis after endoscopic sinus surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2007.11.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Adequate hemostasis is necessary after endoscopic sinus surgery. This study evaluated the clinical performance of Surgiflo hemostatic matrix (Johnson&amp;Johnson Wound Management, a division of Ethicon Inc, Somerville, NJ) with Thrombin-JMI (distributed by Jones Pharma Inc, Bristol, VA, a wholly owned subsidiary of King Pharmaceuticals, Bristol, TN) in achieving hemostasis in patients undergoing endoscopic sinus surgery. Surgiflo hemostatic matrix is a sterile, absorbable porcine gelatin intended to aid with hemostasis when applied to a bleeding surface.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This multicenter, prospective, single-arm study evaluated the success in achieving hemostasis within 10 minutes of product application in patients undergoing elective primary or revision endoscopic sinus surgery for chronic sinusitis with a bleeding surface requiring hemostasis. Patient satisfaction and postoperative healing were also evaluated.
RESULTS: Thirty patients were enrolled, including 17 males and 13 females (average age, 48.2 +/- 15.1 years), with 54 operated sides. Twenty-nine patients achieved hemostasis within 10 minutes of product application (96.7% success rate; 1-sided 95% confidence interval, 85.1%-100%). The median total time to hemostasis including manual compression was 61 seconds. No complications, such as synechiae, adhesion, or infection, were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Surgiflo hemostatic matrix with Thrombin-JMI was clinically effective in controlling bleeding in 96.7% of patients. Further randomized controlled trials are indicated.

### PMID 19485784 (2009) — Surgical infections
TITLE: Microporous Polysaccharide Hemospheres do not enhance abdominal infection in a rat model compared with gelatin matrix.
DOI: 10.1089/sur.2007.033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Residual topical hemostatic material can serve as a nidus for infection or enhance infection in an already contaminated wound. A newly approved agent, Microporous Polysaccharide Hemospheres (MPH) (Arista AH), has rapid degradation properties, which may reduce the chance of surgical site infection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: With institutional approval, 170 Wister rats underwent standardized anesthesia and abdominal surgery. An Echerichia coli inoculum was added to the incision, and MPH, gelatin matrix, or no agent (control) was placed in the site. After 72 h, the animals were sacrificed, and colony-forming units (cfu)/g were counted in the harvested tissue.
RESULTS: Application of gelatin matrix resulted in more cfu/g of tissue and an 87% infection rate, with fewer cfu/g of tissue and a 14% and 24% infection rate in the control and MPH groups, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The use of MPH in this rat abdominal infection model did not enhance infection. Gelatin matrix was associated with a greater infection rate than MPH. The rapid degradation of MPH may account for these results, making it a good hemostat in the presence of infective sources.

### PMID 19280953 (2009) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Candida mediastinitis after double closure technique for repairing ventricular septal perforation].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 69-year-old man was referred to our hospital due to acute myocardial infarction. Systolic heart murmur was first noted on the 23rd day after the onset, but no cardiac shunt flow was detected by echocardiography at that time. Six days later, cardiac function deteriorated rapidly, followed by oliguria and shock. Re-do echocardiography showed ventricular septal perforation. Emergency operation was performed, and septal perforation was seen on the anterior portion of the septum. In addition to infarct-exclusion-technique (Komeda-David method) with the equine pericardial patch, direct closure of the septal defect was performed (double closure technique). Fibrin glue was applied between the ventricular septum and the patch. After surgery, he suffered from Candida mediastinitis and received omentum plombage. Furthermore tracheotomy was performed for pneumonia. He recovered gradually, and was discharged about 3 months after surgery. Echocardiography showed no residual shunt.

### PMID 19584041 (2009) — Acta veterinaria Hungarica
TITLE: Crosstalk between coagulation and inflammation in mastitis and metritis in dairy cows.
DOI: 10.1556/AVet.57.2009.2.9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Coagulation and inflammation are closely related as part of the mechanisms of host defence during a severe infection. The aim of this study was to investigate the relation between thrombin as a factor in both the coagulative and inflammatory processes and neutrophil secretory function on the basis of lactoferrin (LF), elastase and myeloperoxidase release in the course of mastitis and metritis in cows. Thrombin generation was measured on the basis of hydrolysis of SAR-PRO-ARG-pNA and lactoferrin concentration was estimated by an ELISA method. The greatest thrombin generation was observed in the metritis group (1.18 +/- 0.62 IU). The level of LF was the highest in the group of cows with mastitis (0.74 +/- 0.55 mg/ml) in the first phase of the disease. In the second phase of the diseases the level of serum LF in cows with mastitis diminished to the value of 0.41 +/- 0.16 mg/ml, whereas in cows with metritis the level of LF increased to 0.51 +/- 0.17 mg/ml. This study reveals that the excessive production of thrombin not only causes hypercoagulatory disorders but also exaggerates neutrophil function by the release of some enzymes which may play a destructive role during disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). These enzymes also inhibit anticoagulative systems, thus potentially worsening the course of the disease.

### PMID 19558279 (2009) — Pharmacotherapy
TITLE: Topical thrombins: benefits and risks.
DOI: 10.1592/phco.29.pt2.8S | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Whether from surgical misadventure, inherent patient factors, or iatrogenic causes, postoperative bleeding can be a consequence of any surgical procedure. There are many methods and products available to assist in managing or preventing bleeding. For each method, there may be specific benefits and indications, but they may also carry some degree of risk. Topical thrombin is used extensively in many surgical specialties, especially in the cardiovascular and neurosurgical arenas where other hemostatic modalities may not be appropriate choices. As a class, topical thrombins are generally a safe and effective method for achieving intraoperative hemostasis; however, some members of the class carry associated risks with their use. For example, the United States Food and Drug Administration required the addition of a black-box warning to the prescribing information of bovine-derived thrombin, the oldest member of the class, due to concerns of immune-mediated coagulopathies developing after use. In addition, human thrombin derived from pooled plasma has its own, if theoretical, risk of transmitting infections due to viral or prion agents. We address the topical thrombin class and review each product in the context of the current literature.

### PMID 18679572 (2008) — Techniques in coloproctology
TITLE: Obliteration of the fistulous tract with BioGlue adversely affects the outcome of transanal advancement flap repair.
DOI: 10.1007/s10151-008-0425-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Transanal advancement flap repair (TAFR) is useful in the treatment of high transsphincteric fistulas. Initially, promising results were reported. More recent studies have indicated that TAFR fails in one out of three patients. In almost all of our patients with a failure, we have observed healing of the flap except at the site of the original internal opening. A possible explanation for this remarkable finding might be persistent inflammation in the fistulous tract, finding a way out through the original internal opening. The question is whether obliteration of the fistulous tract by local installation at a surgical adhesive, can prevent persistent inflammation to break through the original opening. The aim of this pilot study was to investigate whether concomitant instillation of BioGlue could improve the healing rate following TAFR for high transsphincteric fistulas.
METHODS: Between March 2006 and April 2006 a consecutive series of eight patients (four men, four women; median age 46 years) with a high transsphincteric fistula underwent TAFR after instillation of BioGlue in the fistulous tract. All patients were seen in the outpatient department for postoperative evaluation.
RESULTS: Fistula healing was observed in only one patient (12.5%). All other patients experienced one or more of the following complications: prolonged severe pain (n=5), discharge of great amounts of purulent liquid from the external opening (n=3) and abscess formation (n=2), necessitating incision and drainage. Because of this unexpected outcome we decided to terminate the study prematurely.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that obliteration of the fistulous tract with BioGlue adversely affects the outcome of TAFR for high transsphincteric fistulas.

### PMID 18728598 (2008) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Polyethylene glycol hydrogel dural sealant may reduce incisional cerebrospinal fluid leak after posterior fossa surgery.
DOI: 10.1227/01.neu.0000335034.08274.d2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Incisional cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak remains a significant cause of morbidity, particularly after posterior fossa surgery, with ranges between 4 and 17% in most series. We aimed to determine whether the use of a new polyethylene glycol (PEG) dural sealant product (DuraSeal; Confluent Surgical, Waltham, MA) is effective at preventing incisional CSF leak after posterior fossa surgery.
METHODS: One hundred cases of posterior fossa surgery with the PEG dural sealant applied at the time of dural closure were prospectively observed from May 2005 to April 2006. All patients underwent posterior fossa craniotomy or craniectomy. Clinical histories were followed to document cases of incisional CSF leak, pseudomeningocele, meningitis, wound infection, and interventions required to treat a CSF leak or pseudomeningocele. A retrospective cohort of 100 patients treated in a similar fashion but with fibrin glue augmented dural closure served as controls.
RESULTS: In the PEG group, two of 100 (2%) patients developed an incisional CSF leak postoperatively. By comparison, 10 of 100 (10%) patients in whom fibrin glue was used developed an incisional CSF leak. This difference was statistically significant, with a P value of 0.03. There were no significant differences in the rates of pseudomeningocele, meningitis, or other postoperative interventions.
CONCLUSION: The application of PEG dural sealant to the closed dural edges may be effective at reducing incisional CSF leak after posterior fossa surgery.

### PMID 19561795 (2008) — P &amp; T : a peer-reviewed journal for formulary management
TITLE: Pharmaceutical approval update.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topics include bendamustine (Treanda) for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, hepatitis B immune globulin (HepaGam B) to prevent hepatitis B infection following liver transplantation, and a fibrin sealant (Artiss) used in skin graft surgery for burn patients.

### PMID 18981845 (2008) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Comparative safety and efficacy of topical hemostatic agents in a rat neurosurgical model.
DOI: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000327031.98098.DD | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Adequate hemostasis is extremely important in neurosurgery, commonly requiring the use of topical hemostatic agents. Apart from variable efficacy, the residual presence of these agents may cause foreign body reaction, infection, and delayed bone growth. This study compares the safety and efficacy of commonly used agents with a newly approved agent, Arista (microporous polysaccharide hemospheres; Medafor, Inc., Minneapolis, MN).
METHODS: A brain tissue defect was created in 228 Wistar outbred rats, and either no agent (negative control), Arista, Surgicel (oxidized cellulose; Ethicon, Inc., Somerville, NJ), Avitene (microfibrillar collagen; Alcon, Inc., Humacao, PR), FloSeal (gelatin matrix thrombin sealant; Baxter Healthcare Corp., Deerfield, IL), or kaolin (positive control) was implanted. Time to hemostasis was documented. The animals were sacrificed at different intervals up to 28 days, and presence of residual material and foreign body reaction was determined.
RESULTS: Arista, Avitene, FloSeal, and Surgicel performed better (defined as complete hemostasis within 1 minute) than control (no treatment). Residual material was not present at any time with Arista, markedly contrasting with the presence of residual material in 100% of lesions in the Avitene, FloSeal, and Surgicel groups on Day 14. Avitene and FloSeal also demonstrated a propensity for causing granuloma formation, whereas Arista and Surgicel showed no such evidence.
CONCLUSION: Each of these hemostatic agents was effective in controlling bleeding in the majority of standardized neurosurgical lesions. Arista degrades more rapidly than Surgicel, Avitene, and FloSeal and does not result in any foreign body reaction.

### PMID 17383592 (2007) — Translational research : the journal of laboratory and clinical medicine
TITLE: New method to prepare autologous fibrin glue on demand.
DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2006.08.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin-based sealants are commonly employed to arrest bleeding after surgery. Usually, fibrinogen obtained from pooled human plasma is used to prepare sealants, with attendant risk of blood-borne infections. Availability of autologous fibrinogen would eliminate this risk. To prepare autologous fibrin sealant, fibrinogen was precipitated from human plasma using protamine. Under optimal conditions (10-mg/mL protamine and 22 degrees C), 96 +/- 4% of clottable fibrinogen was recovered by a simple and inexpensive technique. Nearly 50% of the plasma factor XIII was also recovered with the fibrinogen. Using bovine thrombin, the fibrinogen was clotted (1) in a specially designed mold to measure tensile strength and (2) in a lap joint between 2 aortic vessel strips to measure adhesion strength. Tensile and adhesion strengths increased with increasing fibrinogen concentration, and they were increased by the addition of calcium chloride. The addition of aprotinin and -aminocaproic acid to the fibrinogen concentrate before clotting had no effect on the mechanical properties of the clots. After adding thrombin to sealant containing 15-mg/mL fibrinogen, maximum tensile strength was achieved in 1-5 min, and maximum adhesion strength was reached in 5-15 min. For the sealant with 30-60-mg/mL fibrinogen and added calcium, the tensile strength was equivalent to that of the commercial fibrin sealant Tisseel. The adhesion strength of sealant with 30-60-mg/mL fibrinogen exceeded the adhesive strength of Tisseel under identical conditions. Autologous fibrin sealant is an attractive alternative to commercial sealants. It can be readily prepared from 5-mL plasma or more and exhibits mechanical properties equivalent to those of the leading commercial sealant.

### PMID 17564938 (2007) — Strabismus
TITLE: Sutureless closure of the conjunctiva with a commercial fibrin sealant in extraocular muscle surgery for strabismus.
DOI: 10.1080/09273970701405321 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Suturing is a time-consuming process and patients may suffer from sutures because of discomfort and tearing. This prospective study was done to determine the efficacy of an available commercial fibrin sealant for conjunctival wound closure following extraocular muscle surgery for strabismus.
METHODS: Fibrin sealant (Beriplast) was used in 48 conjunctival wounds of 25 patients with strabismus during the period February 2004 to May 2005. There were 12 males and 13 females, whose mean age was 9.3 years.
RESULTS: No allergic reactions, chemosis or infections were seen, but suturing was necessary a day after surgery in 3 wounds of 2 cases (3/48 eyes, 6%). All conjunctival wounds were healed at the end of the second week.
CONCLUSION: The use of Beriplast for conjunctival wound closure is an effective method that is easy to apply and should be considered a solution in strabismus surgical practice.

### PMID 17629041 (2007) — Hepato-gastroenterology
TITLE: Fibrin glue treatment for simple and complex anal fistulas.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND/AIMS: Surgical management of anal fistulas is associated with considerable morbidity, mainly related to anal sphincter injury. However, treatment with fibrin glue is a safe and simple method associated with less discomfort and complications. A prospective trial was conducted at our institute to evaluate the use of fibrin glue (Tissucol, Baxter, The Netherlands) for simple and complex anal fistulas.
METHODOLOGY: From November 2001 until March 2004, 34 patients (22 male, 12 female, median age 40 years) were treated with Tissucol. Twenty-three (67%) fistulas were classified as simple (subcutaneous, intersphincteric and transsphincteric) and 11 (33%) as complex (suprasphincteric, extrasphincteric and/or associated with Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis or HIV).
RESULTS: Twenty-six patients were treated once, 5 patients were treated twice, 2 patients were treated 3 times and 1 patient underwent 4 Tissucol treatments. After a median follow-up of 7 months, 13 of 23 simple fistulas (56%) and 6 out of 11 complex fistulas (54%) healed, accounting for an overall closure rate of 55%. Complications occurred in two patients, who both developed a perineal abscess after glue instillation.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin glue treatment is safe and effective in 55% of the patients with anal fistulas. It is a good alternative to conventional surgery.

### PMID 18076607 (2007) — Dermatologic surgery : official publication for American Society for Dermatologic Surgery [et al.]
TITLE: Hydrophilic polymers with potassium salt and microporous polysaccharides for use as hemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-4725.2007.33312.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative bleeding can lead to complications such as hematoma, infection, dehiscence, and an unscheduled office visit. Topical hemostatic agents can be used to aid in hemostasis.
OBJECTIVE: The objective is to familiarize physicians with topical hemostatic agents--hydrophilic polymers with potassium salts (Urgent QR powder) and microporous polysaccharide hemispheres (Bleed-X).
METHODS: Two hemostatic agents, microporous polysaccharide hemospheres and hydrophilic polymers with potassium salt, are discussed. The literature is reviewed.
RESULTS: Numerous types of hemostatic agents exist. Topical hemostatic agents are safe, cost-effective, and efficient.
CONCLUSION: Microporous polysaccharide hemospheres and hydrophilic polymers with potassium salts can be an adjunct to hemostasis after cautery and ligation. Patients can apply hemostatic agents if they experience any bleeding leading to decreased office visits. Hemostatic agents used intraoperatively shorten bleeding time and enable the physician to use less cautery. Using hemostatic agents can lead to fewer hematomas, infections, and office visits.

### PMID 16614968 (2006) — Digestive diseases and sciences
TITLE: Experimental study evaluating the effect of a barrier method on postoperative intraabdominal adhesions.
DOI: 10.1007/s10620-006-3171-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The purpose of this animal study was to determine if tissue glue-coated collagen sponge is an effective barrier method to prevent localized adhesions in a modified rabbit sidewall model. Rabbits were divided into two groups and underwent laparotomy with subsequent creation of a cecal wound according to the rabbit sidewall model. Rabbits of group I (treatment group; n = 10) were treated with a TachoComb H patch placed on the defect, whereas group II animals (control group; n = 6) did not receive further treatment. All animals were sacrificed 2 weeks postoperatively and adhesions were evaluated using special adhesion score. A further six rabbits underwent TachoComb H application at the cecum to investigate the histological changes during a course of 12 weeks. The average adhesion scores were significantly (P &lt; 0.05) reduced in the treatment group compared to the controls. Histologically the TachoComb H patch was surrounded by granulation tissue without signs of infection. Tissue glue-coated collagen sponge (TachoComb H) is effective to prevent localized intraabdominal adhesions in the modified rabbit sidewall model.

### PMID 17049141 (2006) — Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)
TITLE: Cost-effectiveness of cell salvage and alternative methods of minimising perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion: a systematic review and economic model.
DOI: 10.3310/hta10440 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To compare patient outcomes, resource use and costs to the NHS and NHS Blood Transfusion Authority (BTA) associated with cell salvage and alternative methods of minimising perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic databases covering the period 1996-2004 for systematic reviews and 1994-2004 for economic evidence.
REVIEW METHODS: Existing systematic reviews were updated with data from selected randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that involved adults scheduled for elective non-urgent surgery. Any resource use or cost data were extracted for potential use in populating an economic model. Relative risks or weighted mean difference of each outcome for each intervention were assessed, taking into account the number of RCTs included in each outcome and intervention and the presence of any heterogeneity. This allowed indirect comparison of the relative effectiveness of each intervention when the intervention is compared with allogeneic blood transfusion. A decision analytic model synthesised clinical and economic data from several sources, to estimate the relative cost-effectiveness of cell salvage for people undergoing elective surgery with moderate to major expected blood loss. The perspective of the NHS and patients and a time horizon of 1 month were used. The economic model was developed from reviews of effectiveness and cost-effectiveness and clinical experts. Secondary analysis explored the robustness of the results to changes in the timing and costs of cell salvage equipment, surgical procedure, use of transfusion protocols and time horizon of analysis.
RESULTS: Overall, 668 studies were identified electronically for the update of the two systematic reviews. This included five RCTs, of which two were cell salvage and three preoperative autologous donation (PAD). Five published systematic reviews were identified for antifibrinolytics, fibrin sealants and restrictive transfusion triggers, PAD plus erythropoietin, erythropoietin alone and acute normovolaemic haemodilution (ANH). Twelve published studies reported full economic evaluations. All but two of the transfusion strategies significantly reduced exposure to allogeneic blood. The relative risk of exposure to allogeneic blood was 0.59 for the pooled trials of cell salvage (95% confidence interval: 0.48 to 0.73). This varied by the type and timing of cell salvage and type of surgical procedure. For cell salvage, the relative risk of allogeneic blood transfusion was higher in cardiac surgery than in orthopaedic surgery. Cell salvage had lower costs and slightly higher quality-adjusted life years compared with all of the alternative transfusion strategies except ANH. The likelihood that cell salvage is cost-effective compared with strategies other than ANH is over 50%. Most of the secondary analyses indicated similar results to the primary analysis. However, the primary and secondary analyses indicated that ANH may be more cost-effective than cell salvage.
CONCLUSIONS: The available evidence indicates that cell salvage may be a cost-effective method to reduce exposure to allogeneic blood transfusion. However, ANH may be more cost-effective than cell salvage. The results of this analysis are subject to the low quality and reliability of the data used and the use of indirect comparisons. This may affect the reliability and robustness of the clinical and economic results. There is a need for further research that includes adequately powered high-quality RCTs to compare directly various blood transfusion strategies. These should include measures of health status, health-related quality of life and patient preferences for alternative transfusion strategies. Observational and tracking studies are needed to estimate reliably the incidence of adverse events and infections transmitted during blood transfusion and to identify the lifetime consequences of the serious hazards of transfusion on mortality, health status and health-related quality of life.

### PMID 16448914 (2006) — Oral surgery, oral medicine, oral pathology, oral radiology, and endodontics
TITLE: The use of autologous fibrin glue for closing sinus membrane perforations during sinus lifts.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tripleo.2005.04.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Sinus lift procedures depend greatly on fragile structures and anatomical variations. These procedures may cause sinus membrane perforations, which can lead to graft infection and early failure. The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of autologous fibrin glue in the management of large perforations of the maxillary sinus membrane occurring during sinus lifts. After elevating the sinus membrane in the bilateral maxillary sinuses of 6 adult female mongrel dogs, a laceration (about 2.0 cm in length) was made in the membrane and either repaired with autologous fibrin glue or covered with a bioabsorbable collagen membrane as a control. Wounded areas were biopsied 2 weeks after the operation. Wounds repaired with autologous fibrin glue showed newly formed continuous epithelium across the previous perforation site. However, extensive fibrosis, inflammatory infiltration, and absent epithelium were observed in wounds treated with the collagen membrane control. Our results support the clinical use of autologous fibrin glue for repairing sinus membrane perforations.

### PMID 16025372 (2005) — Heart and vessels
TITLE: Chronic contained rupture of the descending thoracic aorta due to infection by Escherichia coli.
DOI: 10.1007/s00380-004-0815-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 71-year-old man presented with hemoptysis due to chronic contained rupture of the descending thoracic aorta after sepsis by Escherichia coli complicated with transrectal biopsy of the prostate, and underwent urgent graft replacement. The aorta had an almost normal caliber and ruptured into the left lung without abscess. The perforated site of the lung was filled with gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde glue, and the defect of the aortic wall was closed. Without graft infection, lung abscess, or sepsis, the patient was discharged followed by 1 month's intravenous administration of cefazolin and piperacillin sensitive to Escherichia coli after the surgery.

### PMID 16202059 (2005) — Transfusion medicine (Oxford, England)
TITLE: Bacteriological study of autologous cryoprecipitate-derived fibrin glue as the operative sealant.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3148.2005.00604.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue (FG) is frequently used to seal and cover the anastomoses in many operations such as cardiovascular surgery or orthopaedic surgery. However, in case of gastrointestinal surgery, anastomoses are potentially contaminated, and FG may promote bacterial growth, increasing the risk of leakage. The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of cryoprecipitate-derived FG (CryoFG) on bacterial growth. Bacterial growth on the CryoFG and on the commercial FG (Beriplast P) was evaluated and compared with that on control medium. In addition, the complement activities were evaluated by heat inactivation or addition of guinea-pig complement to the experimental settings. The CryoFG inhibited the growth of Escherichia coli, whereas the commercial FG had no effect. Heat inactivation of the CryoFG inhibited the bactericidal effect of CryoFG. Addition of guinea-pig complement to the heat-inactivated CryoFG could almost restore the bactericidal activity, suggesting the important role of complement. This study showed that the CryoFG preserved the complement activity, which inhibited the in vitro growth of E. coli. Therefore, we concluded that the application of the CryoFG for gastrointestinal surgical anastomoses not only would be safe but also has the advantage of reducing bacterial infection.

### PMID 16305845 (2005) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Reconstitution of blood supply of the denuded bronchial stump.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2005.05.104 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Our aim was to study the process of microcirculatory reconstitution in the bronchial stump after pneumonectomy.
METHODS: Eighteen juvenile pigs (median weight 40.6 kg) were randomly assigned to three groups. In all animals left pneumonectomy was performed and the stapled bronchial stump (median length 3.8 cm) carefully denuded. Group I animals received coverage of the stump by intercostal flap. In group II, the stump was covered with TachoComb, an impermeable hemostatic fleece; and group III served as a control without any coverage of the stump. Animals were sacrificed at day 14 after surgery. Vascular density was evaluated in serial histologic sections at multiple levels stained with CD-31 antibody. One-way analysis of variance and the Wilcoxon test were used for data analysis.
RESULTS: At autopsy, stumps of group III animals were totally covered by adjacent mediastinal structures. In group I, intercostal flaps were viable and completely healed to the bronchial stumps. There were no signs of infection or stump insufficiency in these groups. In all group II animals, empyema developed, and stumps were found necrotic at macroscopic and histologic evaluation. Statistical analysis revealed significantly lower vascular density of mature vessels in the area of the bronchial stump in group II compared with both other groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Reconstitution of microcirculation of the denuded bronchial stump after pneumonectomy takes place in a centripetal way from adjacent viable tissue. Hence, the purpose of covering the bronchial stump is the improvement of blood supply rather than mechanical reinforcement.

### PMID 16136287 (2005) — World journal of surgery
TITLE: Randomized trial comparing Quixil surgical sealant with Kaltostat hemostatic dressing to control suture line bleeding after carotid endarterectomy with ePTFE patch reconstruction.
DOI: 10.1007/s00268-005-7863-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Following carotid endarterectomy (CEA), patch angioplasty provides a significant reduction in the risk of perioperative complications. The expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) patch is strong, is resistant to infection, and has low thrombogenicity; but it remains unpopular because of its tendency of prolonged bleeding at the suture line. We aimed to investigate whether the application of Quixil sealant to the suture line could improve the time to achieve hemostasis and reduce local blood loss when compared to a standard topical hemostat Kaltostat. A prospective, randomized trial of 20 patients undergoing CEA was undertaken. Patients were randomized to receive either Quixil sealant (treatment group) or topical Kaltostat (controls) as a hemostatic agent to the patch suture line. Hemostasis was defined as no bleeding at the suture line for 1 minute. Statistical analysis was performed using the Mann-Whitney test. The two groups had a similar age and sex distribution. The mean age was 71 years, and there were seven men and three women in each group. The time to achieve hemostasis was significantly lower in the Quixil group (median 2.5 minutes, range 1-4 minutes) compared to the controls (median 17 minutes, range 7-59 minutes) (p &lt; 0.001). Blood loss after clamp release was also significantly reduced in the Quixil group; median 24.5 ml (range 5.5-105.0 ml) versus 203 ml (range 54.5-817.0 ml) (p &lt; 0.001). This study has demonstrated that Quixil human surgical sealant is an effective sealant of ePTFE patch suture holes and does not compromise the patch repair. It could be used during other vascular procedures involving ePTFE.

### PMID 16111949 (2005) — Gastrointestinal endoscopy
TITLE: Endoscopic debridement of paraesophageal, mediastinal abscesses: a prospective case series.
DOI: 10.1016/j.gie.2005.03.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Mediastinal abscesses after esophageal perforation or postoperative leakage nearly always require surgical intervention.
METHODS: Patients with paraesophageal abscesses were treated with EUS-guided or endoscopic mediastinal puncture if the abscess was &gt;2 cm and sepsis was present. Abscess cavities were entered with a 9.5-mm endoscope after balloon dilation to allow irrigation and drainage. Debris was removed with a Dormia basket. Concomitant pleural effusions were treated with transthoracic drains. Patients received intravenous antibiotics and enteral/parenteral nutrition.
RESULTS: Twenty patients fulfilled the entry criteria. Simple drainage was sufficient in 4 cases, and puncture was impossible in one case. Of the 15 treated patients (age 39-76 years, 5 women) the etiology of perforation was Boerhaave's syndrome (n = 8), anastomotic leak (n = 3), and iatrogenic perforation (n = 4). Debridement was successful in all cases and required a median of 5 daily sessions (range 3-10). All patients became apyrexial, with a C-reactive protein &lt; 5 mg/L within a median of 4 days (range 2-8 days). Esophageal defects were closed with endoclips (n = 7), fibrin glue (n = 4), metal stents (n = 1), or spontaneously healed (n = 3). One patient died from a massive pulmonary embolism one day after successful debridement (mortality 7%). No other complications were seen. Median follow-up was 12 months (range 3-40 months).
CONCLUSIONS: Nonoperative endoscopic transesophageal debridement of mediastinal abscesses appears safe and effective.

### PMID 15054667 (2004) — Der Ophthalmologe : Zeitschrift der Deutschen Ophthalmologischen Gesellschaft
TITLE: [Fibrin glue for closing conjunctival wounds in ophthalmic surgery].
DOI: 10.1007/s00347-004-1015-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tissue adhesives offer the attractive prospect of sutureless surgery and provide a mechanism for repairing potentially difficult surgical wounds. We examined the ability of fibrin glue--instead of sutures--to close conjunctival wounds at the end of different ophthalmic surgeries.
METHODS AND PATIENTS: Between 2002 and 2003 the fibrin glue Beriplast was used in our department to close the conjunctival wound in 100 eye muscle surgeries, 10 scleral buckling procedures in retinal detachment, and 20 pars plana vitrectomies.
RESULTS: No patient showed postoperative adverse or allergic reactions, bacterial infections, inflammation, or delayed healing. The healing process of the conjunctiva takes a similar time course as in suture closure, but without disturbing suture ends and knots. In children with extensive Tenon's fascia, adaptation of the conjunctiva is safer using sutures. The necessary time using fibrin glue is reduced to one-fourth of the usual 4-8 min necessary for suturing the conjunctiva. The costs for fibrin glue are the same as for Vicryl 9/0, i.e., approximately 18-20 Euros per patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin glue for closing conjunctival wounds results in good adaptation, is time saving, effective, and not more expensive than a suture with a high-end needle. Especially the thin atrophic conjunctiva in adults will tear using sutures in contrast to the very fast and effective adaptation with fibrin glue. Application of fibrin glue is limited in children with extensive Tenon's fascia: in these patients a suture is superior for good adaptation of the conjunctiva.

### PMID 15622380 (2004) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Combined endovascular stent grafting and endoscopic injection of fibrin sealant for aortoenteric fistula complicating esophagectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2004.08.044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 67-year-old man with previous total gastrectomy and roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy had hematemesis 4 weeks after esophagectomy performed because of carcinoma of the esophagus. Investigation showed an aortojejunal fistula with a thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm. Endovascular stent grafting of the pseudoaneurysm, followed by endoscopic injection of fibrin sealant for the fistula, was performed, and the infection was controlled with broad-spectrum antibiotic agents together with drainage and daily irrigation of the pseudoaneurysm sac. The fistula subsequently healed. The patient remained well 14 months after the procedure; follow-up computed tomograms at 12 months did not show any pseudoaneurysm, and there was no evidence of reopening of the fistula.

### PMID 14759427 (2004) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Application of biological glue in repair of intracardiac structural defects.
DOI: 10.1016/S0003-4975(03)01533-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: BioGlue (Cryolife Inc, Kennesaw GA) was introduced as an alternative tissue sealant. Its most common application has been in repairs of acute dissections of the aorta. There is no reported experience with its use in the repair of intracardiac structural defects.
METHODS: In 5 patients BioGlue was used as an adjunct in repairs of complex intracardiac structural defects. It was used during patch repair of posterior mitral annular defects in 2 patients and aortic annular defect in 1 patient in the presence of active endocarditis. It was also used in 1 patient with a chronic atrioventricular groove pseudoaneurysm following mitral valve replacement, and in 1 patient during repair of a postinfarction posterior ventricular septal rupture.
RESULTS: There were no hospital or late deaths. Immediate intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography and late follow-up echocardiography documented complete and durable repair of all defects without recurrence. At follow-up all patients are in New York Heart Association class I-II, 6 to 29 months postoperatively. No patient has suffered late complications or exhibited signs of glue embolization.
CONCLUSIONS: BioGlue was found to be an effective adjuvant to the standard techniques used for the repair of intracardiac structural defects of various etiologies. Long-term follow-up is recommended to determine its long-term safety in this application.

### PMID 15160303 (2004) — Journal of infection and chemotherapy : official journal of the Japan Society of Chemotherapy
TITLE: Subcutaneous tissue release of amikacin from a fibrin glue/polyurethane graft.
DOI: 10.1007/s10156-004-0304-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We investigated whether fibrin glue (FG) might be useful as a carrier of amikacin (AMK) for prevention of local graft infection. After AMK (4.0 mg)-treated FG (AMK-FG) polyurethane grafts were implanted subcutaneously in the anterior abdominal region of Sprague-Dawley rats, AMK concentrations in tissues surrounding the implantation sites were compared over time with concentrations at the same sites in rats given an intravenous injection of AMK (4.0 mg). In the injection group, AMK concentrations in serum were detectable only for 4 h, whereas AMK released from AMK-FG grafts remained detectable over 24 h. Until 4 h after implantation, AMK concentrations in tissues near implantation sites were significantly higher in the AMK-FG graft group than in the injection group; peak local concentrations during that time were 210 times higher for the AMK-FG graft group than for the injection group. Areas under the tissue concentration-time curve (AUC) for AMK were 171 microg x h/g and 1.35 microg x h/g in the AMK-FG graft and injection groups, respectively. FG therefore was considered to control release of AMK and to maintain a high AMK concentration in tissues surrounding the implantation site. Thus, AMK-FG polyurethane graft delivery may be useful in preventing local infection by local delivery of AMK.

### PMID 12931590 (2003) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Prosthetic valve endocarditis after aortic valve replacement with freestyle stentless xenograft].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 52-year-old man underwent aortic valve replacement with freestyle stentless xenograft, using subcoronary technique for active infective endocarditis in June, 2001. Eighteen month later he had late prosthetic valve endocarditis associated with aortic annular abscess due to Staphylococcus epidermidis infection. The abscess was debrided and gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue (GRF glue) was injected into the abscess cavity. Abscess cavity was closed with continuous running suture of 3-0 polypropylene stitches. Finally the aortic valve was replaced with ATS mechanical valve (20 mmAP). After administration of vancomycin and gentamicin for 4 weeks, he discharged on 57th postoperative day in good condition. We strongly suggest that GRF glue is essential to close the aortic annular abscess of combined with aortic regurgitation due to active infective endocarditis.

### PMID 12723585 (2003) — The Japanese journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official publication of the Japanese Association for Thoracic Surgery = Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai zasshi
TITLE: Successful aortic valve replacement for severe aortic regurgitation combined with annular abscess due to active infected endocarditis: usefulness of gelatine-resorcine-formol biological glue in remodeling the new aortic annulus.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-003-0051-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Two men, 58 and 72 years old, were diagnosed as severe aortic regurgitation complicated by aortic annular abscess due to active endocarditis infection diagnosed by echocardiography. We conducted aortic valve replacement using gelatine-resorcine-formol biological glue to close the abscess cavity and remodel the new aortic annulus. Although 1 man developed complete atrial-ventral blockage postoperatively and required that a permanent pacemaker be implanted, neither experienced recurrence of infectious peri-valvular leakage.

### PMID 11899170 (2002) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Acute type A dissection: conservative methods provide consistently low mortality.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(01)03449-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A wide spectrum of operative techniques are applied in acute type A dissection. Most convey hospital mortality between 10% and 20%. In this high-risk setting, we believe that a conservative approach to the aortic root and the complete resection of the primary tear are important. We reviewed the results of this policy from our aortic surgery database.
METHODS: Between 1988 and December 2000, 95 acute type A dissection patients were operated on by one surgeon. They included 70 men and 25 women aged 37 to 81 years (mean 65 years). Six had Marfan syndrome. Aortic root restoration or replacement was performed during cooling, open arch repair during circulatory arrest, and hemostasis while rewarming. Eighty-seven patients had ascending aortic replacement with glue resuspension of the valve. Two others had had aortic valve replacement previously. Aortic root and partial arch replacement was performed in 6 Marfan patients. Eighteen patients had hemiarch replacement, and 6 had total arch replacement to excise the tear.
RESULTS: Five patients died in hospital (5.3% 30-day mortality) and another after early readmission for mediastinal infection (6.3% total mortality). There were no deaths from bleeding. Two patients required aortic valve replacement for aortic regurgitation 2.5 and 3.0 years postoperatively. Two others required total arch replacement and thromboexclusion procedures, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our policy of primary tear excision and preservation of the native aortic valve has resulted in low overall mortality. We still prefer to replace the aortic root in dissected Marfan patients. In this high-risk condition, hospital survival is of paramount importance. A conservative "pathology-oriented" approach helps to achieve this aim.

### PMID 11956939 (2002) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: A clinical study of a fibrinogen-based collagen fleece for dural repair in neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s007010200034 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: There is frequently a need for dural grafts to cover defects resulting from retraction, shrinkage, or excision following neurosurgical procedures. Many substances have been tried as possible dural substitution, and different tissues and materials have been evaluated for use in dural repair.
METHOD: The authors performed a retrospective review of 288 consecutive neurosurgical procedures using a fibrinogen based collagen fleece (TachoComb), a resorbable mesh of collagen from horse tendons, coated with human fibrinogen, bovine thrombin, bovine aprotinin and riboflavin (for marking the coated side), for dural substitution. The fibrinogen and thrombin imitate the last step of the coagulation cascade. On contact with bleeding wounds or other body fluids the coagulation factors dissolve and a link is formed between the collagen carrier and the wound surface. Thrombin converts fibrinogen into fibrin by splitting off peptides. Aprotinin prevents premature lysis of the fibrin clot by plasmin.
FINDINGS: Neither superficial or deep wound infections nor aseptic meningitis were noted. We found good fibrous incorporation of TachoComb into the surrounding normal dura. Postoperative cerebrospinal-fluid (CSF) leaks developed in only five cases, who had to be re-operated, upon as well as one patient with a rebleeding. In another four cases, there was notable subcutaneous cerebrospinal-fluid accumulation without CSF-leak. They required a lumbar cerebrospinal-fluid drainage.
INTERPRETATION: We conclude that TachoComb is a valuable alternative to the patients fibrous tissues for dural repair in cases in which autogenous tissues are either unavailable or insufficient for proper reconstruction.

### PMID 11802136 (2002) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Technical details with the use of cryopreserved arterial allografts for aortic infection: influence on early and midterm mortality.
DOI: 10.1067/mva.2002.118818 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: In situ repair with cryopreserved vascular allografts improves the results in the surgical treatment of aortic infection. This study evaluated the technical pitfalls with the use of allografts that influence early and midterm mortality.
METHODS: Between 1990 and 1999, 49 patients, 21 (43%) with a mycotic aneurysm and 28 (57%) with a prosthetic graft infection of the thoracic and abdominal aorta including pelvic and groin vessels, underwent in situ repair with cryopreserved arterial allografts. Seventeen patients (35%) had aortobronchial, aortoesophageal, or aortoenteric fistulas.
RESULTS: Allograft-related technical problems occurred in eight patients (16%) in this series, and they included: intraoperative rupture caused by allograft friability; allograftenteric fistula from ligated allograft side branches rupturing 8, 18, and 48 months after implantation; anastomotic failure caused by inappropriate mechanical stress; anastomotic stricture after partial replacement of infected prosthetic grafts; allograft failure caused by inappropriate wound drainage; and recurrence of infection after inappropriate duration of antifungal treatment. Seven of the eight technical problems (87%) occurred in the first 10 patients (80%) in this series. There was one technical failure in the remaining 39 patients (2.6%; P =.0002) because of various technical adaptations, such as critical selection of allografts, use of allograft strips supporting large anastomoses, sealing with antibiotic-impregnated fibrin glue, and change in technique of allograft side-branch ligature. The 30-day mortality rate was 6% for the whole series; however, it was 2.6% for last 39 patients, with no recurrence of infection or allograft-related late death.
CONCLUSIONS: In situ repair with cryopreserved arterial allografts achieves excellent early and late results in the treatment of aortic infection. However, distinct allograft-related technical problems had to be overcome to improve the outcome of patients with major vascular infections.

### PMID 28561614 (2002) — Minimally invasive therapy &amp; allied technologies : MITAT : official journal of the Society for Minimally Invasive Therapy
TITLE: Early endoscopic management of anastomotic leakage of esophageal atresia.
DOI: 10.1080/13645706.2003.11873733 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anastomotic leaks (AL) of esophageal atresia (EA) close spontaneously with tube drainage and nutritional support, but this conservative management carries some risk factors. The present study describes an alternative endoscopic approach in evaluation and management. The endoscopic procedure, including esophagoscopy, catheterization of leakage point, and application of fibrin glue (FG) has been evaluated. It was applied seven times to four patients. The diagnostic criteria, the technique and the results are discussed. It has been determined that early endoscopic demonstration of AL in EA and application of FG prevent the possible complications of the conservative management, such as mediastinitis and lung collapse with pneumothorax due to ineffective chest drain, and side effects of parenteral nutrition and antibiotics. If a quickly solidified FG in a proper amount &#xab;0,5 ml) is used in an early phase with a correct positioning of the AL by radiological or endoscopic examination, a satisfactory result can be obtained.

### PMID 12204761 (2002) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: A foreign body reaction to Surgicel mimicking an abscess following cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(02)00328-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Comment, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 11292934 (2001) — The Journal of cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Repair of aortic root abscess cavity with Gelatin-Resorcin-Formol biological glue.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case of infective endocarditis in which Gelatin-Resorcin-Formol biological glue enabled safe and effective aortic root repair to be performed in a 57-year-old man with infective endocarditis and subsequent aortic valve insufficiency.

### PMID 11935684 (2001) — Neurologia i neurochirurgia polska
TITLE: [The application and evaluation of TachoComb in repair of lacerations of dural sac].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The opening of dural sac (deliberate or accidental) during operation of the spine should be watertightly closed because of the risk of cerebro-spinal fluid leakage and infectious complications. Suturing the dural sac is sometimes difficult and time-consuming in cases of dural sac lacerations in a narrow confined space or in the proximity of radices. This occurs particularly in the case of reoperation in presence of scar involving the dural sac, that increases the risk of laceration. The aim of this paper is to asses the usefulness of a new sealing and haemostatic material--TachoComb in a watertight closure of the dural sac during spinal operation. We compared the frequency of complications related to closing of the dural sac in patients operated before and after introduction of TachoComb. The results indicate that the rate of liquorrhoea and infections is lower in the postoperative period with addition of TachoComb. Addition of TachoComb allows to shorten the time of operation, while its application is relatively easy.

### PMID 11824673 (2001) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: A novel synthetic sealant to treat air leaks at cardiac reoperation.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2001.tb00517.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Pulmonary injury with resultant air leak is common at cardiac reoperation. Sequelae of this complication include prolonged chest tube drainage and time to ambulation, extended hospitalization and increased costs, and mediastinitis. The purpose of this study was to test the efficacy of a new synthetic absorbable sealant at treatment air leaks occurring at cardiac reoperation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifteen patients having cardiac reoperation had lung injuries repaired with FocalSeal-L Sealant (Focal, Inc., Lexington, MA). Mean age was 61+/-15 years, and mean interval from the previous to the current operation was 44+/-38 months.
RESULTS: In all patients, FocalSeal-L Sealant was successful at sealing intraoperative air leaks. Postoperatively, 73% of patients had no air leak. Four patients (27%) developed a recurrent air leak, three on postoperative day 1 and one on postoperative day 2. In three of these patients, the air leak sealed within 3 days. In the fourth patient, an immunosuppressed heart transplant recipient with mediastinitis, the air leak never sealed; that patient died of sepsis after an omental flap failed to control the air leak. In patients without air leak, chest tubes were removed on postoperative day 1 (9 patients) or 2 (1 patient).
CONCLUSION: This novel synthetic sealant prevents postoperative air leaks in the majority of patients suffering lung injury at cardiac reoperation.

### PMID 11552427 (2001) — Laryngo- rhino- otologie
TITLE: [Comparison of 2 endoscopic surgery techniques for reliable therapy of Zenker diverticulum].
DOI: 10.1055/s-2001-16432 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A mediastinitis or intraoperative bleeding are the most feared complications of the transoral laser assisted diverticulotomy of Zenker's diverticulum. To reduce these complications we developed a new endoscopic surgical technique and compared the results of this new method with the results of patients who we treated earlier.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: At the department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Luebeck 68 patients suffering from a hypopharyngeal diverticulum have been treated since 1987. In 64 patients we performed an endoscopic diverticulotomy using a CO2-Laser and the Weerda distending diverticuloscope. Four of the Zenker's diverticulua had to be removed by an external approach. From 1987 to 1994 a five millimeter bar between pouch and hypopharynx after diverticulotomy was left and sealed with fibrin glue in the first 38 patients. From 1995 to 1999 the spur of the hypopharyngeal pouch of the other 26 patients was completely separated. Afterwards we sutured the mucosa between the pouch and the hypopharynx to close the opened mediastinal space and sealed the former spur with fibrin glue.
RESULTS: Comparing both endoscopic methods we had to observe concerning our first method one mediastinitis, a rise of body temperature in 29 patients (76%) and we had to perform a revision diverticulotomy in three patients (8%). Our modified technique didn't cause any mediastinitis, a rise of body temperature did only occur in five patients (18%) and no patient had to undergo revision surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: The transoral complete separation of the spur of the hypopharyngeal pouch with suturing the mucosa of the pouch and the hypopharynx causes good functional results and means a further reduction of complications and a further improvement of the endoscopic diverticulotomy. Our new instruments (Fa. K. Storz, Tuttlingen) will be demonstrated.

### PMID 11398589 (2000) — Przeglad lekarski
TITLE: [Post-traumatic bacterial meningitis].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: 10 patients with posttraumatic bacterial meningitis were treated in the Department of Infectious Diseases of the Jagielloniam University--Collegium Medicum during the period of 63 months. Traffic accidents were responsible for 80% of all cases of trauma. The most common place of injury was the base of anterior cranial fossa. Infecting agent was established in 8 cases. Gram-positive aerobic cocci (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Enterococcus faecalis, and Enterococcus spp.) were found in 4 patients, Gram-negative aerobic cocci (Neisseria meningitidis) in 2 patients, and Gram-negative aerobic rods (Acinetobacter baumanii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp, Escherichia coli) in 3 patients. Streptococcus pneumoniae was still highly sensitive to penicillin, ampicillin and cefotaxime. Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus spp. were sensitive to vancomycin and teicoplanin. Neisseria meningitidis was sensitive to penicillin, cefotaxime, amoxicillin/clavulonate. Gram negative aerobic rods were sensitive to third-generation cephalosporins, carbapenems and aminoglycosides. Among 10 patients treated for posttraumatic bacterial meningitis 1 patient died and in 1 preserved vegetative state was diagnosed. In 4 patients severe or moderate disabilities developed, however 4 recovered completely. 6 patients after regression of the CNS infection were qualified to neurosurgical intervention. In 3 patients reconstructive operation of the basis of anterior cranial fossa with tissue glue Beriplast P. was done, the recovery was complete. 3 patients didn't agree to surgical operation, and we don't know what has happened with them. They have not come to the control visit.

### PMID 10969678 (2000) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Mediastinal false aneurysm after thoracic aortic surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(00)01300-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative mediastinal false aneurysm is associated with a substantial morbidity and mortality. Surgical treatment is mandatory, although the individual approach varies according to the type of pathologic process, infection status, and site of origin of the aneurysm.
METHODS: Between April 1993 and February 1999, we treated 10 patients, aged 25 to 73 years, with anastomotic mediastinal false aneurysm originating from the proximal thoracic aorta. Nine had undergone prior operations on the ascending aorta (7, type A dissection repair; 1, aortitis; 1, root abscess) with a Dacron conduit (n = 5) or valved conduit (n = 4). The last patient had undergone valve replacement for excavating aortic root sepsis. False aneurysms were detected from 2 to 70 months after the most recent operation. Three patients had positive tissue cultures. The surgical procedure was direct suture repair of the disrupted anastomosis in 5, root or ascending aortic replacement with an aortic homograft in 4, and Dacron graft interposition in 1. Hypothermic low-flow perfusion with or without circulatory arrest was used in all patients.
RESULTS: There was one hospital death caused by staphylococcal mediastinitis. A false aneurysm recurred after direct suture repair in 2 patients with underlying type A dissection or aortitis. This resulted in one late death. One patient experienced a neurologic event during removal of an infected vascular graft. All 8 surviving patients are alive and well after a mean follow-up of 2 years. Three patients with mycotic false aneurysms remain free from infection after aortic homograft replacement.
CONCLUSIONS: Mediastinal false aneurysms are surgically taxing. Low-flow hypothermic perfusion with or without circulatory arrest allows safe reentry. Radical surgery provides a satisfactory outcome in infected patients. Local repair of suture dehiscence in pathologic tissues may predispose to recurrence. We suspect that excessive use of formalin in gelatin-resorcin-formol glue may predispose to tissue necrosis.

### PMID 10906674 (2000) — Journal of biomedical materials research
TITLE: Distribution and serum concentration of sisomicin released from fibrin glue-sealed dacron graft in the rat and human.
DOI: 10.1002/1097-4636(200010)52:1&lt;53::aid-jbm7&gt;3.0.co;2-i | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We investigated whether or not fibrin glue (FG) used as a sealant in vascular prostheses to prevent leakage might be useful as a carrier of antibiotics for the prevention of local graft infection. Sisomicin (SISO) was incorporated into fibrin glue (SISO-FG) and evaluated as to its safety and pharmacokinetics. SISO (1.75 mg) -FG Dacron grafts were implanted subcutaneously in the anterior abdominal region of Sprague-Dawley rats, and then the changes in SISO concentrations in the serum and in the tissue around the implantation sites were compared with those same sites in rats that had had intravenous injection of SISO (1.75 mg). The serum SISO concentrations were significantly lower in the SISO-FG Dacron graft group than they were in the intravenous injection group. However, until 4 h after implantation the SISO concentrations in the tissues around the implantation sites were significantly higher in the SISO-FG Dacron group than they were in the iv injection group, and the peak concentrations during that time were 5.8 times higher for the SISO-FG Dacron group than they were for the intravenous injection group. The ratio of the area under the tissue concentration time curve of SISO (AUC tissue) after implantation of the SISO-FG Dacron graft to that after intravenous injection of SISO was 13.08. Therefore, FG was considered to control the release of SISO into the serum and to maintain a high SISO concentration in the tissue around the implantation site. Clinically, SISO (45 mg) -FG was applied directly to the Dacron grafts implanted in 10 patients who underwent prosthetic vascular reconstruction. No graft infection was observed in any of the patients who received SISO-FG Dacron grafts. The mean serum concentration of SISO was 0.65+/-0.17 microg/mL after 1 h and 0.33+/- 0.21 microg/mL after 3 h. The results of these clinical applications are in close correlation with those of the animal experiment and suggest that FG is useful as a carrier of SISO, allowing its controlled release for the prevention of local infection.

### PMID 9706509 (1998) — International surgery
TITLE: Unusual and infrequent indications for thoracoscopy.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: A number of unusual or uncommon thoracoscopic indications have developed over the years. Pleural tuberculosis and blastomycosis, HIV infections, histoplasmosis, presenting as a nodular process have been diagnosed and treated. Fistulae or tube tract endoscopy may delineate whether a patient has persistence or recurrent carcinoma or tuberculosis through biopsy and culture techniques especially in the post pneumonectomy patient with an air leak. Thoracic diseases, including carcinoma, and mediastinal adenopathy and undiagnosed masses, are amenable to biopsy and possible resection. Foreign bodies may be removed with this technique. The utilization of thoracoscopy for diagnosis and treatment of pericardial processes has been utilized as well for placement of pacemakers. More recently, internal mammary artery to coronary artery bypass grafting has been performed by a few same surgeons with the endoscopic or VATS technique. Neurogenic indications include resection of the posterior sympathetic ganglia and vagectomy. Chylothorax therapy utilizing fibrin glue and liver and kidney biopsy may be performed.

### PMID 9502142 (1998) — The Journal of heart valve disease
TITLE: Application of cyanoacrylate adhesive (Krazy Glue) in critical cardiac injuries.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND AIMS OF THE STUDY: Although small lacerations of the myocardium may be repaired easily using conventional methods, larger tears or ruptures, especially if they occur in infarcted myocardial tissue, may create formidable technical challenges. Described is a method for applying sutureless pericardial patches for control of hemorrhage.
METHODS: A sutureless pericardial patch was glued to the myocardium with commercially available household cyanoacrylate (Krazy Glue) in seven patients.
RESULTS: No patient in this series developed any evidence of mediastinal infection as a result of this technique. Six patients were discharged home without any long-term sequelae noted. One patient developed reinfarction and died of arrhythmia two weeks following surgery. Autopsy revealed that the laceration had healed and that the patch was closely adherent. Bacteriology studies revealed that different brands of cyanoacrylate are not only bacterium-free but also exhibit a bactericidal effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Sutureless pericardial patches fastened to the myocardium with cyanoacrylate glue to control hemorrhage under critical situations were easy to apply, safe and effective in this series of patients.

### PMID 9413058 (1997) — Surgery today
TITLE: The reinforcement of tracheoplasty with a self-fascia lata and Gelatin-Resorcin-Formal (GRF) glue.
DOI: 10.1007/BF02385786 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We examined the efficacy of protecting the suture line in tracheoplasty by using a self-fascia lata and Gelatin-Resorcin-Formal (GRF) glue. Fifteen dogs underwent a resection of four rings of the trachea and reconstruction, and we then observed them for one month; group A (n = 5) without reinforcement, group B (n = 5) with a self-fascia-lata spread with GRF glue, and group C (n = 5) with only a self-fascia-lata. In the reinforced dogs (group B, three cases, and group C, five cases), in which the continuity of the suture line had been conserved, eight cases were resistant to pressures of from 240 mmHg to 300 mmHg, and two cases (both in group B) which had a partial discontinuity of the suture line were resistant to the same pressure of 160 mmHg. But in the five dogs without reinforcement (group A), four died from infection due to leakage of the trachea within 2 weeks; only one that had a continuity of the suture line survived and was resistant to pressure of 300 mmHg. These results show that a reinforcement of tracheoplasty using a self-fascia lata and GRF glue is useful for preventing air leakage from the suture line.

### PMID 17171003 (1997) — Skull base surgery
TITLE: The fixed combination of collagen with components of fibrin adhesive-a new hemostypic agent in skull base procedures.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2008-1058620 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: CSF leak still is one of the major sources of morbidity after extensive skull base procedures. Of the various standard closure techniques of traumatic or iatrogenic dural defects, none provides a really waterlight, persistent closure. Even the supplementary use of fluid fibrin glue did not substantially improve the rate of postoperative CSF leaks. The application of a collagen sheet covered with a fixed layer of solid components of a fibrin tissue glue (TachoComb(R)) overcomes the major drawbacks of dural sealing in skull base surgery. The dural defects of 58 patients undergoing extensive skull base procedures were sealed with this new hemostyptic agent. The series includes 44 patients undergoing primary surgery, 6 patients with traumatic or iatrogenic tears of venous sinuses, and 8 patients with postoperative leaks after previous skull base procedures in which other sealing methods were previously used. In the group of primary surgery, none of the patients had postoperative CSF leakage or venous rebleeding. One patient developed a delayed pneumatocephalus. All cases of patent CSF fistulas were resolved without any adjuvant therapy. Preliminary experience shows that the good sealing and hemostyptic performance of this new agent will considerably reduce the risk of postoperative CSF leak and infection after skull base procedures.

### PMID 9206634 (1997) — Der Chirurg; Zeitschrift fur alle Gebiete der operativen Medizen
TITLE: [Surgical therapy of esophageal perforation. A determination of current status based on 4 personal cases and the literature].
DOI: 10.1007/s001040050203 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: We present four cases of esophageal rupture (three iatrogenic, one Boerhaave syndrome) to demonstrate the difficulty in diagnosis and therapy. The current literature is discussed and conclusions are drawn as regards the modus operandi. All our patients were operated on. The site of esophageal rupture was always closed with a primary suture and substantial irrigation and drainage were performed. In two cases the suture line was in addition covered with fibrin glue or by an omentum flap, respectively. All patients survived and recovered was unremarkable. Our own results and a subsequent analysis of literature allow the following conclusions. At an early stage of esophageal rupture surgical intervention is indicated. The method of choice is primary closure of the rupture site by suture, possibly combined with a muscle or omentum flap. In cases of delayed diagnosis with advanced mediastinitis, suture of the rupture site should also be striven for. Additional coverage is advisable in these cases. Resection procedures with or without reconstruction should be done only in exceptional cases before of the high surgical risk.

### PMID 8905274 (1996) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Controlled clinical studies of fibrin sealant in cardiothoracic surgery--a review.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(96)80332-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: More than 2300 clinical papers have been published on the surgical applications of fibrin sealant (FS), with the largest number in the speciality of cardiothoracic surgery. The purpose of this review of the literature was to find and evaluate controlled studies published in the field of cardiothoracic surgery, to clarify the indications and emphasize the benefits of FS available to the practising surgeon.
METHODS: A database of the surgical publications of FS was created. Up to the end of 1995, at least 24 controlled clinical studies had been published; these may be divided into 20 studies with a positive outcome and 4 studies where the results were not different from the controls. In none of the studies was the clinical result worse after the use of FS.
RESULTS: In most of the cardiac studies, FS was successfully used at bleeding sites in reoperations and in congenital heart surgery. Postoperative bleeding may also be reduced by the anterior mediastinal spray application of FS or by preparing woven Dacron prostheses with the sealant. In addition, Fs has been found to improve results after type A aortic disections and, by adding an antibiotic to the sealant, the postoperative infection rate for active endocarditis of the aortic root can be reduced. In pulmonary surgery FS can be used to reduce pulmonary air leakage, however the results of some studies diverge due to different clinical test conditions and the inclusion of only a small number of patients in the "negative" studies. In none of the controlled studies of esophageal surgery could FS prevent leakage from esophageal anastomoses.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant is safe when it is applied properly, but there is a learning curve for surgeons who start using it. An autologous sealant or a sealant containing human instead of bovine thrombin is preferred, since repeated use of bovine thrombin may induce coagulopthies. The number of controlled clinical studies of FS is currently increasing, with the majority of the papers revealing a beneficial effect of FS when it is used as a hemostatic or sealing agent in cardiothoracic surgery.

### PMID 8604922 (1995) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Tissue engineering heart valves: valve leaflet replacement study in a lamb model.
DOI: 10.1016/0003-4975(95)00733-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Valve replacements using either bioprosthetic or mechanical valves have the disadvantage that these structures are unable to grow, repair, or remodel and are both thrombogenic and susceptible to infection. These characteristics have significantly limited their durability and longevity. In an attempt to begin to overcome these shortcomings, we have tested the feasibility of constructing heart valve leaflets in lambs by seeding a synthetic polyglycolic acid fiber matrix in vitro with fibroblasts and endothelial cells.
METHODS: Mixed cell populations of endothelial cells and fibroblasts were isolated from explanted ovine arteries. Endothelial cells were selectively labeled with an acetylated low-density lipoprotein marker and separated from the fibroblasts using a fluorescent activated cell sorter. A synthetic biodegradable scaffold constructed from polyglycolic acid fibers was seeded with fibroblasts, which grew to form a tissue-like sheet. This tissue was subsequently seeded with endothelial cells, which formed a cellular monolayer coating around the leaflet. Using these constructs, autologous (n = 3) and allogenic (n = 4) tissue engineered leaflets were implanted in 7 animals. In each animal the right posterior leaflet of the pulmonary valve was resected and replaced with an engineered valve leaflet.
RESULTS: All animals survived the procedure. Postoperative echocardiography demonstrated no evidence of stenosis and trivial pulmonary regurgitation in the autografts and moderate regurgitation in the allogenic valves. Collagen analysis of the constructs showed development of an extracellular matrix. Histologic evaluation of the constructs demonstrated appropriate cellular architecture.
CONCLUSIONS: This preliminary experiment showed that a tissue engineered valve leaflet constructed from its cellular components can function in the pulmonary valve position. Tissue engineering of a heart valve leaflet is feasible, and these preliminary studies suggest that autograft tissue will probably be superior to allogenic tissue.

### PMID 8541171 (1995) — British heart journal
TITLE: Pseudoaneurysm following aortic homograft: clinical implications?
DOI: 10.1136/hrt.74.6.645 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of pseudoaneurysm formation after aortic (left ventricular outflow tract) homograft implantation and to evaluate predisposing factors.
METHODS: Echocardiographic data were analysed in 30 patients for evidence of pseudoaneurysm formation after homograft implantation. Pseudoaneurysm was characterised as a perfused echo-free space between the homograft and the native aortic wall communicating with the left ventricular outflow tract. Clinical data were analysed for potential predisposing factors for pseudoaneurysm formation.
RESULTS: Pseudoaneurysms were found in 22 of 30 patients. Mean age, length of follow up after surgery, aortic systolic pressure gradient (15 (SD 12) v 10 (4) mm Hg), aortic root diameter, and size of the homografts were comparable in patients with and without pseudoaneurysm. preoperative infection, operating techniques, and whether first or reoperation did not affect pseudoaneurysm formation. However, pseudoaneurysms were often localised at the site of an abscess or a paravalvular leak after eradicated prosthetic valve endocarditis.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) Doppler echocardiography demonstrates that pseudoaneurysm formation is common after aortic homograft implantation. (2) A prospective study is needed to clarify the prognostic importance of pseudoaneurysms. (3) The high incidence of pseudoaneurysm formation may lead to an improvement of surgical technique (application of fibrin glue).

### PMID 8657017 (1995) — Microbiology and immunology
TITLE: Prevention of vascular graft infection by sisomicin incorporated into fibrin glue.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.1995.tb03287.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To examine the efficacy of sisomicin (SISO) incorporated into fibrin glue (FG) for the prevention of graft infection in animal models, the susceptibility to infection of Dacron grafts (control) and SISO-FG Dacron grafts following the inoculation of Staphylococcus aureus or S. epidermidis was compared. The results showed that SISO-FG Dacron grafts displayed resistance to graft infection.

### PMID 7571895 (1995) — Zentralblatt fur Chirurgie
TITLE: [Prevention and therapy of prosthesis infections in the thoracic area].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Infections of vascular prostheses following replacement of the thoracic aorta remain a rare complication, fortunately. The incidence of prosthetic infection amounts to approximately 1.6%, however, there is only limited information from single center studies, and linearized actuarial data for more exact estimations are not available. Experience with prophylaxis and treatment of bacterial endocarditis as well as data available from peripheral vascular reconstruction nevertheless allow the development of treatment strategies concerning this complication. Experimentally, there is clear evidence that pretreatment of Dacron-grafts using the fibrin sealant-antibiotic compound results in a significant protection from infection, created by artificial contamination with staphylococcus aureus. This concept could clearly be confirmed in clinical series involving treatment of prosthetic valve endocarditis. Currently, the concept of implantation of cryopreserved human vascular allografts is studied clinically. Its efficiency in infected areas and following prosthetic replacement of the thoracic aorta has not been proven. Some preliminary results as well as studies on treatment for bacterial endocarditis would suggest a clear advantage of this strategy, however statistically significant improvements have not been published. Currently available data, however, appear to be sufficient to advocate potentially successful techniques as a prophylaxis in routine thoracic aortic replacement as well as for treatment in case of a vascular prosthetic infection following such procedures.

### PMID 8054732 (1994) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Annular abscesses and GRF glue.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1540-8191.1994.tb00856.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Infective endocarditis of the aortic prosthesis is a serious complication of valve surgery. The correction of this condition is difficult and complex procedures are often required. Two patients with aortic bioprosthetic endocarditis complicated with annular abscesses were operated on. The aortic valve was replaced with a bioprosthesis and the annular abscesses were debrided and closed with the aid of gelatin-resorcin-formalin (GRF) glue, which completely sealed the abscess cavities. One year later the patients were asymptomatic and had no clinical or echocardiographic signs of aortic incompetence.

### PMID 1530824 (1992) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Prevention of graft infection by bonding of gentamycin to Dacron prostheses.
DOI: 10.1067/mva.1992.30301 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To increase the efficacy of perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis in vascular surgery an experimental study including topical application of the gentamicin derivative EMD 46/217 and fibrin sealant as antibiotic carrier to Dacron prostheses was initiated. In vitro treatment of Dacron with gentamicin and fibrin was followed by constant antibiotic release for 3 weeks. In a subsequent animal study Dacron grafts were implanted in the aorta of 10 pigs after direct contamination with Staphylococcus aureus solution. One graft was pretreated with the antibiotic/fibrin compound, a second with the antibiotic alone. Grafts 3 (no pretreatment) and 4 (fibrin alone) served as controls. After 1 week the grafts and their corresponding implantation sites were excised for measurement of antibiotic content and for culture. The antibiotic content of grafts with the antibiotic/fibrin compound was 25.0 +/- 7.2 micrograms/gm wet weight, whereas Dacron pretreated with the antibiotic alone contained no measurable drug amounts except for one specimen (0.5 microgram/gm) (antibiotic/fibrin vs antibiotic, p less than .0005). The corresponding implantation sites to antibiotic/fibrin grafts contained 1.07 +/- 0.54 microgram/gm antibiotic, whereas in only 2/10 implantation sites of antibiotic grafts low antibiotic levels were found (0.05 and 0.2 microgram/gm) (antibiotic/fibrin vs antibiotic, p less than 0.005). All control grafts and 9/10 antibiotic grafts were infected. By contrast, only five were contaminated, and 5 of 10 remained sterile after culture (antibiotic/fibrin vs antibiotic, p less than 0.05). This finding correlates with the antibiotic content in the Dacron. It is concluded that pretreatment of prosthetic Dacron grafts with the antibiotic/fibrin compound results in binding of sufficient amounts of antibiotic for at least 1 week.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 1758598 (1991) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Intracranial infection after missile injuries to the brain: report of 30 cases from the Lebanese conflict.
DOI: 10.1097/00006123-199112000-00010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study reviews the features of 30 intracranial infections complicating 600 penetrating head injuries from missiles in patients treated at the American University of Beirut Medical Center between 1981 and 1988. The follow-up period ranged from 1 month to 7 years (mean, 2.5 years). Sixteen patients had a brain abscess, 9 had cerebritis, 2 had an infected intracerebral hematoma, and 5 had meningitis. Infection developed 4 days to 7 years after the initial debridement. The infecting organisms were Gram positive in 11 patients (36%), Gram negative in 12 (40%), and a combination of Gram positive and Gram negative in 2 (7%). Twenty-four patients (80%) had wound dehiscence or cerebrospinal fluid leakage at the time the infection appeared. There was a 76% correlation between the organisms cultured from the dehiscent scalp wound and the brain. Twenty-three patients had intracranial retention of bone. Infection developed in 16 of the 30 patients (70%) around bone fragments, in 4 around a metallic fragment, in 2 around absorbable gelatin sponge, and in 3 along the missile tract; 2 had an infected intracerebral hematoma, and 3 had meningitis. At least one of the following risk factors was present in each patient: extensive brain injury, coma, trajectory through an air sinus, cerebrospinal fluid fistula, inadequate initial debridement, or incomplete dural closure. The incidence of intracranial infection in patients with postoperative retention of bone was 4% in the absence of scalp wound dehiscence, compared with 84.6% when wound dehiscence was present. Ten patients (43%) still retained a bone fragment measuring less than 1 cm after excision of a brain abscess or treatment of cerebritis or meningitis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 1960439 (1991) — [Zasshi] [Journal]. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai
TITLE: [Coronary artery bypass grafting using right gastro-epiploic artery and cholecystectomy].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 59-year-old male with ischemic heart disease and cholecystolithiasis underwent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) using the right gastro-epiploic artery (GEA) and cholecystectomy simultaneously CABG was performed under standard extracorporeal circulation followed by cholecystectomy at the same incision. The opening in the dome of the diaphragm where the pedicle of GEA was brought up was closed with fibrin glue. Then, sternum was closed and cholecystectomy was performed with no elongation of the incision. The postoperative course was uneventful without mediastinitis or other infectious events. The postoperative angiography showed good patency of the GEA graft. Combined CABG using GEA and cholecystectomy is beneficial for the selected patients.

### PMID 2201786 (1990) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Fibrin glue-antibiotic suspension in the prevention of prosthetic graft infection.
DOI: 10.1097/00005373-199008000-00009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: The following study was done to assess whether fibrin glue-antibiotic suspension (FGAS) can prevent infection of a PTFE vascular graft in a contaminated wound.
METHODS: FGAS was made by combining cryoprecipitate with a mixture of bovine thrombin, aminocaproic acid, and tobramycin (5 mg/cc thrombus). Antibiotic activity was documented by in vitro kinetics which revealed initial elutions to be greater than 8,000 mu gm/cc and elutions at 4 days to be greater than 2 mcg/cc. Twelve dogs had a 1-cm section of infrarenal aorta replaced with a PTFE graft that had been bathed in a 2-cc solution of E. coli 3 x 10(8) CFU/ml and S. aureus 3 x 10(8) CFU/ml. Both organisms were sensitive to tobramycin and cefonicid. Dogs were divided into three groups of four. Group I had a contaminated PTFE graft placed and no further therapy. Group II had a contaminated PTFE graft placed and sealed with fibrin glue. Group III had a contaminated PTFE graft placed and sealed with FGAS. All three groups received daily IV cefonicid.
RESULTS: Group I: Four of four dogs were reoperated on the fourth day for suspected sepsis and all four had pseudoaneurysms (one ruptured). Three of four were culture positive for S. aureus and two of four positive for E. coli. Group II: Four of four died of anastomotic disruption by the third day. Four of four were culture positive for S. aureus and E. coli. Group III: All four dogs survived and were sacrificed on Day 17: all anastomoses were normal. Animal survival was significantly associated with the treatment given (p = 0.0025). Three of four tissue cultures of the grafts were weakly positive for S. aureus and one of four for E. coli and Pseudomonas. Serum tobramycin levels were negligible at 12, 24, 72, and 96 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: The data show that FGAS was associated with a reduction in vascular graft infection and pseudoaneurysm formation after exposure to a standardized bacterial inoculum. Whether complete eradication of all organisms can be achieved with higher doses of tobramycin is as yet undetermined.

### PMID 2687712 (1989) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Peculiar computed tomographic images after intracranial use of microfibrillar collagen hemostat: report of three cases].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: After the intracranial application of microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene), CT revealed contrast enhancement suggestive of brain abscess or residual or recurrent tumor in three patients. The first case was a 22-year-old male with left ventricular oligodendroglioma. At operation Avitene was applied to the ventricular wall and incised frontal lobe. Two months after the operation CT revealed ring enhancement at the left frontal lobe and ventricular enlargement. Craniotomy was performed again. Histological examination, however, revealed no recurrent tumor but residual Avitene and granulation. The second case was a 57-year-old female with left parietal glioblastoma multiforme. At operation Avitene was applied to the tumor cavity. Two months after the operation CT showed ring enhancement and craniotomy was performed again. Histological examination revealed residual Avitene and necrotic tissue. Five months after the first operation, craniotomy was performed for the third time, because recurrence was suspected after a CT scan. Histological examination revealed recurrent tumor and residual Avitene. The third case was a 19-year-old male with left frontal astrocytoma. Two months after the operation when Avitene was used for hemostasis, marked ring enhancement was observed. Five months after the operation, however, enhancement in CT was weak. The CT findings in these patients were characterized by the abnormally long duration of enhancement (five months) and by enhancement more marked two to three months after the operation than immediately after it. Based on these findings brain abscess or residual or recurrent tumor rather than normal healing was more suspect as the cause of this phenomenon. Brain abscess was ruled out, because the peripheral leukocyte count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP, etc. were normal.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 2464722 (1989) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Randomized clinical trial of fibrin sealant in patients undergoing resternotomy or reoperation after cardiac operations. A multicenter study.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: A multicenter study was conducted to test the efficacy and safety of fibrin sealant as a topical hemostatic agent in patients undergoing either reoperative cardiac surgery (redo) or emergency resternotomy. A total of 333 patients from 11 centers in the United States were included in the study. Patients were randomly assigned to initially receive the fibrin sealant or a conventional topical hemostatic agent when such was required during an operation. The end point used to evaluate the agent's efficacy was local hemostasis, the number of bleeding episodes controlled within 5 minutes. The fibrin sealant group from the prospective study was compared with historical matched control subjects for postoperative blood loss, need for resternotomy, blood products received, and hospital stay. It was also compared with historical nonmatched control subjects for the incidence of resternotomy and mortality. The results showed a 92.6% success rate for fibrin sealant in controlling bleeding within 5 minutes of application, compared with only a 12.4% success rate with conventional topical agents (p less than 0.001). Fibrin sealant also rapidly controlled 82.0% of those bleeding episodes not initially controlled by conventional agents. High-volume postoperative blood loss was significantly less (p less than 0.05) in the fibrin sealant group than in the matched controls. Additionally, resternotomy rates after redo operations were significantly lower in the fibrin sealant group (5.6%) than in the nonmatched historical control group (10%) (p less than 0.0089). There were no significant differences in hospital stay or blood products received between the fibrin sealant group and matched historical controls and no difference in mortality between the fibrin sealant group and nonmatched historical controls. There were no documented instances of adverse reactions, transmission of viral infection (hepatitis B, non-A/non-B hepatitis), or human immunodeficiency virus seroconversion. This study shows that fibrin sealant is safe and highly effective in controlling localized bleeding in cardiac operations. Fibrin sealant reduces postoperative blood loss and decreases the incidence of emergency resternotomy. These findings make fibrin sealant a valuable hemostatic agent in cardiac surgery.

### PMID 2685469 (1989) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Tobramycin-adhesive in preventing and treating PTFE vascular graft infections.
DOI: 10.1016/0022-4804(89)90125-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: The present study was designed to determine the effectiveness of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate as a vehicle to deliver antibiotics locally to contaminated vascular graft sites and to grafts with established infections. Phase I--Contaminated wound model: Sixteen dogs had a 1-cm section of infrarenal aorta replaced with a PTFE graft. Prior to placement, the graft was immersed in solutions of Escherichia coli 3 X 10(8) CFU/ml and then Staphylococcus aureus 3 X 10(8) CFU/ml. After anastomosis, 1 cc of each solution was placed directly over the graft. Eleven dogs served as controls and 5 as treatment dogs. Parenteral cefonecid was given preoperatively and daily until sacrifice. Treatment animals had the anastomoses and graft sealed with a suspension of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and 1.2 g tobramycin powder (antibiotic glue, ANGL) after contamination. All dogs were reoperated on the third postoperative day.
RESULTS: Eleven of 11 control dogs had positive cultures for S. aureus and 9 of 11 had positive cultures for E. coli. Seven of 11 had pseudoaneurysms, 1 exsanguinated. None of the 4 treatment dogs had positive cultures (P = 0.0002), pseudo-aneurysms (P = 0.017), or local signs of sepsis. Phase II--Infected graft model: The 10 surviving infected control dogs served as the established graft infection model. These dogs were randomized into two groups; Group 1 control (N = 5) had the graft replaced; Group 2 treatment (N = 5) had the graft replaced and ANGL treatment. Dogs were sacrificed after 2 weeks.
RESULTS: Graft cultures were positive in all 4 control dogs and negative in the 4 treatment dogs (P = 0.005). One dog in each group was eliminated secondary to failure to obtain graft culture. The data show that ANGL can be effective in the prevention and treatment of prosthetic graft infection.

### PMID 2465714 (1989) — The American surgeon
TITLE: Successful use of fibrin glue during 2 years of surgery at a university medical center.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A method for producing concentrated fibrinogen, an essential component of fibrin glue, from individually stored, single-donor units of human plasma is reported. The plasma is screened for hepatitis B antigen and HIV-1 virus to reduce the risk of transmission of hepatitis and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). This material is routinely stocked in some operating rooms. It is thus readily available when requested by a surgeon for use in combination with topical bovine thrombin to produce fibrin glue. From April 1985 to March 1987 this material was used by surgeons from eight different surgical specialties on 413 patients with a 91 per cent success rate (376/413). Uses have included sealing vascular suture lines, reinforcing pulmonary and esophageal staple lines, closing dural cerebrospinal fluid leaks, fixing split-thickness skin grafts, reducing lymphatic leakage, and controlling bone bleeding. Additional uses include closure of bronchopleural fistulas by means of the flexible bronchoscope, reduction of perioperative hemorrhage by spraying fibrin glue on the anterior mediastinum during cardiac surgery, and reduction of bleeding during debridement of burn eschars. Careful monitoring and patient follow-up detected no cases of transmission of blood-borne diseases. Only one complication, a local wound infection, has been documented. This material has been an important adjunct for the surgical services and may be safely used at hospitals with local blood bank facilities.

### PMID 3107501 (1987) — Archives des maladies du coeur et des vaisseaux
TITLE: [Emergency surgical repair of acute aortic arch dissection. Apropos of 14 cases].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Among 70 patients operated upon for acute dissection of the ascending aorta between 1977 and 1984, 14 (age range 40-72 years) benefited from emergency aortic arch repair motivated by the presence in, or extension to, this segment of the portal of entry, or by lesions of the supra-aortic main vessels. The operation was performed under cardiopulmonary bypass in all cases. Cerebral protection was ensured in 9 patients by deep hypothermia alone or with circulatory arrest for a mean period of 5 minutes (7 cases), and in 5 patients by continuous brain perfusion (carotid blood flow 4 ml/kg/min; perfusion pressure 70 mmHg). Repair consisted of ascending aorta replacement combined with gluing of the arch whenever possible, or bevelled resection in the concavity of the arch, or complete aortic arch replacement with reimplantation of the cervico-cerebral vessels when necessary. In every case the gelatin-resorcin-formalin glue was used to reinforce the aortic wall or the areas with sutures. Operative mortality was nil. Hospital mortality was 28.5%. In patients operated upon under deep hypothermia alone or associated with circulatory arrest the main complications were neurological (4 cases) and respiratory (3 cases) disorders; these were responsible for the death of 3 patients. A fourth patient died of mediastinitis. No neurological or respiratory complication occurred in patients who had brain perfusion. The mean follow-up period was 37 months (range 7-84 months). Late mortality was nil. All but one patient (sequelae of paraplegia) are in excellent clinical condition. Post-operative angiography alone or combined with computerized tomography showed satisfactory blood distribution in all cases and no aneurysm formation on the dissected aorta despite a persistent false lumen.

### PMID 3004516 (1985) — Arzneimittel-Forschung
TITLE: Fibrin glue safety: inactivation of potential viral contaminants by pasteurization of the human plasma components.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue has become an indispensable tool in salvaging operations of the parenchymatous organs of the abdomen, in vascular and ophthalmic plastic surgery as well as neurosurgery. Currently available glues contain clotting factors from human plasma and thus carry the potential risk of transmitting viral infections like hepatitis or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Combined efforts in selection of plasma donations as well as pasteurization of the human plasma products allow the manufacturing of a product (Beriplast) with virtually no risk of transmission of viral infections as demonstrated by in vivo and in vitro experiments with a variety of human pathogenic viruses. No changes in activity or antigenicity of the clotting factors by the pasteurization procedure have been encountered.

### PMID 3856007 (1985) — Journal of periodontology
TITLE: Collagen sponge as a topical hemostatic agent in mucogingival surgery.
DOI: 10.1902/jop.1985.56.1.35 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage from palatal donor sites during periodontal mucogingival surgery was controlled by application of Collastat absorbable hemostatic sponges. The use of collagen sponges was evaluated in 20 free-graft cases. In contrast to microfibrillar collagen, which is normally delivered as clumps of material, a Collastat sponge was applied as a single piece that maintained structural integrity even when wet and was easy to maneuver into place. The highly porous sponges conformed to the wound, absorbed fluid and produced consistently reliable hemostasis with no secondary bleeding. By stemming the seepage of blood into the throat, patient safety and comfort were improved. The sponges were left on the wounds and removed at the 1-week postoperative visit, revealing well-formed granulation tissue. Healing proceeded normally with no evidence of infection, tissue reaction, or other adverse effects.

### PMID 6405719 (1983) — Archives des maladies du coeur et des vaisseaux
TITLE: [4-year clinical experience with gelatin-resorcinol-formol glue in acute dissections of the ascending aorta].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The gelatine-resorcine-formol glue (GRF) was used to reinforce the tissues of 25 patients operated for acute dissection of the ascending aorta, between January 1977 and September 1980. The results were compared with those of a control group of 25 patients operated between 1970 and 1976 by "classical techniques". There were no significant differences between the two groups as regards age, anatomical and preoperative clinical states. The ascending aorta was replaced in all patients; the aortic valve was replaced three times (12 p. 100) in the GRF group and twelve times (48 p. 100) in the control group: the coronary arteries were bypassed or reimplanted in 20 p. 100 of patients in both groups. The average peroperative blood loss was 5,800 ml in the control group and 2,100 ml in the GRF group (p less than 0,01). There were four peroperative deaths (16 p. 100) in the control group and no peroperative deaths in the GRF group. Postoperative complications (renal failure, cerebral ischemia, persistent peripheral ischemia or infection) were much more common in the control group. They were responsible for eight hospital deaths in the control group and two hospital deaths in the GRF group (p less than 0,01). Therefore, global hospital mortality was reduced from 48 p. 100 (control group) to 8 p. 100 (GRF group) (p less than 0,01). Two late deaths occurred in the control group, but there were none in the GRF one, all survivors being in good clinical condition. Sixteen patients in the GRF group underwent 19 angiographic controls, 2 to 36 months after surgery. These investigations showed two moderate aortic regurgitations (8 p. 100), three persistent dissections of the descending aorta but a stable, good quality repair in the other patients. In conclusion, the use of GRF glue significantly reduced: 1) the number of aortic valve replacements, 2) per- and postoperative blood loss, 3) the incidence and severity of postoperative complications. The long-term survival rate (4 years) has improved from 40 to 91 p. 100.

### PMID 7394661 (1980) — Spine
TITLE: Control of postlaminectomy scar formation: an experimental and clinical study.
DOI: 10.1097/00007632-198005000-00004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Scar formation after laminectomy was evaluated in dogs treated with hemostatic agents, antiinflammatory drugs, or mechanical barriers. Microfibrillar collagen was found to be superior to gelatin foam. The antiinflammatory drugs delayed healing and frequently resulted in abscess formation, and eventually scar filled the defect. The fat grafts formed a viable mechanical barrier. Gelatin foam sponge was compared with microfibrillar collagen for hemostasis with free fat grafts in a clinical series of 50 patients. The latter technique was clearly superior.

