# SLICE: fibrin_sealant  (970 records)

### PMID 41531927 (2026) — Annals of vascular diseases
TITLE: Comparative Analysis of Adhesive Strength and Flexibility in Surgical Sealants for Cardiovascular Surgery.
DOI: 10.3400/avd.oa.25-00100 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to compare the adhesive strength and flexibility of 3 surgical sealants-synthetic (Hydrofit; Sanyo Chemical Industries, Kyoto, Japan), albumin-based (BioGlue; Artivion, Kennesaw, GA, USA), and fibrin-based (Beriplast; CSL Behring, Tokyo, Japan)-which are commonly used in cardiovascular surgery but unexplored under identical experimental conditions.
METHODS: Adhesive strength was evaluated using a tensile adhesion test on collagen, polyester, and polytetrafluoroethylene substrates. Flexibility was assessed by measuring the maximum stress and elongation at failure in Hydrofit and BioGlue film samples. Beriplast was excluded as it failed to form films.
RESULTS: Hydrofit and BioGlue showed similar collagen-collagen adhesion strengths (p = 0.11), while Beriplast was significantly weaker (p &lt;0.01). Hydrofit outperformed both BioGlue and Beriplast (p &lt;0.01) in collagen-polyester and collagen-expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) adhesions. Hydrofit also demonstrated a significantly higher elongation rate, strength, and maximum stress before rupture than BioGlue.
CONCLUSIONS: These surgical sealants possess distinct adhesive and mechanical characteristics. Hydrofit showed stable adhesion across various substrates, with notable flexibility. BioGlue displayed adequate adhesion on collagen surfaces but had restricted flexibility. Beriplast demonstrated reduced adhesion. Although only adhesive strength and flexibility were evaluated, such properties may offer valuable insights into sealant traits contextually. These potentially aid in the selection of appropriate sealants for cardiovascular procedures that require both durable adhesion and tissue compliance. Further in vivo validation is warranted.

### PMID 41793077 (2026) — The journal of obstetrics and gynaecology research
TITLE: Severe Lymphorrhea Mimicking Hypovolemic Shock Following Retroperitoneal Lymphadenectomy for Endometrial Cancer: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1111/jog.70229 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a rare case of severe lymphatic leakage resembling hypovolemic shock following retroperitoneal lymphadenectomy for endometrial cancer. A 62-year-old female developed massive lymphorrhea and chylous ascites following total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy. Immediately postoperatively, massive lymphatic leakage caused hypotension and oliguria necessitating vasopressor support. Conservative management, including fasting and octreotide, was unsuccessful. Lymphangiography with Lipiodol and subsequent embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate were performed but did not achieve hemodynamic stabilization. Re-laparotomy was undertaken, and indocyanine green injection into the bilateral inguinal lymph nodes, along with oral milk ingestion, enabled precise intraoperative identification of leakage sites. These were successfully ligated with adjunctive fibrin glue and oxidized cellulose. Hemodynamics rapidly improved following repair. Although most lymphatic leakages resolve conservatively, severe cases can cause life-threatening circulatory failure. This case highlights the importance of a multidisciplinary approach, including interventional radiology and surgical repair, to achieve successful outcomes.

### PMID 42377745 (2026) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Blood management with preoperative autologous blood in valve-sparing root replacement: separated autologous red blood cells and plasma and fibrin sealant versus autologous whole blood.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-026-02349-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: We investigated the effects of the combined use of preoperatively separated autologous red blood cells, plasma, and fibrin sealant on reducing allogeneic blood transfusion during valve-sparing root replacement using the aortic root remodeling technique, by comparison with transfusion of refrigerated, predeposited autologous whole blood.
METHODS: Thirty-nine patients underwent elective, initial valve-sparing root replacement using the aortic root remodeling technique by a single surgeon between April 2018 and December 2023. Of these, 9 patients in Group A predeposited autologous whole blood until September 2019 and 12 patients in Group B predeposited separated autologous red blood cells, plasma, and fibrin sealant after October 2019. The intraoperative allogeneic blood transfusion avoidance rate was compared between Groups A and B.
RESULTS: The allogeneic blood transfusion avoidance rate in Group A was 66.7% for red blood cells, 55.6% for plasma, 55.6% for platelets, and 55.6% for all components combined. In Group B, the avoidance rate was 100% for each component, significantly higher than in Group A for plasma, platelets, and all components combined (all P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.021). Postoperative hemoglobin level was significantly higher and amount of chest tube drainage during the first 12 postoperative hours was lower in Group B.
CONCLUSIONS: This before-and-after study suggested that the combined use of preoperatively separated autologous red blood cells and plasma and fibrin sealant can be an effective blood management strategy in patients undergoing valve-sparing root replacement using the aortic root remodeling technique, reducing intraoperative allogeneic blood transfusion compared with predeposited autologous whole blood transfusion.

### PMID 42305800 (2026) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: Clinical efficacy and safety of porcine fibrin sealant in video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery lobectomy for lung cancer.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2026.1839723 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. Although minimally invasive surgery continues to advance, postoperative complications (such as pleural effusion and pulmonary air leaks) remain significant challenges, prolonging the duration of chest tube placement and increasing patient burden. This study aimed to systematically evaluate the safety and clinical efficacy of porcine fibrin sealant (PFS, a biological tissue adhesive), in VATS lobectomy for lung cancer.
METHODS: We conducted a single-center, retrospective observational cohort study including 345 lung cancer patients who underwent VATS lobectomy plus systematic lymph node dissection between 2017 and 2023. The patients were divided into a control group (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;142) and a PFS group (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;203) receiving intraoperative PFS application. The primary endpoints were total postoperative chest drainage volume and the duration of chest tube placement. Secondary endpoints included the incidence of pulmonary air leaks, severely prolonged drainage (&gt;5 days), and other complications. PSM and OW models were employed to adjust for the baseline.
RESULTS: The unadjusted and PSM cohorts demonstrated the statistical benefits of PFS across multiple aspects. After rigorous adjustment using OW, the difference in total drainage volume was attenuated (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.089). Nevertheless, in the OW cohort, PFS still significantly shortened the duration of chest tube placement (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.036) and effectively decreased the occurrence of PAL (0.0% vs. 5.0%, P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.019) and severely prolonged drainage (0.0% vs. 22.3%, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). There were no significant differences in other complications, and no allergic reactions occurred, indicating its good biosafety.
CONCLUSION: The results demonstrate that the intraoperative application of PFS during VATS lobectomy is safe and effective. It can significantly prevent postoperative pulmonary air leaks and reduce delayed chest tube removal.

### PMID 42294763 (2026) — Multimedia manual of cardiothoracic surgery : MMCTS
TITLE: Robotic sleeve lobectomy with bronchoplasty for primary squamous cell carcinoma of the left upper lobe.
DOI: 10.1510/mmcts.2026.025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: Sleeve lobectomy with bronchoplasty is a complex but lung-preserving operation, often requiring open thoracotomy. Robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery offers enhanced visualization and instrument dexterity, enabling such procedures to be performed with minimal invasiveness. We report a case of a 75-year-old man with squamous cell carcinoma located in the lingual segment of the left upper lobe, which invaded to the entrance of left upper lobe bronchus. The tumour was staged as cT2aN0M0. Due to its central location, robotic left upper sleeve lobectomy with bronchoplasty was selected. A five-port approach was used. Pulmonary vessels of the left upper lobe were dissected and divided using robotic staplers. After sleeve resection of the bronchus, bronchial reconstruction was performed using a continuous barbed suture, and the anastomosis was reinforced with a pericardial fat pad and fibrin sealant. The console time was 267 minutes with minimal blood loss. The chest tube was removed on postoperative Day 1, and the patient was discharged on Day 5 without complications. Pathology confirmed pT2aN0M0 squamous cell carcinoma with negative margins. Robotic left upper sleeve lobectomy with bronchoplasty is feasible and safe in selected patients, providing the advantages of minimally invasive surgery without compromising oncological outcomes.

### PMID 42294761 (2026) — Multimedia manual of cardiothoracic surgery : MMCTS
TITLE: Robotic right upper sleeve lobectomy with bronchoplasty for primary adenocarcinoma.
DOI: 10.1510/mmcts.2026.033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: Sleeve lobectomy with bronchoplasty is a complex yet lung-sparing procedure traditionally performed via open thoracotomy. Robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, with enhanced visualization and instrument dexterity, may facilitate this technically demanding procedure in a minimally invasive setting. We report the case of an 85-year-old man with adenocarcinoma in the right upper lobe, accompanied by an isolated intrapulmonary metastasis and an enlarged lymph node #4R and #11s, with #11s invading the orifice of the right upper lobe bronchus. The clinical stage was cT3N2aM0 (stage IIIB). Because of bronchial involvement by metastatic lymph node #11s, robotic right upper sleeve lobectomy with bronchoplasty was performed. A five-port approach was used. The right upper lobe pulmonary vessels were individually dissected and divided using robotic staplers. After sleeve resection of the bronchus, bronchial reconstruction was completed with a continuous barbed suture. The anastomosis was reinforced with a free pericardial fat pad and fibrin sealant. Console time was 226 minutes, with minimal blood loss. The chest tube was removed on postoperative Day 1, and the patient was discharged on postoperative Day 5 without complications. Pathology confirmed pT3N2bM0 adenocarcinoma with negative margins. Robotic right upper sleeve lobectomy with bronchoplasty may be a feasible minimally invasive option in selected patients requiring complex airway reconstruction.

### PMID 42236288 (2026) — Interdisciplinary cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Effectiveness of Surgical Sealants in Reducing Prolonged Air Leaks After Pulmonary Resection: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivag164 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Prolonged air leak (PAL) is the most common complication following pulmonary resection, leading to increased morbidity, hospital stay, and healthcare costs. Although staplers are currently the standard for lung parenchymal closure, ALs remain frequent. Surgical sealants have been introduced as adjuncts to staplers to reduce PAL, but evidence remains inconsistent. Prior systematic reviews frequently pooled together stapled and sutured resections, limiting applicability to contemporary practice. This review specifically evaluates whether surgical sealants reduce the incidence and duration of PAL when used with staplers in adult patients.
METHODS: This systematic review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and was registered on the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) (CRD420251064592). A literature search was conducted in PubMed, Ovid MEDLINE, and Cochrane Library for studies published between 2005 and June 2025. Eligible studies included adult patients undergoing stapler-based pulmonary resection comparing sealants plus staplers versus staplers alone. Risk of bias was assessed using the revised Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for randomized trials (RoB2) and risk of bias in non-randomized studies of interventions (ROBINS-I) tools.
RESULTS: Eight studies were included. Surgical sealants studied included fibrin-based (autologous fibrin sealant (FS), FS patch, human FS) and synthetic polymers (polyethylene glycol hydrogel sealant, cyanoacrylate-based sealant). Most studies reported a statistically significant reduction in PAL incidence and/or duration with sealant use. Some also showed reduced chest tube duration and hospital stay, though not always statistically significant. One study showed worse outcomes in the sealant group. No study reported increased complications. Subgroup analyses were limited.
CONCLUSIONS: Sealants used with staplers may reduce PAL incidence and duration, particularly in high-risk patients, without increased complications. However, variability in study design and limited subgroup data weaken current evidence. Larger, standardized randomized controlled trials are needed to confirm clinical benefit and inform routine use.

### PMID 42182772 (2026) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Microbubble fibrin sealant application technique for prolonged air leak after anatomical lung resection: a retrospective comparative study.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd-2026-1-0173 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Prolonged air leak (PAL) is a frequent complication of anatomical lung resection. Although fibrin sealants combined with polyglycolic acid sheets are widely used, an optimal application technique has not yet been established. Their effectiveness may be limited because fibrinogen solution is difficult to visualize and tends to run off during the application. To address these limitations, we introduced a simple microbubble fibrin sealant application technique that improves fibrinogen visibility and viscosity by mixing fibrinogen solution with air. This study aimed to compare the incidence of PAL between the conventional and microbubble techniques in patients undergoing anatomical lung resection for lung cancer.
METHODS: This single-center retrospective study included patients who underwent anatomical lung resection for primary lung cancer between April 2019 and April 2025, and had an intraoperative air leak identified using a water-sealing test. Patients were treated using either the conventional or microbubble technique. The microbubble technique was introduced in April 2022, and the choice of technique was primarily determined by the study period. Multivariable logistic regression analysis was performed to evaluate factors associated with PAL, adjusting for clinically relevant variables.
RESULTS: The 356 eligible patients were classified into conventional (n=201) and microbubble (n=155) groups. PAL occurred in 22/201 patients (10.9%) in the conventional group and 7/155 patients (4.5%) in the microbubble group (P=0.03). In the multivariable analysis, the microbubble technique was independently associated with a lower incidence of PAL [odds ratio (OR) 0.36; 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.15-0.90; P=0.03]. Higher intraoperative air leak severity, as assessed by the Macchiarini scale, was independently associated with increased PAL risk (OR, 2.39; 95% CI: 1.20-4.73; P=0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The microbubble technique is associated with a reduced incidence of PAL after anatomical lung resection. Given the retrospective design, these findings should be interpreted with caution and warrant further prospective validation.

### PMID 42182748 (2026) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Staple line coverage with suture fixation of polyglycolic acid patch for primary spontaneous pneumothorax.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd-2025-1-2726 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery is the standard surgical treatment for primary spontaneous pneumothorax (PSP). Various attempts, including absorbable mesh and fibrin glue, have been made to reduce surgical complications such as postoperative prolonged air leaks and recurrence. This retrospective study evaluates whether suturing a polyglycolic acid (PGA) patch to a surgical staple line can reduce postoperative air leakage.
METHODS: This study included 135 patients under the age of 40 years who underwent thoracoscopic PSP surgery between September 2013 and February 2023. A PGA patch and fibrin glue were used, and in each case, a single surgeon performed the surgery and coordinated postoperative care. Patients who underwent other surgery on the same side or required five or more staples were excluded. Methods for reinforcing the staple line included multiple sutures on the PGA patch and staple line (n=28, group A), a single suture (n=34, group B), and fibrin glue alone (n=73, group C). In group A, suturing was performed at both ends of the staple line and wherever it was considered necessary. In group B, suturing was performed at the center of the staple line.
RESULTS: The demographic data showed no significant differences among the three groups. Furthermore, the groups did not differ significantly in operation indication, operation time, complications, incision number, or cartridge number, but the bleb characteristics did differ. After adjusting for bleb characteristics, groups A and B showed a statistically significant decrease in air leakage, compared with group C (P&lt;0.01), and the postoperative air leakage duration was significantly shorter in group A than group B (P=0.047).
CONCLUSIONS: When the PGA patch was sutured to the staple line, postoperative air leakage was significantly reduced, compared with cases in which the PGA patch was secured with fibrin sealant alone. When multiple sutures were applied to the staple line and PGA patch, postoperative air leakage tended to decrease compared with the group that received a single suture. Covering the staple line under a PGA patch with suture fixation can reduce air leakage after wedge resection for pneumothorax.

### PMID 42121228 (2026) — Journal of nanobiotechnology
TITLE: Cycloastragalol nanoparticle-loaded composite hydrogel as an injectable embolic agent for vascular repair in a mouse model of abdominal aortic aneurysm.
DOI: 10.1186/s12951-026-04433-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a progressive degenerative vascular disease with a high risk of rupture and mortality. Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is a widely used minimally invasive treatment option for anatomically suitable AAA. However, postoperative endoleaks associated with EVAR can precipitate secondary aneurysm rupture. We developed an injectable nanocomposite hydrogel for embolization and local delivery of cycloastragalol (CAG). CAG-loaded aldehyde-functionalized polyurethane nanoparticles (DFPU@CAG) showed uniform morphology, favorable biocompatibility, and enhanced CAG delivery efficiency, and were incorporated into a chitosan (CS)-based dynamically crosslinked hydrogel to form CS-DFPU@CAG. The hydrogel showed suitable injectability and rheological properties for embolization with sustained local drug release. In vivo studies in animal AAA models showed that in situ administration significantly attenuated AAA expansion and reduced matrix metalloproteinase9 (MMP9) expression and enzymatic activity. CS-DFPU@CAG also demonstrated robust embolization performance in vitro and in vivo, maintaining stability under high pressure and achieving blood-flow occlusion in rabbit femoral arteries comparable to a clinical porcine fibrin sealant. These findings provide a preclinical proof-of-concept for CS-DFPU@CAG as a dual-function embolic and local therapeutic platform for AAA management.

### PMID 41913923 (2026) — Journal of surgical case reports
TITLE: Azygos vein arch injury caused by an ultrasonic scalpel during lung cancer surgery.
DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjag207 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Unexpected azygos vein injury during thoracoscopic lung resection is rare. Here, we describe a case of azygos vein arch injury caused by an ultrasonic scalpel. The patient underwent segmentectomy for right upper lobe lung cancer. The ultrasonic scalpel was activated while its blade tip was inadvertently grasping the vascular wall of the azygos vein arch during management of bleeding from the pulmonary artery stump, resulting in injury to the azygos vein arch. Because the injury site was temporarily sealed, it was not initially detected. When the right upper lobe was retracted ventrally to dissect the upper lobe bronchus, tension was applied to the injured site of the azygos vein arch, leading to massive haemorrhage. Conversion to thoracotomy was required, and haemostasis was achieved using a fibrin sealant patch. The azygos vein is a low-pressure system; most injuries can be managed with a fibrin sealant patch.

### PMID 41877070 (2026) — BMC infectious diseases
TITLE: Endovascular aneurysm repair combined with local and systemic antibacterial treatment for infected aorto-iliac artery aneurysms caused by Brucella.
DOI: 10.1186/s12879-026-13056-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Brucella-induced aorto-iliac aneurysms (with &lt;&#x2009;200 documented cases globally) present unique therapeutic challenges due to their dual pathology of structural fragility and persistent bacteremia. Despite their life-threatening nature, no consensus exists on optimal management, particularly for patients unsuitable for open surgical reconstruction. This single-center case series provides critical insights into endovascular salvage strategies for this orphan disease. METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted on 16 consecutive patients with Brucella-infected aorto-iliac aneurysms undergoing endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) with adjunctive local and systemic antimicrobial therapy at our institution between January 2019 and June 2025. RESULTS: The cohort demonstrated a 30-day mortality rate of 6.3% (1/16) and all-cause mortality of 31.3% (5/16) during a mean follow-up of 31.1 months. Notably, one patient (6.3%) without local gentamicin-fibrin sealant application developed distal aneurysm recurrence leading to fatal hematemesis at 48 months. In this cohort, Three patients died as a consequence of self-discontinuation of antibiotic therapy: two patients (12.5%) succumbed to infectious shock, while one patient experienced fatal aneurysm recurrence and rupture. Among 15 patients receiving standardized protocol (EVAR with intracavitary gentamicin instillation and prolonged antimicrobial therapy), satisfactory aortic remodeling was achieved with significant aneurysm diameter reduction (39.7 vs. 44.5&#xa0;mm, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). Reintervention rate was 6.3% (1 / 16) for iliac occlusion. CONCLUSIONS: Although radical open repair with complete debridement should remain the preferred approach for physiologically eligible patients, our findings suggest that EVAR combined with intracavitary antibiotic delivery and rigorously monitored antimicrobial therapy may be a viable alternative in select cases. This hybrid strategy requires meticulous patient selection, sustained infection control, and strict therapeutic compliance to mitigate long-term reinfection risks. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

### PMID 41754964 (2026) — Pharmaceutics
TITLE: A Purified Platelet-Derived Exosome Product for Chronic Wound Healing: A Novel Therapeutic Strategy and Next-Generation Delivery Platform.
DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics18020222 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Chronic wounds remain a major unmet clinical challenge, often failing to progress to normal healing due to persistent inflammation, impaired angiogenesis, and cellular senescence. Exosomes have recently been investigated as promising acellular therapeutics capable of restoring intercellular communication and promoting tissue regeneration. Among these, the Purified Exosome Product (PEP) represents a next-generation, platelet-derived exosome formulation manufactured under Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) conditions with high purity, stability, and reproducibility. This review summarizes the current advances in exosome-based chronic wound therapeutics and PEP delivery systems and their translational potentials. Incorporation of PEP into bioengineered carriers such as fibrin sealant, collagen scaffolds, and hyaluronic acid (HA) hydrogels enables localized and sustained exosome release, significantly prolonging therapeutic effects and improving regenerative outcomes. Fibrin-based PEP delivery achieved complete wound closure and functional skin regeneration in animal models, while collagen and HA-based systems showed promising results for injectable and dermatologic applications. Beyond its intrinsic healing effects, PEP may also serve as a nanocarrier for other drugs, offering a future direction in chronic wound management.

### PMID 41677267 (2026) — International journal of surgery (London, England)
TITLE: Fibrin sealant for prophylaxis of cervical anastomotic leakage after McKeown esophagectomy for esophageal or esophagogastric junction cancer (PLACE030): a Phase III multicenter randomized clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1097/JS9.0000000000004514 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Anastomotic leakage (AL) is one of the most serious complications after esophagectomy, and previous studies have suggested that fibrin sealant (FS) might be beneficial in preventing AL. This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of FS in preventing AL.
METHODS: This randomized controlled trial included 360 patients aged 18-75&#xa0;years with resectable esophageal or esophagogastric junction cancer, clinically staged as T1-4aN0-3M0, from six centers in China. Surgery was performed using McKeown esophagectomy with circular stapled anastomosis combined with two-field lymphadenectomy. In the FS group, 2.5 ml of FS was applied circumferentially to the cervical anastomotic site. The primary endpoint was the incidence of AL within the first 3&#xa0;months postoperatively.
RESULTS: A total of 360 patients were recruited from February 2019 to May 2023, with 179 in the FS group and 181 in the control group. The incidence of AL was 7.3% in the FS group and 13.3% in the control group (P =&#xa0;0.061). According to the subgroup analysis of patients who underwent upfront surgery without neoadjuvant treatment, the incidence of AL in the FS group was numerically lower without statistical significance [FS group: 5.8% vs. control group: 15.1%; P =&#xa0;0.046, RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.385 (95% CI, 0.143-1.032)]. The incidence of postoperative complications was similar between the two groups (FS group: 41.6% vs. control group: 48.9%; P =&#xa0;0.163).
CONCLUSIONS: Intraoperative sealing with porcine FS did not significantly reduce the incidence of cervical AL. For patients who undergo upfront esophagectomy, the potential protective effect of FS needs further studies.

### PMID 41508572 (2026) — The American journal of case reports
TITLE: Technical Approach to Repair of Tracheogastric Conduit Fistula Following Minimally Invasive Esophagectomy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.950499 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND Tracheogastric conduit fistula (TGCF) is a rare but life-threatening complication of esophagectomy, particularly in high-risk patients with comorbidities or prior chemoradiotherapy. It typically develops in the setting of anastomotic leakage, ischemia, or infection. There is no standardized treatment, and outcomes vary depending on timing and surgical approach. We report a delayed TGCF after thoracolaparoscopic esophagectomy and describe the operative technique and key perioperative considerations. CASE REPORT A 78-year-old man with diabetes, hypertension, and a heavy smoking history underwent thoracolaparoscopic esophagectomy for Siewert type I adenocarcinoma following neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. On postoperative day 54, persistent coughing prompted imaging and endoscopy, which revealed a tracheogastric fistula between the gastric conduit and posterior membranous trachea. Surgical repair was performed via right thoracotomy, involving debridement, closure of the gastric and tracheal defects, and interposition of a vascularized intercostal muscle flap. Reinforcement with fibrin sealant and a bovine pericardial patch was applied. Initial bronchoscopy confirmed airtight repair. However, the patient later developed recurrent pneumonia and septic shock, ultimately dying to multiorgan failure on postoperative day 108. CONCLUSIONS This case illustrates the complex management of TGCF and reinforces the value of early recognition and aggressive surgical intervention. Despite the fatal outcome, the absence of fistula recurrence confirmed the technical success and offers insight for managing similar high-risk cases. Intercostal muscle flap remains a reliable option for fistula closure in irradiated and infected fields. Meticulous surgical planning and perioperative management are essential for optimizing outcomes in this rare complication.

### PMID 41501974 (2026) — Journal of chest surgery
TITLE: Outcomes of Pleural Sealant Application in Pneumothorax Surgery: A Comparative Analysis.
DOI: 10.5090/jcs.25.118 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Recurrence after video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) bullectomy for primary spontaneous pneumothorax (PSP) remains a major clinical concern. Pleural reinforcement has been proposed to reduce recurrence; however, comparative evidence between fibrin sealant (FS) patches and polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheets is limited.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 188 patients with PSP who underwent VATS bullectomy with pleural reinforcement between 2015 and 2025 (FS group, n=42; PGA group, n=146). Perioperative outcomes and recurrence-free survival (RFS) were compared. Baseline imbalances were adjusted using inverse probability of treatment weighting. Survival outcomes were evaluated using Kaplan-Meier analysis and restricted mean survival time (RMST). Predictors of recurrence were assessed with Firth's penalized Cox regression.
RESULTS: The FS group showed significantly shorter operative time (29.6 minutes vs. 39.6 minutes, p&lt;0.001) and a reduced length of hospital stay (3.4 days vs. 4.2 days, p=0.042) compared with the PGA group, whereas chest tube duration was comparable between groups. Overall recurrence was 11.7%. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated no significant difference in RFS (p=0.174), but RMST analysis indicated significantly fewer recurrences with FS (p=0.038). Multivariable Cox regression identified female sex as an independent protective factor against recurrence (hazard ratio, 0.117; p=0.028).
CONCLUSION: FS patches showed a trend toward lower recurrence, achieving statistical significance in RMST analysis. FS appears to be a safe and effective option for pleural reinforcement following VATS bullectomy in patients with PSP.

### PMID 41428441 (2026) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Video Analysis of Intraoperative Complications and Management in Robotic Lung Segmentectomy.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezaf475 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Robotic-assisted thoracic surgery segmentectomy is increasingly used; however, comprehensive reports on robotic-specific intraoperative complications remain limited. This study analysed intraoperative complications during robotic-assisted lung segmentectomy across different indications, emphasizing factors unique to robotic surgery-limited visualization, lack of tactile feedback, instrument interference, and team communication-and described effective management strategies derived from detailed video-based review.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of 215 consecutive patients (169 with primary lung cancer, 38 with metastatic lung tumours, and 8 with other diseases) who underwent robotic-assisted thoracic surgery segmentectomy between July 2020 to March 2024 was conducted. Operative records and videos were reviewed to identify intraoperative complications, and detailed video-based analyses were performed to determine injury mechanisms and causes.
RESULTS: Intraoperative complications occurred in 19 patients (8.8%), primarily involving injuries to the pulmonary artery (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;9, 4.2%), bronchi (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4, 1.9%), pulmonary vein (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;2, 0.9%), and pleura (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4, 1.9%). Robotic-specific complications, attributed to limited visualization, lack of tactile feedback, stapler-related tension, instrument interference, and miscommunication, accounted for 3.3% (7 cases). All complications were managed successfully without blood transfusion or thoracotomy conversion using fibrin sealant patches, direct suturing, or additional subsegmental resection.
CONCLUSIONS: Video analyses identified robotic-specific challenges-limited visualization, lack of tactile feedback, instrument trouble, and miscommunication. Targeted refinements in port positioning, stapling techniques, and structured simulation training improved the safety of robotic-assisted segmentectomy.

### PMID 42203440 (2026) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Experimental and Clinical Evaluation of Spongostan as a Substitute for Spongel in Sellar Floor Reconstruction during Endoscopic Transsphenoidal Surgery.
DOI: 10.2176/jns-nmc.2025-0388 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Absorbable gelatin sponges are widely used as hemostatic and reconstructive materials in neurosurgery. Global discontinuation of Gelfoam and withdrawal of Spongel from the Japanese market have created an urgent need for alternatives. This study was performed to evaluate the utility of Spongostan as a substitute for Spongel and Gelfoam in sellar floor reconstruction using the fibrin glue-soaked gelatin sponge method.Two gelatin sponges (Spongel and Spongostan) and 2 fibrin sealants (Beriplast and Bolheal) were combined to prepare 4 fibrin glue-soaked gelatin sponge combinations. Adhesive strength was measured using a tensile strength test according to ASTM F2458-05 and analyzed using 2-way analysis of variance. A retrospective review was also conducted for patients who underwent endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery for pituitary adenoma between May 2024 and October 2025, in which fibrin glue-soaked gelatin sponge prepared with Spongostan was used for sellar floor reconstruction.Spongostan showed significantly higher adhesive strength than Spongel (F (1,20) = 13.72, p = 0.0014), whereas neither the fibrin sealant type nor the sponge-fibrin sealant interaction was significant (both p = 0.73). In 11 clinical cases (mean age 66 &#xb1; 16 years), intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage occurred in 5 cases and postoperative leakage in one case, in a patient who had undergone prior radiotherapy. No hemorrhage, meningitis, or material-related complications occurred. These findings suggest that Spongostan may serve as a feasible alternative to Spongel for fibrin glue-soaked gelatin sponge-based sellar floor reconstruction during endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery.

### PMID 42377427 (2026) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Transforaminal Endoscopic Extradural Onlay Patch Graft Repair of Spontaneous Spinal Type 1a Cerebrospinal Fluid Leaks: A Case Series.
DOI: 10.1227/ons.0000000000002120 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Spontaneous spinal cerebrospinal fluid (sCSF) leaks represent a significant source of morbidity, presenting with symptoms of spontaneous intracranial hypotension. Type 1a leaks are classified as ventral dural tears, with thoracic defects proving to be especially challenging to diagnose and treat. Epidural blood patches remain first-line for many cases; however, their efficacy is variable. Traditional surgical management of sCSF leaks typically involves open laminectomy with transdural direct suture repair, with attendant risks due to wide laminectomy and spinal cord exposure/manipulation. This study demonstrates that endoscopic extradural repair technique is a reliable minimally invasive alternative for treating type 1a sCSF leaks.
METHODS: A transforaminal endoscopic extradural approach with subsequent onlay patch repair technique was performed on 11 patients with spontaneous type 1a CSF leaks at spinal levels ranging from T2-3 to L1-2. All patients were from a single institution from 2024 to 2025. Data on clinical outcomes, perioperative variables, and risk factors for reoperation were collected.
RESULTS: Eleven patients (8 female:3 male) underwent endoscopic repair with DuraGen, TachoSil, and TISSEEL with adjunctive lumbar drain placement for CSF diversion. 81.8% of patients experienced resolution of their symptoms and returned to normal daily activities within 3 months. The mean estimated blood loss was 11.1 mL, operative time averaged 170 minutes, and average length of stay was 6.8 days due to preplanned CSF diversion. Two patients underwent reoperation for recurrent/persistent leak, without satisfactory resolution of symptoms after reoperation. One incidence of a small nonoperative pneumothorax occurred.
CONCLUSION: In this study, a single-surgeon cohort of 11 patients underwent transforaminal endoscopic extradural repair of type 1a sCSF leaks. The results suggest that transforaminal endoscopic extradural approach with onlay patch repair is a safe and effective alternative to existing surgical techniques for type 1a CSF leaks. Additional studies are warranted for further characterization, direct comparison with traditional techniques, and long-term outcome assessment.

### PMID 42370181 (2026) — Theranostics
TITLE: A robust asymmetric bioadhesive patch for sutureless intestinal repair to prevent anastomotic leakage and postoperative adhesion.
DOI: 10.7150/thno.135611 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: RATIONALE: Anastomotic leakage (AL) remains a major surgical challenge that is difficult to address using hand-sewn closure alone. Robust, rapidly acting bioadhesive patches offer a promising alternative to conventional sutures and staples. However, the development of bioadhesive patches that achieve instantaneous wet-tissue adhesion while minimizing postoperative adhesion remains challenging. Innovative material designs and interdisciplinary translational strategies are therefore needed to advance bioadhesion technologies toward clinical application.
METHODS: Herein, we developed a translational asymmetric bioadhesive patch (ABP) that integrates a blood-repelling, hydrophobic, HBP oil-infused anti-adhesive top surface with a bioadhesive bottom surface capable of absorbing interfacial water. The physicochemical properties, mechanical performance, wet-tissue adhesion, and hemostatic capacity of the ABP were systematically evaluated through in vitro and in vivo assays. Its therapeutic efficacy for sutureless intestinal repair was further assessed in a rat colon defect model.
RESULTS: The ABP exhibited instantaneous and robust adhesion to various biological wet tissues (~10 times stronger than FDA-approved sealant Tisseel). The patch also showed excellent stretchability, sustaining more than 1000% strain without loss of elasticity. Moreover, ABP enables rapid hemostasis in injured tissues and achieved sutureless sealing and repair of intestinal defects in a rat colon injury model. Importantly, the asymmetric design reduced postoperative adhesions and attenuated foreign body reactions.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed ABP patch provides an effective solution for intestinal defects repair by enabling immediate wet-tissue attachment, non-invasive defect closure, and durable tissue sealing without the need for device removal. By combining strong bioadhesion with an anti-adhesive outer surface, this patch offers a promising translational platform for preventing anastomotic leakage while reducing postoperative adhesions and foreign body responses.

### PMID 42365352 (2026) — BMC research notes
TITLE: Comparative hemostatic efficacy of oxidized regenerated cellulose powder and fibrin glue in a rat model of induced liver parenchymal hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1186/s13104-026-07929-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: The objective of this study is to compare the hemostatic efficacy of oxidised regenerated cellulose powder (Surgicel&#xae; Powder) and fibrin glue (Tisseel&#xae;) in a rat model of liver parenchymal haemorrhage, and to evaluate their effects on tissue healing.
RESULTS: Preoperative haemoglobin and haematocrit values were comparable among the groups (p&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.05). At 24&#xa0;h, postoperative haemoglobin and haematocrit values differed significantly among the three groups (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.045 and p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.042, respectively), with lower values in the saline-compression control group and relatively preserved values in the Surgicel&#xae; Powder and Tisseel&#xae; groups. However, no statistically significant difference was identified between the two active treatment groups. Histopathological evaluation revealed no statistically significant between-group differences in necrosis, inflammation, fibrosis, haemorrhage, or granulation tissue formation (p&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.05).

### PMID 42225544 (2026) — Military medicine
TITLE: Detection of Electrophysiologic Conduction After Polyethylene Glycol-Fusion Repair of Peripheral Nerve Injuries in a Porcine Model.
DOI: 10.1093/milmed/usag235 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Peripheral nerve injuries (PNIs) are associated with significant morbidity, and traditional repair techniques often result in incomplete functional recovery. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) fusion has been proposed as a technique to promote rapid axonal continuity and facilitate electrophysiologic conduction. This study evaluates PEG fusion in a porcine median nerve injury model, with a focus on detectable electrophysiologic conduction following repair.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-one Yucatan pigs underwent creation of single-cut or 2 cm segmental PNIs. Twenty-nine animals had analyzable immediate electrophysiologic data, and 27 underwent end-of-study (EOS) evaluation. Repairs were performed using standard repair (SR) or neurorrhaphy augmented with PEG fusion. Segmental defects were reconstructed using ulnar nerve autograft with or without adjunctive Tisseel and Tacrolimus. Electrophysiologic outcomes were assessed using compound action potentials and compound motor action potentials immediately post-repair and up to 90 days postoperatively. Outcomes were recorded as binary presence or absence of detectable electrophysiologic conduction.
RESULTS: PEG fusion was associated with detectable electrophysiologic conduction immediately following repair in both single-cut and segmental injury models, whereas no immediate conduction was observed following standard repair in segmental injuries. At EOS, both PEG-treated and standard repair single-cut injuries demonstrated persistence of detectable electrophysiologic conduction in 5 of 7 animals (71%). In segmental injuries, no animals treated with standard repair (0/4) or PEG alone (0/3) demonstrated detectable conduction at EOS. In contrast, PEG-treated autografts with Tisseel demonstrated detectable conduction in 1 of 4 animals (25%), while PEG-treated autografts with Tisseel and Tacrolimus demonstrated detectable conduction in 2 of 2 animals (100%), although subgroup sizes were small.
CONCLUSIONS: PEG fusion was associated with detectable electrophysiologic conduction following peripheral nerve repair in this porcine model. Although no difference was observed between PEG and standard repair in single-cut injuries at EOS, PEG-enabled immediate conduction and adjunctive augmentation strategies were associated with detectable conduction in a subset of segmental injuries. Because outcomes were limited to qualitative electrophysiologic measures without functional or histologic correlation, conclusions regarding functional recovery cannot be made. Further investigation in larger studies incorporating quantitative electrophysiologic, histologic, and functional outcome measures is required to define its clinical relevance.

### PMID 41960497 (2026) — Bioinformation
TITLE: Comparative evaluation of tissue adhesives and conventional sutures in periodontal flap surgery: A randomized clinical study.
DOI: 10.6026/973206300220241 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Post-surgical discomfort, delayed soft tissue healing and risk of infection remain significant challenges associated with conventional suturing methods in periodontal flap surgeries. Therefore, it is of interest to evaluate four different groups (n=10 each); Group 1 - silk sutures, Group 2 - vicryl sutures, Group 3 - fibrin sealant (Tisseel) and Group 4 - isoepoxy 2-cyanoacrylate adhesives (Amcrylate) and compared effects on wound healing, postoperative discomfort and clinical outcomes in periodontitis patients. Phase I therapy was followed by full-thickness mucoperiosteal flaps elevation, debridement and closure conducted as specified. The measurement of healing was done at 1, 2, 4 and 12 weeks by the use of Landry Healing Index, Visual Analog Scale (VAS) of pain, Plaque and Gingival Indices, Probing Pocket Depth (PPD) and Clinical Attachment Level (CAL). Tissue glues, especially fibrin-based sealants, provided periodontal flap closure with clinically reliable, biocompatible and patient-friendly option which enhances faster hemostatic and early healing.

### PMID 41890487 (2026) — Cureus
TITLE: Fibrin Glue (Tisseel) in Pterygium Surgery: A Narrative Review.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.104088 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Pterygium is a common ocular surface disorder with a risk of recurrence following surgical excision. Conjunctival autografting is widely used to reduce recurrence, traditionally secured with sutures. Fibrin glue, including Tisseel (Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Deerfield, IL, USA), has been introduced as an alternative method of graft fixation. The objective of the study is to review the current evidence on the use of fibrin glue in pterygium surgery, with emphasis on surgical outcomes, recurrence rates, postoperative comfort, and complications. A narrative review of the literature was conducted using PubMed, Google Scholar, and the Cochrane Library. English-language studies evaluating fibrin glue for conjunctival autograft fixation in pterygium surgery were included. Across multiple studies, fibrin glue fixation was associated with shorter surgical duration and improved early postoperative comfort compared with sutured techniques. Recurrence rates were generally comparable between fibrin glue and sutures. Recent studies and meta-analyses have also demonstrated reduced conjunctival inflammation without an increase in significant complications. Fibrin glue represents a reliable alternative to sutures for conjunctival autograft fixation in pterygium surgery. Its use offers advantages in operative efficiency and patient comfort while maintaining acceptable recurrence and safety profiles.

### PMID 41752733 (2026) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: The Effect of TISSEEL&#xae; on the Healing Process of Uterine Horn Reanastomosis in an Experimental Animal Model.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina62020333 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: Tubal reanastomosis is an alternative option for women seeking fertility after sterilization. Thus, anastomosis healing quality and peri-tubal adhesions play a crucial role. TISSEEL&#xae; fibrin sealant may enhance tissue repair and reduce foreign-body reaction. We evaluated the effect of TISSEEL&#xae;, used alone or with sutures, on anastomotic healing and adhesion formation in a rat uterine horn model. Materials and Methods: Thirty female Wistar rats were randomized to Suture, TISSEEL&#xae;, or Suture + TISSEEL&#xae; groups (n = 10 each). After bilateral uterine horn transection, reanastomosis was performed with sutures alone, fibrin sealant alone, or combined sutures and sealant. On postoperative day 14, reanastomosis segments were collected for blinded histologic assessment and evaluation of modified Ehrlich-Hunt score parameters (inflammation, fibrosis, neovascularization and collagen production). Intra-abdominal adhesions were also macroscopically assessed. Results: Two animals died perioperatively and 56 uterine horns were included in the final analysis (Suture n = 18, TISSEEL&#xae;n = 18, Suture + TISSEEL&#xae;n = 20). The distribution of inflammation and fibrosis severity grades, as assessed by the modified Ehrlich-Hunt scoring system, did not differ significantly between the study groups (p = 0.208 and p = 0.652, respectively). In contrast, high-grade neovascularization (grades 3-4) was more common in TISSEEL&#xae; groups (77.8% TISSEEL&#xae;, 80.0% Suture + TISSEEL&#xae;, 33.3% Suture, p = 0.004), while increased collagen deposition was also more common in the TISSEEL&#xae; groups (p = 0.011), after binary analysis. Severe adhesions were more common in the Suture group (66.7% vs. 11.1% in the TISSEEL&#xae; group and 30.0% in the Suture + TISSEEL&#xae; group, p = 0.037). Conclusions: TISSEEL&#xae;, alone or as an adjunct to sutures, improves neovascularization and collagen production and is associated with milder adhesions without increased inflammation or fibrosis. The use of fibrin sealant TISSEEL&#xae; may be a useful tool in tubal reconstructive surgery.

### PMID 41684978 (2026) — Cureus
TITLE: Massive Recurrent Chylous Ascites Following Laparoscopic Inguinal Hernia Mesh Repair.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.101306 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chylous ascites is a rare condition characterized by the accumulation of lipid-rich lymph within the peritoneal cavity. While typically secondary to malignancy or trauma, its occurrence following laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair is exceptional. While clinical findings are usually sufficient to diagnose an inguinal hernia and justify surgical intervention, this case demonstrates that rare lymphatic malformations can closely mimic common pathology. A high index of clinical suspicion and further imaging should be employed when diagnostic ambiguity exists to avoid such devastating iatrogenic complications. This case contributes a novel presentation and management approach to the literature. A 35-year-old female, initially misdiagnosed with a right inguinal hernia, underwent elective laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) repair with mesh placement. Three weeks postoperatively, she developed progressive abdominal distension and weight loss. CT imaging revealed massive free fluid consistent with ascites, and paracentesis yielded 9 L of chylous fluid with elevated triglyceride levels. Conservative management, including a medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) diet and somatostatin analogues, failed to achieve resolution. Lymphography subsequently identified multiple leak sites in the right groin; however, an attempt at percutaneous embolization was unsuccessful. Definitive surgical exploration was performed, during which the mesh was removed, revealing injured lymphatic vessels at the femoral ring. These vessels were ligated, and Tisseel&#xae; (Baxter) fibrin sealant was applied. The patient recovered uneventfully, with no recurrence at the three-year follow-up. This case highlights that lymphatic malformations can mimic inguinal hernias and lead to severe iatrogenic complications if not considered in the differential diagnosis when clinical findings or imaging are ambiguous. When conservative measures fail, surgical intervention, specifically mesh removal and direct ligation, is essential. In this patient, the presence of the mesh likely perpetuated the lymphatic leak. This complex scenario required multidisciplinary management; ultimately, prevention relies on accurate preoperative diagnosis.

### PMID 41677405 (2026) — Cornea
TITLE: Autologous Glue: Novel Use of Injectable Platelet-Rich Fibrin With Tranexamic Acid to Achieve Graft Adhesion in Pterygium Surgery.
DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000004125 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To study the use of autologous injectable platelet-rich fibrin (iPRF) and tranexamic acid (TA) for conjunctival autograft (CAG) adherence during pterygium surgery.
METHODS: This case series report included 212 primary nasal pterygiums from 205 patients who underwent pterygium excision with conjunctival autograft fixation using iPRF and TA operated by a single surgeon at 1 center. Surgical time, postoperative graft stability, and recurrence were assessed, and outcomes were compared with literature reports of autologous blood (ATB) and commercial fibrin glue (FG).
RESULTS: The average age was 57.8 years (range 33-75 years). The average surgical duration was 15.3 minutes (12.2-21.4 minutes). Graft dislodgement was noted in 1 eye (0.47%) on day 1, requiring reprocedure. Recurrence was observed in 2 patients (0.94%), mild graft edema in 68 eyes (32.07%), late spontaneous hemorrhage under CAG in 34 eyes (16%), and graft retraction in 2 eyes (0.94%). No postoperative infections, local inflammation, thrombotic complications, or systemic adverse effects were observed. The recurrence rates were lower than those reported for ATB. Unlike FG, iPRF contains platelets and leukocytes, which contribute to angiogenesis and wound healing. The addition of TA stabilizes the fibrin network by inhibiting fibrinolysis, thereby enhancing the adhesion. The cost incurred when using iPRF was 50x lower than that of Baxter Tisseel.
CONCLUSIONS: iPRF combined with TA is a safe, autologous, and cost-effective alternative to ATB, sutures, and FG for CAG fixation in pterygium surgery. Larger randomized controlled trials are required to validate the findings of this novel method.

### PMID 41546047 (2026) — Journal of ovarian research
TITLE: Dynamic in vitro 3D culture of cryopreserved human ovarian tissue: transcriptomic analysis by RNA sequencing.
DOI: 10.1186/s13048-025-01896-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To explore the in vitro 3D culture of ovarian tissue thawed in two different ways with TISSEEL Fibrin and assessed transcriptome differences by RNA sequencing. METHODS: Human ovarian tissue samples were collected, and the fragments used for the experiments were obtained from tumor patients involved in a fertility treatment program. After cryopreservation (frozen and thawed after initial cryopreservation), with or without 3D culture with TISSEEL Fibrin. The culture flask is agitated at 75 times per minute using a rotary shaker during the entire culture process. Four experimental groups were formed. Frozen tissue after quick thawing at 100&#xa0;&#xb0;C (Group 1), frozen tissue after quick thawing at 100&#xa0;&#xb0;C and in vitro 3D culture for 7 days with TISSEEL Fibrin (Group 2), frozen tissue after slow thawing at 37&#xa0;&#xb0;C (Group 3), frozen tissue after slow thawing at 37&#xa0;&#xb0;C and in vitro 3D culture for 7 days with TISSEEL Fibrin (Group 4). All groups were followed by RNA sequencing and histological evaluation. RESULTS: Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining has shown that the follicle cells have the tendency to develop and actively migrate into the fiber. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis shows that in comparison to groups 1 and 3 (thawing ovarian tissue without culture), Differential Expression Genes (DEGs) in groups 2 and 4 (thawing ovarian tissue with in vitro 3D culture), are mainly enriched and up-related in the lysosome pathway and protein processing in the endoplasmic reticulum pathway and mainly down-related in the cell adhesion molecules pathway. CONCLUSIONS: The technology of the described dynamic in vitro 3D-cultivation of ovarian tissue for 7 days with TISSEEL Fibrin is informative and demonstrates that it may promote follicular growth, actively migrate into the fiber, weaken cell adhesion, and cause little cell damage.

### PMID 41476411 (2026) — The American journal of sports medicine
TITLE: Purified Exosome Product Enhances Tendon-Bone Healing in a Rat Rotator Cuff Repair Model.
DOI: 10.1177/03635465251395275 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tendon-bone healing after rotator cuff injury is, or remains, a clinical challenge.
PURPOSE: To examine the role of intraoperative use of purified exosome products (PEPs) in the treatment of rotator cuff injuries and to assess the effect of PEP on supraspinatus tendon-bone healing after rotator cuff repair in a rat model.
STUDY DESIGN: Controlled laboratory study.
METHODS: This study used 120 Sprague-Dawley rats that underwent an acute supraspinatus tendon transection from the insertion, followed by repair using a single transosseous suture. They were divided into 3 groups: a control group that received only sutures, a TISSEEL group that used a commercially available fibrin sealant patch (TISSEEL) of approximately 0.5 cm2, and a PEP-TISSEEL group that used a similarly sized TISSEEL patch combined with PEP. Autopsies were performed at 1, 3, 6, and 8 weeks after surgery. Analyses were performed using molecular biological, biomechanical, and histological techniques.
RESULTS: At 6 weeks, the PEP-TISSEEL group achieved greater failure load (mean, 27.5 &#xb1; 5.3 N) than the control (mean, 16.4 &#xb1; 4.2 N; P = .012) and TISSEEL (mean, 23.4 &#xb1; 5.0 N; P = .041) groups, with superiority persisting at 12 weeks (27.2 &#xb1; 6.5 N vs 13.1 &#xb1; 2.6 N [P = .002] for the control group and 21.1 &#xb1; 5.8 N [P = .037] for the TISSEEL group). DigiGait showed earlier recovery of stride length and paw angle. Histology revealed organized collagen and reduced scarring, while molecular assays demonstrated early inflammatory modulation with subsequent upregulation of collagen type 1 or 3 and TGF-&#x3b2;, supporting accelerated tendon-bone healing.
CONCLUSION: Intraoperative application of PEP-TISSEEL enhanced tendon-bone healing in a rat model by improving biomechanical strength, promoting enthesis-specific histological regeneration, and accelerating functional recovery as evidenced by gait analysis.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The intraoperative application of PEP combined with TISSEEL significantly enhances rotator cuff tendon healing by modulating early inflammation, promoting collagen synthesis, and improving biomechanical properties in a rat model. These findings suggest that PEP-based therapies could offer a promising adjunct in surgical repair, potentially reducing retear rates and improving functional outcomes in patients with rotator cuff injuries. Further clinical studies are warranted to translate these benefits into human applications.

### PMID 41391811 (2026) — Hand surgery &amp; rehabilitation
TITLE: Tenolysis of flexor tendons in zone II: Interest of TISSEEL&#xae; instillation in the prevention of postoperative adhesions.
DOI: 10.1016/j.hansur.2025.102561 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 40333367 (2026) — Advances in wound care
TITLE: An Adipose-Derived Stem Cell Exosome Sheet Promotes Oral Mucosal Wound Healing.
DOI: 10.1089/wound.2024.0216 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Oral mucosal wound healing is not completely understood, and effective therapies are lacking. This study explores the potential of an adipose-derived stem cell (ADSC) exosome sheet in enhancing intraoral wound healing in rats.
APPROACH: An ADSC exosome sheet derived from Tisseel and rat adipose tissue (ADSC-exo) was applied to 16 rats with 6 mm full-thickness mucosal hard palate wounds. Eight wounds received ADSC-exo with a superficial occlusive dressing (ADSC-exo group), and eight received only an occlusive dressing (control group). Wound closure was monitored on days 0, 2, 4, 7, and 10, with dressings changed every 2 days. On day 10, rats were sacrificed, and wounds (n = 8 per group) were collected for immunohistochemical analysis. In vitro, four ADSC-exosome concentrations (0, 4.5 &#xd7; 1011, 9 &#xd7; 1011, and 18 &#xd7; 1011 exosomes/mL; n = 4 per group) were applied to rat oral mucosal fibroblasts to assess migration speed.
RESULTS: ADSC-exo accelerated wound closure (18% &#xb1; 5% vs. 35% &#xb1; 9% of initial wound area; p = 0.002) and fibroblast migration (for 18 &#xd7; 1011 exosomes/mL at 24 h: 29.7% &#xb1; 3% vs. 62.2% &#xb1; 4% of initial gap area; p &lt; 0.0001) compared with the control. ADSC-exo promoted reepithelialization (87% &#xb1; 14% vs. 21% &#xb1; 6%; p &lt; 0.0001), proliferation (34 &#xb1; 12 vs. 18 &#xb1; 7 Ki67+/high-power field [HPF]; p = 0.004), and neovascularization (28 &#xb1; 9 vs. 11 &#xb1; 5 CD31+/HPF; p = 0.0002) while reducing inflammation (4 &#xb1; 1 vs. 13 &#xb1; 9 CD68+/HPF; p &lt; 0.0001) and increasing M2 macrophages (9.2 &#xb1; 2 vs. 4.2 &#xb1; 3 CD163+/HPF; p = 0.0008). ADSC-exo increased Transforming Growth Factor beta 1 (TGF-&#x3b2;1) (1.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.3 vs. 0.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.2; p = 0.006), Smad3 (0.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.02 vs. 0.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.1; p = 0.006), and collagen I (1.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.9 vs. 0.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.3; p = 0.005) while downregulating caspase-3 (0.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.3 vs. 1.1&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.2; p = 0.003) and Bax (0.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.2 vs. 1.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.1; p &lt; 0.0001).
INNOVATION: This is the first study to demonstrate the pro-wound healing effects of an ADSC exosome sheet on intraoral wounds. This paves the way for future research and clinical applications of ADSC exosomes in mucosal wound healing.
CONCLUSIONS: Application of an ADSC-exo to rat mucosal wounds significantly improved wound healing. Mechanistically, these effects may be linked to upregulated activity of the TGF-&#x3b2;/Smad pathway.

### PMID 42429719 (2026) — Journal of minimally invasive gynecology
TITLE: Corrigendum to Efficacy of a fibrin sealant (Tissucol Duo&#xae;) for the prevention of lymphocele after laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy: a randomised controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2026.06.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016425">Published Erratum
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 41832382 (2026) — Techniques in coloproctology
TITLE: Novel adjunctive technologies for the prevention of colorectal anastomotic leakage: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1007/s10151-026-03311-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Anastomotic leakage (AL) remains one of the most serious complications following colorectal surgery, particularly after low anterior resection. In recent years, several adjunctive technologies have been introduced to reinforce anastomotic integrity during the early phases of healing. This systematic review aimed to evaluate the safety, feasibility, and clinical effectiveness of novel mechanical and biological devices designed to prevent AL in colorectal surgery.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was conducted in PubMed, Embase, and Scopus. Human studies evaluating innovative adjunctive devices for AL prevention in patients undergoing low anterior resection were included. Studies focusing on transanal tubes, omental wrapping, or suture reinforcement were excluded. The primary outcome was the rate of anastomotic leakage.
RESULTS: Eighteen studies published between 2005 and 2021 met the inclusion criteria. The evaluated technologies were grouped into six categories: bioabsorbable staple-line reinforcements, nitinol-based compression rings, biodegradable intraluminal sheaths, vacuum-anchored diversion systems, fi brin-based sealants, and collagen patches (Seamguard&#x2122;, C-Seal&#x2122;, ColonRing&#x2122;, Colovac&#x2122;, Tissucol&#x2122;/Greenplast&#x2122;, TachoSil&#x2122;, and Hemopatch&#x2122;). Considerable heterogeneity in study design and methodological quality was observed. Although several devices demonstrated acceptable technical feasibility and safety, their eff ect on AL prevention was inconsistent. Only a limited number of studies included control groups or were designed as randomized controlled trials. Device-related complications, including migration, technical difficulties, and local tissue reactions, were reported in some series.
CONCLUSIONS: Current adjunctive technologies have not consistently demonstrated a reduction in AL rates after colorectal surgery. While selected devices may provide potential benefit in high-risk patients, their clinical applicability remains limited by technical constraints and heterogeneous evidence. Further large, high-quality studies incorporating standardized definitions of AL and patient-specific risk stratification are warranted.

### PMID 42221284 (2026) — Plastic and reconstructive surgery. Global open
TITLE: The Use of Hemostatic Agents to Decrease Surgical Drain Time in General Plastic Surgery Procedures.
DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000007792 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Drains can be used in general plastic surgery procedures given the extensive undermining of tissue. Our primary goal was to investigate whether hemostatic agents used during general plastic surgery procedures could decrease drain time length. Secondary goals were to investigate whether hemostatic agents decreased seromas and hematomas.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review was conducted including patients undergoing bilateral breast reduction (BBR), abdominoplasty, or panniculectomy. Data collected included use of hemostatic agent (fibrin sealant [EVICEL] or combination powder [HEMOBLAST Bellows]), time to surgical drain removal, and postoperative complications (seroma, hematoma, and operative reintervention). Statistical analyses included t tests and Fisher exact test where appropriate.
RESULTS: A total of 351 patients were included. For both the abdominoplasty/panniculectomy and BBR groups, there were statistically significant reductions in surgical drain duration with combination powder compared with no hemostatic agent-13.5 versus 27.9 days for abdominoplasty/panniculectomy (P &lt; 0.001), 7.1 versus 8.7 days for BBR (P = 0.042). There were no statistically significant differences in incidence of hematomas, seromas, or operative reintervention among any groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of hemostatic agents such as fibrin sealant or combination powder in general plastic surgery procedures is associated with a statistically significant reduction in postoperative surgical drain duration.

### PMID 41023173 (2026) — International journal of impotence research
TITLE: Zero infection protocol in inflatable penile prosthesis surgery: a prospective cohort study using chlorhexidine-alcohol skin preparation and fibrin sealant hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1038/s41443-025-01174-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgical site infections remain a devastating complication of inflatable penile prosthesis (IPP) implantation. We evaluated a novel surgical protocol combining chlorhexidine-alcohol skin preparation with fibrin sealant-mediated hemostasis and no drain placement, hypothesizing that it would reduce infection and hematoma rates. Between January 2020 and December 2023, 103 men underwent primary IPP placement with a protocol of 2% chlorhexidine gluconate/70% isopropyl alcohol (ChloraPrep&#xae;) skin antisepsis and intraoperative application of Evicel&#xae; fibrin sealant to corporotomy suture lines, subcutaneous tissues, and pump pocket. This group was compared with 115 historical controls who received povidone iodine skin preparation only and routine surgical drains between January 2015 to December 2019. The primary endpoint was IPP infection at 12 months; secondary endpoints included hematoma rate, operative time, length of stay, and patient satisfaction. No infections occurred in the study cohort (0/103), compared to 3.5% (4/115) of controls (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Hematoma incidence was 1.0% (1/103) versus 5.2% (6/115) in controls (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.03). Mean operative time (52.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;13.8&#x2009;min vs. 58&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;18&#x2009;min, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.12) was similar between groups, while same-day discharge rates were higher in the study cohort (94.7 vs. 88.0%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.03). Combining chlorhexidine-alcohol skin antisepsis with fibrin sealant hemostasis and eliminating drains is a viable option to reduce infections and hematomas in IPP surgery.

### PMID 40973835 (2026) — Aesthetic plastic surgery
TITLE: Step-by-Step Guide to Hematoma Prevention After Rhytidectomy: Lessons Learned from 40 Years of Experience.
DOI: 10.1007/s00266-025-05235-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative hematoma remains one of the most significant complications in rhytidectomy, with reported rates up to 15%. This study presents a structured, experience-based protocol for hematoma prevention, developed over 40 years and applied to over 3000 cervicofacial lift procedures. The protocol combines strict patient selection, advanced surgical technique, and perioperative management strategies aimed at minimizing bleeding risks.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted on a patient population of approximately 3000 individuals, with an emphasis on the most recent 500 cases performed under a unified protocol. Key preoperative measures include blood pressure control and avoidance of medications and supplements that increase bleeding risk. Intraoperative strategies involve infiltration with tranexamic acid (TXA), use of fibrin sealants (ARTISS), hemostatic net placement, and meticulous SMAS flap dissection and fixation using a modified High SMAS/Extended SMAS technique. Postoperative care focuses on pain, anxiety, and blood pressure control through long-acting anesthetics and appropriate dressings.
RESULTS: The systematic adoption of this multimodal approach has reduced the hematoma rate to approximately 0.3% over the past five years. The combination of TXA, fibrin glue, hemostatic nets, and blood pressure management has proven synergistically effective, despite the lack of randomized controlled comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: While the study is limited by its retrospective design and absence of a formal control group, the large sample size and low complication rate offer compelling evidence. This protocol represents a reproducible and practical guide for surgeons aiming to minimize hematoma risk in facelift surgery, supporting safer outcomes and faster recovery. A standardized, multimodal protocol has reduced hematoma rates in facelift surgery to 0.3%. The protocol integrates TXA infiltration, fibrin glue, hemostatic nets, and precise blood pressure control. Over 3000 facelift cases and 40 years of experience support the safety and reproducibility of the approach. This guide provides practical steps that can be directly applied to improve surgical outcomes in rhytidectomy.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE III: This journal requires that authors assign a level of evidence to each article. For a full description of these Evidence-Based Medicine ratings, please refer to the Table of Contents or the online Instructions to Authors www.springer.com/00266 .

### PMID 42320863 (2026) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Management of Minor Superior Sagittal Sinus Laceration in Parasagittal Meningioma Surgery: Operative Video.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2026.125145 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: Superior sagittal sinus (SSS) injury represents a potentially serious intraoperative complication during parasagittal meningioma surgery. Although primary venous repair with direct suturing remains the preferred reconstructive strategy when technically feasible, selected minor sinus wall injuries may require less manipulative hemostatic strategies aimed at preserving venous patency while minimizing sinus manipulation. We report the case of a 44-year-old male with multiple intracranial meningiomas who underwent resection of a right frontal parasagittal lesion located at the junction between the anterior and middle thirds of the SSS. Preoperative imaging demonstrated tumor adherence without intraluminal invasion (Sindou grade I) and preserved sinus patency. During coagulation of the dura attachment using a thulium laser, a minor sinus wall laceration occurred. Given the small defect size, preserved sinus morphology, and limited wall disruption, the injury was managed using a collagen-based fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil&#xae;), achieving rapid and stable hemostasis without requiring direct suturing or additional repair maneuvers. Gross total resection (Simpson grade I) was achieved. Postoperative MRI with venography confirmed complete tumor removal and preserved sinus patency without thrombosis, stenosis, or hemorrhagic complications. The patient had an uneventful recovery and remained neurologically intact at 3-month follow-up. Histology confirmed WHO grade I fibroblastic meningioma. This case highlights the importance of tailoring the management of minor SSS injuries according to defect size, sinus patency, and anatomical context. In highly selected situations, collagen-based sealant patches may represent a reasonable adjunct for achieving rapid hemostasis while preserving venous flow. An operative video illustrating the complication and its management is provided.

### PMID 42193412 (2026) — Biomedicines
TITLE: Efficacy and Safety of a Bioinspired Chitosan-Catechol/Gelatin Hemostatic Patch vs. TachoSil in Hepatectomy: A Randomized Noninferiority Trial.
DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines14051087 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background/Objectives: Topical hemostatic biomaterials are used to control diffuse parenchymal bleeding during hepatectomy. TachoSil is a widely used standard fibrin sealant patch. We evaluated the efficacy and safety of InnoSEAL Plus DL, a novel bioinspired absorbable chitosan-catechol/gelatin hemostatic patch, compared with TachoSil. Methods: This multicenter, randomized, single-blind, active-controlled, parallel-group noninferiority trial enrolled adults undergoing hepatectomy who had persistent oozing from the hepatic transection surface despite primary hemostasis. Participants were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive InnoSEAL Plus DL or TachoSil. The primary endpoint was hemostatic success within 3 min of application, with a prespecified noninferiority margin of -19.4 percentage points (pp). Safety was assessed up to 30 days postoperatively. Results: Ninety patients were randomized (45 per group). In the per-protocol population, 3 min hemostatic success was achieved in 100.0% of both the InnoSEAL Plus DL (43/43) and TachoSil (41/41) groups. The risk difference was 0.0 pp, and the lower bound of the one-sided 97.5% confidence interval was -8.2 pp, confirming noninferiority. The mean time to hemostasis was similar between groups (1.2 vs. 1.3 min), and no intraoperative rebleeding occurred. Adverse events were reported in 78/90 patients (86.7%) and serious adverse events in 6/90 (6.7%); the latter were typical post-hepatectomy events unrelated to the study devices. No deaths were reported. Conclusions: InnoSEAL Plus DL was noninferior to TachoSil for achieving rapid intraoperative hemostasis during hepatectomy, with no unexpected safety concerns. This bioinspired hemostatic patch is an effective alternative to fibrin sealant, without the use of human-derived proteins.

### PMID 41870623 (2026) — Langenbeck's archives of surgery
TITLE: TachoSil&#xae; for prevention of postpancreatectomy hemorrhage after distal pancreatectomy: a propensity-weighted pilot study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00423-026-04022-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Postpancreatectomy hemorrhage (PPH) is a rare but potentially lethal complication after distal pancreatectomy (DP), often precipitated by clinically relevant postoperative pancreatic fistula (POPF). While the fibrin sealant patch TachoSil&#xae; has been evaluated for POPF prevention, its role in mitigating PPH remains underexplored. METHODS: We conducted a single-center, retrospective cohort study of consecutive adult patients undergoing DP (2015&#x2013;2024). Patients were classified by intraoperative use of TachoSil&#xae; in addition to standard stump closure. The primary endpoint was PPH, defined per International Study Group of Pancreatic Surgery (ISGPS) criteria. Secondary endpoints included clinically relevant POPF, Comprehensive Complication Index (CCI), reoperation, 90-day mortality, and length of stay (LOS). Inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) was applied to adjust for baseline covariates. RESULTS: Of 224 patients, 56 (25%) received TachoSil&#xae;. After IPTW adjustment, TachoSil&#xae; was associated with a reduced risk of PPH (RD&#x2009;&#x2212;&#x2009;0.065; 95% CI&#x2009;&#x2212;&#x2009;0.121 to &#x2212;&#x2009;0.009; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.014), corresponding to a number needed to treat (NNT) of 15 and an E-value of 6.7. No significant differences were observed for clinically relevant POPF (RD 0.116; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.105), CCI (MD 3.459; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.091), reoperation (RD&#x2009;&#x2212;&#x2009;0.016; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.486), 90-day mortality (RD 0.012; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.498), or LOS (MD&#x2009;&#x2212;&#x2009;0.242 days; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.856). Stratified analysis showed a pronounced reduction in PPH among patients who developed POPF (RD&#x2009;&#x2212;&#x2009;0.180; 95% CI&#x2009;&#x2212;&#x2009;0.311 to &#x2212;&#x2009;0.048; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.004; NNT&#x2009;=&#x2009;6; E-value&#x2009;=&#x2009;12.6), while no significant effect was observed in patients without POPF. CONCLUSIONS: TachoSil&#xae; use after DP was not associated with lower POPF rates but significantly reduced PPH incidence, particularly in patients developing POPF. These findings support selective TachoSil&#xae; application in high-risk patients as part of a targeted strategy to prevent severe hemorrhagic complications after DP.

### PMID 41530962 (2026) — The American journal of case reports
TITLE: Early Epidural Cerebrospinal Fluid Leak After Anterior Cervical Discectomy and Fusion: A Case Report of Postoperative Intracranial Hypotension.
DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.950550 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) is a commonly performed and effective procedure for treating cervical spondylosis. Although cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is an uncommon complication, occurring in 0.2% to 1.7% of cases, it typically presents as an extraspinal leak. This report describes the case of a 51-year-old woman with postoperative headache due to an early epidural (intraspinal) CSF leak following ACDF - a complication that has not been previously reported. CASE REPORT A 51-year-old woman presented with chronic neck pain, cervicogenic headaches, and upper-limb paresthesia due to multilevel cervical spondylosis. MRI revealed discopathy at C4-C7. She underwent elective ACDF at C4-C7. During discectomy at C5/C6, a CSF leak was observed before exposure of the posterior longitudinal ligament (PLL) and was repaired intraoperatively using TachoSil, a muscle graft, and fibrin glue. On the first postoperative day, the patient developed headaches, nausea, and dizziness consistent with intracranial hypotension. MRI on postoperative day 4 revealed a ventral epidural CSF collection. Lumbar drainage was placed, resulting in resolution of symptoms and the CSF collection. Follow-up MRI at 6 weeks confirmed complete recovery. CONCLUSIONS This report presents a rare case of early epidural CSF leak following ACDF. Prompt recognition and conservative management with lumbar drainage resulted in full recovery without reoperation. Awareness of this potential complication can aid early diagnosis and prevent unnecessary surgical interventions.

### PMID 41178305 (2026) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: Development of a Novel Synthetic Hydrogel Sealant for Effective Prevention of Liver Resection-Associated Bile Leakage.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202503518 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bile leakage is a major complication following hepatectomy; these often lead to surgical site infections, liver failure, and even death. Biomaterials, including fibrinogen-based collagen fleece (TachoSil) and fibrin glue, are ineffective for bile sealing. Synthetic sealants, including cyanoacrylate and polymer-based materials, independent of coagulation, are inadequate for bile leakage management. Therefore, in the present study, a novel hydrogel-based sealant (DCSN_100_25) is developed using 3 types of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) with a dual-stage cross-linking mechanism, termed the delayed cross-linked single network (DCSN). This design facilitates rapid initial solidification followed by gradual network formation, ensuring immediate sealing and stable adhesion to the amputated liver tissue surface. Experiments using in vivo rat hepatectomy models demonstrated that DCSN_100_25 achieved hemostasis within 1 min, outperforming conventional sealants, such as SURGICEL and TachoSil, and effectively preventing both bleeding and bile leakage. Furthermore, in vivo safety assessments confirmed its safety profile, with PEG brushes remaining on the liver tissue and exhibiting minimal inflammation and no chronic liver damage. These findings suggest that DCSN_100_25 is a promising surgical sealant that effectively manages bile leakage and enhances hepatectomy safety.

### PMID 41517632 (2026) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Massive Hemoperitoneum Caused by Spontaneous Rupture of a Superficial Uterine Fundal Vein During Preterm Labor: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm15010383 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Spontaneous hemoperitoneum in pregnancy is rare, and rupture of a superficial uterine fundal vein in an unscarred uterus is exceptionally uncommon. A 37-year-old woman at 27 + 0 weeks presented with left upper quadrant abdominal pain, and imaging revealed a localized hematoma adjacent to the left uterine fundus without active bleeding. During conservative management, she developed sudden severe pain with fetal heart rate decelerations at 27 + 6 weeks, prompting emergency cesarean delivery. Intraoperative findings showed approximately 2400 mL of hemoperitoneum caused by rupture of a superficial fundal vein, with the uterus otherwise intact, and bleeding was controlled with a fibrin sealant patch. Maternal recovery and neonatal outcome were favorable. This case underscores that rupture of superficial uterine veins should be considered in pregnant patients presenting with unexplained hemoperitoneum during pregnancy.

### PMID 41930430 (2026) — Zhurnal voprosy neirokhirurgii imeni N. N. Burdenko
TITLE: [First clinical application of autologous fibrin sealant Vivostat for neurosurgery in Kazakhstan and Central Asia].
DOI: 10.17116/neiro20269002170 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Watertight dural closure and skull base reconstruction remain key challenges in neurosurgery. Autologous fibrin sealant Vivostat, produced from the patient's own blood, provides high biocompatibility, elasticity, and reliable adhesion. The absence of clinical data on its use in Central Asian countries highlights the relevance of the present study.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical efficacy and safety of autologous fibrin sealant Vivostat for dural sealing and skull base reconstruction.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This retrospective-prospective study included 110 patients operated on at the National Center of Neurosurgery (Astana, Kazakhstan) between August 2024 and September 2025. The sealant, derived from autologous blood using the Vivostat system, was applied for dural defect sealing and fixation of reconstructive grafts. The primary outcomes were the incidence of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage, infectious complications, and the need for reoperation.
RESULTS: The mean patient age was 48.9&#xb1;14.7 years; 60% were women. An endoscopic transnasal approach was used in 65 patients, craniotomy in 35, and other approaches in 10. Polymerization occurred almost instantly, reaching maximal strength within 1-2 minutes. Successful sealing was achieved in 109 (99.1%) patients, while 1 (0.9%) patient required reoperation due to nasal CSF leakage and epistaxis. No infectious, allergic, or thromboembolic complications were observed.
CONCLUSION: The use of autologous fibrin sealant Vivostat demonstrated high efficacy and safety for dural sealing and skull base reconstruction. The method reduced the risk of postoperative CSF leakage and reoperation. This study presents the first clinical experience with Vivostat in Central Asia.
UNLABELLED: &#x413;&#x435;&#x440;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x438;&#x437;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x434;&#x435;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x442;&#x432;&#x435;&#x440;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43c;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x433;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43e;&#x431;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x447;&#x43a;&#x438; &#x438; &#x440;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x441;&#x442;&#x440;&#x443;&#x43a;&#x446;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x434;&#x435;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x447;&#x435;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x44e;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x43e;&#x434;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x438; &#x438;&#x437; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x44e;&#x447;&#x435;&#x432;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x437;&#x430;&#x434;&#x430;&#x447; &#x43d;&#x435;&#x439;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x438;. &#x410;&#x443;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x439; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x44b;&#x439; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x439; Vivostat, &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x443;&#x447;&#x430;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x44b;&#x439; &#x438;&#x437; &#x43a;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x438; &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x430;, &#x43e;&#x431;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x447;&#x438;&#x432;&#x430;&#x435;&#x442; &#x432;&#x44b;&#x441;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x443;&#x44e; &#x431;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c;, &#x44d;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x438; &#x43d;&#x430;&#x434;&#x435;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x443;&#x44e; &#x430;&#x434;&#x433;&#x435;&#x437;&#x438;&#x44e;. &#x414;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x435; &#x43e; &#x435;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x438; &#x432; &#x441;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x445; &#x426;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x410;&#x437;&#x438;&#x438; &#x43e;&#x442;&#x441;&#x443;&#x442;&#x441;&#x442;&#x432;&#x443;&#x44e;&#x442;.
&#x426;&#x415;&#x41b;&#x42c; &#x418;&#x421;&#x421;&#x41b;&#x415;&#x414;&#x41e;&#x412;&#x410;&#x41d;&#x418;&#x42f;: &#x41e;&#x446;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x443;&#x44e; &#x44d;&#x444;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x438; &#x431;&#x435;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x430;&#x443;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x44f; Vivostat &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438; &#x433;&#x435;&#x440;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x438;&#x437;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x442;&#x432;&#x435;&#x440;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43c;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x433;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43e;&#x431;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x447;&#x43a;&#x438; &#x438; &#x440;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x441;&#x442;&#x440;&#x443;&#x43a;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x447;&#x435;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430; &#x43d;&#x430; &#x431;&#x430;&#x437;&#x435; &#x41d;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x446;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430; &#x43d;&#x435;&#x439;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x438; &#x41a;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x445;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x430;.
&#x41c;&#x410;&#x422;&#x415;&#x420;&#x418;&#x410;&#x41b; &#x418; &#x41c;&#x415;&#x422;&#x41e;&#x414;&#x42b;: &#x412; &#x440;&#x435;&#x442;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;-&#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x435; &#x438;&#x441;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x432;&#x43a;&#x43b;&#x44e;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x44b; 110 &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432;, &#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x432; &#x41d;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x446;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x435; &#x43d;&#x435;&#x439;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x438; (&#x410;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x430;, &#x41a;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x445;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x43d;) &#x432; &#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x434; &#x441; &#x430;&#x432;&#x433;&#x443;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430; 2024 &#x43f;&#x43e; &#x441;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x44f;&#x431;&#x440;&#x44c; 2025 &#x433;. &#x41a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x439;, &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x443;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x439; &#x438;&#x437; &#x430;&#x443;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43a;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x438; &#x441; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x449;&#x44c;&#x44e; &#x441;&#x438;&#x441;&#x442;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x44b; Vivostat, &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x44f;&#x43b;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x434;&#x43b;&#x44f; &#x433;&#x435;&#x440;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x438;&#x437;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x434;&#x435;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x442;&#x432;&#x435;&#x440;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43c;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x433;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43e;&#x431;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x447;&#x43a;&#x438; &#x438; &#x444;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x441;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432;. &#x41e;&#x446;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x438; &#x447;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x443; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43b;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x435;&#x438;, &#x438;&#x43d;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439; &#x438; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x432;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x448;&#x430;&#x442;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x441;&#x442;&#x432;.
&#x420;&#x415;&#x417;&#x423;&#x41b;&#x42c;&#x422;&#x410;&#x422;&#x42b;: &#x41c;&#x435;&#x434;&#x438;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x430; &#x432;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x440;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430; &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x441;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x432;&#x438;&#x43b;&#x430; 48,9&#xb1;14,7 &#x43b;&#x435;&#x442;, &#x436;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x449;&#x438;&#x43d; &#x431;&#x44b;&#x43b;&#x43e; 60%. &#x42d;&#x43d;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x439; &#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x439; &#x434;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x443;&#x43f; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d; &#x443; 65 &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432;, &#x43a;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x2014; &#x443; 35, &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x447;&#x438;&#x435; &#x434;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x443;&#x43f;&#x44b; &#x2014; &#x443; 10. &#x41f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x437;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x44f; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x438;&#x441;&#x445;&#x43e;&#x434;&#x438;&#x43b;&#x430; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438; &#x43c;&#x433;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;, &#x43c;&#x430;&#x43a;&#x441;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x44f; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x434;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x433;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x441;&#x44c; &#x447;&#x435;&#x440;&#x435;&#x437; 1&#x2014;2 &#x43c;&#x438;&#x43d;. &#x423;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x448;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x44f; &#x433;&#x435;&#x440;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x438;&#x437;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x434;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x433;&#x43d;&#x443;&#x442;&#x430; &#x443; 109 (99,1%) &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432;, 1 (0,9%) &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x440;&#x435;&#x431;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43b; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x438;&#x437;-&#x437;&#x430; &#x43d;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43b;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x435;&#x438; &#x438; &#x43a;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f;. &#x418;&#x43d;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445;, &#x430;&#x43b;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x438; &#x442;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x431;&#x43e;&#x44d;&#x43c;&#x431;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439; &#x43d;&#x435; &#x43e;&#x442;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43e;.
&#x417;&#x410;&#x41a;&#x41b;&#x42e;&#x427;&#x415;&#x41d;&#x418;&#x415;: &#x41f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x430;&#x443;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x44f; Vivostat &#x43e;&#x431;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x447;&#x438;&#x432;&#x430;&#x435;&#x442; &#x432;&#x44b;&#x441;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x443;&#x44e; &#x44d;&#x444;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x438; &#x431;&#x435;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438; &#x433;&#x435;&#x440;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x438;&#x437;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x442;&#x432;&#x435;&#x440;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43c;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x433;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43e;&#x431;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x447;&#x43a;&#x438; &#x438; &#x440;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x441;&#x442;&#x440;&#x443;&#x43a;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x434;&#x435;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x447;&#x435;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430;. &#x41c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x434; &#x441;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x436;&#x430;&#x435;&#x442; &#x440;&#x438;&#x441;&#x43a; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43b;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x435;&#x438; &#x438; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x432;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x448;&#x430;&#x442;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x441;&#x442;&#x432;. &#x41f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x434;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x432;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43d; &#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x432;&#x44b;&#x439; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x439; &#x43e;&#x43f;&#x44b;&#x442; &#x435;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x432; &#x426;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x410;&#x437;&#x438;&#x438;.

### PMID 42293773 (2026) — Gastro hep advances
TITLE: Innovative Endoscopic Treatment of Dual Gastric Perforations Using Argon Plasma Coagulation and Hybrid Closure Techniques.
DOI: 10.1016/j.gastha.2026.100999 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anastomotic leaks and conduit perforations are serious complications following Ivor Lewis esophagectomy. A 65-year-old man with tobacco use, obesity, obstructive sleep apnea, hypertension, and gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma underwent Ivor Lewis esophagectomy complicated by an anastomotic leak. Endoscopy confirmed dehiscence, successfully treated with a 20 mm AXIOS stent. A second full-thickness perforation from a chest tube traversing the gastric conduit staple line was also identified. Multiple endoscopic attempts, including argon plasma coagulation, OVESCO clipping, and OverStitch suturing, failed due to poor tissue apposition. A novel approach using Surgicel packing with fibrin sealant and Dermabond achieved closure. Chest tubes were removed, and the patient recovered fully, highlighting an effective salvage strategy in complex postoperative complications.

### PMID 41783210 (2026) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Endoscopic repair of congenital ethmoidal meningoencephalocele in a 17-month-old child: A case report.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_962_2025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Congenital meningoencephaloceles are rare malformations involving the herniation of intracranial contents through skull base defects. Endoscopic endonasal surgery (EES) is now standard, although transnasal repair is particularly challenging in infants due to small nasal cavities and immature skull-base anatomy. This case highlights early endoscopic repair of a congenital meningoencephalocele in an infant, contributing to the limited pediatric literature.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 17-month-old girl with extreme prematurity presented with noisy breathing and persistent clear rhinorrhea, later confirmed as a cerebrospinal fluid leakage. Imaging identified a right ethmoidal meningoencephalocele originating from a cribriform plate defect, confirmed on computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). She underwent endoscopic resection and multilayer skull base repair using a fat graft as a plug, reinforced with oxidized regenerated cellulose, a right nasoseptal mucosal flap, and fibrin glue. Recovery was uneventful, and follow-up MRI confirmed closure without recurrence. Surgical planning involved coordination among neurosurgery, otolaryngology, and neuroradiology teams to optimize access and repair strategy.
CONCLUSION: EES is considered the gold-standard approach for anterior skull base meningoencephaloceles, although anatomical constraints make the procedure challenging in infants. In this patient, EES was successfully performed using tailored techniques and materials, illustrating that the approach can be reproduced in other young children. Transcranial approaches remain an alternative when endonasal access is limited. Early surgery in symptomatic cases prevents complications such as meningitis. Careful planning and coordination among specialties support optimal outcomes in complex pediatric skull base surgery.

### PMID 41957762 (2026) — BMC musculoskeletal disorders
TITLE: Delayed myelopathy caused by cerebrospinal fluid pseudocyst following decompression for thoracic ossification of the ligamentum flavum: a case report and literature review.
DOI: 10.1186/s12891-026-09786-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Delayed neurological deterioration caused by a postoperative high-pressure cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection is an uncommon but clinically recognized complication after thoracic decompression complicated by incidental durotomy. We report a case of delayed thoracic myelopathy due to a tension subfascial CSF collection and summarize relevant literature.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 55-year-old woman with thoracic myelopathy due to ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament at T2-4 and ossification of the ligamentum flavum at T5-6 underwent posterior decompression and instrumented fusion (T2-6 laminectomy with T1-6 instrumentation). An incidental dural tear occurred at T5-6 and was managed with an onlay artificial dural patch reinforced with fibrin glue and gelatin sponge. The wound drain was removed on postoperative day 7. On postoperative day 9, she developed acute left lower-extremity weakness. MRI demonstrated a large subfascial CSF collection causing significant spinal cord compression, consistent with a tension pseudomeningocele. Bedside subfascial incision and continuous closed low-level drainage (with the drainage bag kept at bed level) resulted in rapid neurological improvement. After recurrence following drain removal, ultrasound-guided drainage was performed, leading to sustained symptom relief. At 3-month follow-up, she had full motor recovery and follow-up MRI confirmed resolution of the collection with adequate decompression.
CONCLUSIONS: A tension subfascial CSF collection after incidental durotomy can mimic recurrent stenosis and cause delayed thoracic myelopathy. When imaging confirms a compressive CSF collection, continuous closed low-level subfascial drainage may be considered before revision surgery.

### PMID 40909211 (2026) — DEN open
TITLE: Endoscopic Closure Combined With the Endoscopic Submucosal Dissection Technique and Over-the-scope Clip for Chronic Aortoesophageal Fistula: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.1002/deo2.70202 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Aortoesophageal fistula (AEF) is a rare but life-threatening condition. Initial management typically includes thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) or aortic graft replacement to achieve hemostasis, followed by esophagectomy with aortic graft replacement and greater omentum wrapping to eliminate the source of infection. We report a case of successful endoscopic closure of a chronic esophageal fistula secondary to AEF. A 63-year-old man presented with hematemesis. He had a history of two ascending aortic replacements and one descending aortic replacement for aortic dissection. Computed tomography revealed a pseudoaneurysm at the graft anastomosis site and perforation into the esophagus. He was diagnosed with AEF and underwent TEVAR for hemostasis. Although the bleeding was stopped, follow-up imaging confirmed a residual fistula. Because of his poor general condition, surgery was contraindicated, and endoscopic closure was attempted. Initial treatment with hemostasis clips was ineffective. A second attempt using polyglycolic acid sheets, fibrin glue, and hemostasis clips with endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) achieved closure, but the fistula reopened after 5 months. Finally, the combination of ESD and over-the-scope clip (OTSC) achieved complete and sustained closure. The patient was discharged after 3 months but died 8 months postoperatively owing to idiopathic splenic rupture. This case demonstrates that the combination of ESD and OTSC may be an effective treatment option for chronic esophageal fistulas caused by AEF.

### PMID 41723098 (2026) — European annals of otorhinolaryngology, head and neck diseases
TITLE: When routine turns rare: Massive hematemesis unveiling hypopharyngeal perforation caused by a redon suction drain.
DOI: 10.1016/j.anorl.2026.02.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Hypopharyngeal perforation is a rare but potentially life-threatening complication that can follow cervical or aerodigestive procedures. Its deep anatomical location and often subtle symptoms make early recognition difficult, increasing the risk of mediastinitis and sepsis. Massive hematemesis as the initial manifestation is exceptionally uncommon and diagnostically challenging.
CASE SUMMARY: A 49-year-old man underwent elective C4-C5 anterior cervical discectomy for degenerative canal stenosis. Shortly after extubation, he developed massive hematemesis. Endoscopy revealed a perforation of the right pyriform sinus, with a Redon suction drain traversing the hypopharyngeal wall into the laryngeal lumen. Emergency direct pharyngolaryngoscopy was performed; the drain was carefully removed and the defect closed endoscopically with interrupted sutures reinforced by biological fibrin sealant. The postoperative course was uneventful, and at three-month follow-up the patient showed complete recovery without stenosis or fistula.
DISCUSSION: This case describes an exceptionally rare iatrogenic hypopharyngeal perforation caused by a Redon suction drain after anterior cervical discectomy, presenting atypically with massive hematemesis. It highlights the diagnostic challenge and potentially dramatic presentation of hypopharyngeal perforation following anterior cervical spine surgery. The report underscores the importance of meticulous drain placement, intraoperative vigilance, and postoperative airway and swallowing surveillance in preventing aerodigestive complications after cervical or transoral procedures.

### PMID 41169321 (2025) — JTCVS open
TITLE: Twenty-year experience of supracoronary reconstruction with fibrin glue in type A acute aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.xjon.2025.07.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: In surgery for type A acute aortic dissection, we perform supracoronary reconstruction with fibrin glue when the sinus of Valsalva has no intimal tears, and the diameter is &#x2264; 45 mm. This study aimed to clarify the surgical outcomes with fibrin glue, the incidence of aortic root events, and the influence of the preoperative severity of aortic regurgitation (AR) on aortic root events.
METHODS: Among 621 patients who underwent central repair in the past 20 years, we included 546 who underwent supracoronary reconstruction (87.9%). We closed the false lumen using fibrin glue and placed inner and outer polytetrafluoroethylene felt strips. The mild AR group included patients with no, trivial, or mild preoperative AR, whereas the severe AR group included patients with moderate or severe AR.
RESULTS: Acute aortic root events occurred in 19 patients (3.5%), and the incidence was higher in the severe AR group than in the mild AR group (9 [5.9%] vs 8 [2.2%]; P = .029). The long-term outcomes were investigated in 486 patients who underwent supracoronary reconstruction and were subsequently discharged. Late events occurred in 13 patients (2.7%), the 5-year and 10-year event-free rates were 98.4% and 95.1%, respectively. The pseudoaneurysm-free rate was 99.8% at 10 years. The 5-year and 10-year event-free rates were lower in the severe AR group than in the mild AR group (97.1% vs 99.3% and 85.8% vs 98.5%, respectively; P = .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Supracoronary reconstruction can be performed safely with fibrin glue with excellent long-term outcomes. Preoperative AR is a risk factor for aortic root events.

### PMID 40946181 (2025) — Advanced science (Weinheim, Baden-Wurttemberg, Germany)
TITLE: Molecular Design of a Naturally Derived Hemostatic Sealant with Prolonged Antimicrobial Activity for Repairing Elastic Organ Injuries.
DOI: 10.1002/advs.202506466 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhaging injuries on dynamic internal organs present significant clinical burdens due to their complex nature. To address therapeutic challenges, an injectable, photocrosslinkable, and multifunctional bioadhesive hydrogel comprising methacrylated gelatin (GelMAG), methacrylated dopamine (DMA), and poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (pDDA), named GDP, is engineered. The hydrogel combined underwater adhesion, antimicrobial activity, and hemostatic performance with high elasticity, biomimetic stiffness, and biocompatibility. The GDP hydrogel displayed &gt;200% elongation and &#x2248;50&#xa0;kPa Young's modulus in tensile tests. The bioadhesive strongly adhered (&gt;40&#xa0;kPa strength) to skin, outperforming commercial sealants Coseal and Evicel, and could seal various sizes and shapes of injuries created on explanted pig lungs. Broad-spectrum and long-term in vitro antibacterial activity is noted. During in vivo rat liver puncture and tail amputation, GDP achieved significantly reduced blood loss (&#x2248;65%) compared to commercial hemostat Surgicel in some cases. In a clinically relevant porcine lung laceration model, GDP sealed large defects and reduced blood loss by 45-55% compared to Surgicel and hemostatic sealant TISSEEL. It also supported enhanced wound closure and tissue regeneration with minimal inflammation. Ultimately, these findings showcased the potential of GDP to act as an elastic, antibacterial, and hemostatic sealant for the repair of multi-dimensional traumatic injuries on soft, dynamic tissues.

### PMID 40317897 (2025) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part B, Applied biomaterials
TITLE: One-Pot Synthesis of Antibacterial and Antioxidant Self-Healing Bioadhesives Using Ugi&#xa0;Four-Component Reactions.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.b.35584 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bioadhesive materials are extensively utilized as alternatives to surgical sutures and wound dressings. Despite significant advancements in their synthesis, current bioadhesives suffer from inadequate mechanical stability, suboptimal wet tissue adhesion, and a lack of inherent antibacterial and antioxidant properties, while requiring multistep synthesis processes, complicating their production for biomedical applications. To address these limitations, we developed a new bioadhesive, named UgiGel, synthesized through a one-pot Ugi four-component reaction (Ugi-4CR). Our strategy utilized gelatin as the backbone, 4-formylphenylboronic acid (4-FPBA) as an aldehyde source for improved adhesion and antibacterial activity, gallic acid (GA) as a carboxylic acid source for improved antioxidant activity and wound healing, and cyclohexyl isocyanide (CyIso) to induce pseudopeptide structures. The internal crosslinking between GA and 4-FPBA via dynamic boronate ester bond formation, triggered by slight pH changes (7.4-7.8) and temperature elevation (25&#xb0;C-40&#xb0;C), resulted in the formation of viscoelastic and self-healing hydrogels with water as the only byproduct without the need for initiator/light activation. UgiGel showed higher adhesion to porcine skin tissue (139.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.7&#x2009;kPa) as compared to commercially available bioadhesives, Evicel (26.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.6&#x2009;kPa) and Coseal (19.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.9&#x2009;kPa). It also demonstrated effective antibacterial properties against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, as well as antioxidant activity. Additionally, the in&#xa0;vitro studies using NIH-3T3 cells confirmed the biocompatibility of the UgiGel over 7&#x2009;days of culture. Moreover, in&#xa0;vivo biocompatibility and biodegradation of UgiGel were confirmed via subcutaneous implantation in rats for up to 28&#x2009;days. Our results demonstrated that UgiGel outperformed commercially available bioadhesives in terms of adhesion, self-healing, and antibacterial activity, without compromising biocompatibility or physical properties, representing a promising multifunctional bioadhesive for wound sealing and repair.

### PMID 41583841 (2025) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: Efficacy of fibrin sealant for bedside pleurodesis in patients with prolonged air leak after lung cancer surgery: a comparative study.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2025.1722846 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Prolonged air leak (PAL) represents a significant clinical problem after lung resection surgery, frequently causing extended hospital stays. Although several treatments exist, their effectiveness often remains limited. Fibrin sealant has attracted attention as a potential alternative due to its biocompatible properties, but strong evidence from controlled studies supporting its use for bedside pleurodesis remains insufficient. This study was conducted to compare the effectiveness and safety of fibrin sealant vs. 50% glucose solution in managing PAL following pulmonary resection for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of NSCLC patients who developed PAL (lasting &#x2265;5 days) after surgery between January 2021 and May 2025. Patients received either fibrin sealant or 50% glucose solution for bedside pleurodesis. To address potential selection bias, we employed propensity score matching (1:1 ratio) based on key clinical characteristics. Primary outcomes included success rate after initial intervention and time to chest tube removal. Secondary outcomes focused on complication rates.
RESULTS: After matching, 74 pairs were available for analysis. The fibrin sealant group showed significantly better outcomes, with a higher success rate after the first intervention (56.8% vs. 24.3%; OR&#x2009;=&#x2009;4.08, 95% CI: 2.02-8.24, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) and shorter time from intervention to median chest tube duration (6.0 days vs. 9.5 days, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). All patients in the fibrin sealant group achieved resolution within three interventions, while some in the glucose group required up to seven procedures. Complication rates were similar between groups (16 cases each, p&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.05), with no infection-related complications observed in the fibrin sealant group.
CONCLUSION: For patients with PAL after NSCLC resection, bedside pleurodesis using fibrin sealant appears more effective than 50% glucose solution. It offers better initial success rates, significantly reduces air leak duration, and demonstrates a comparable safety profile. These findings support considering fibrin sealant as a primary non-surgical treatment option for this challenging complication.

### PMID 40691699 (2025) — Scientific reports
TITLE: Clinical impact of surgical approaches on early-phase postoperative air leakage.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-025-12038-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: This study was performed to assess the impact of different surgical approaches on postoperative air leak and outcomes in patients undergoing pulmonary resection. This was a post hoc analysis of the ILO1805 trial, a multicenter prospective observational study conducted across 21 Japanese institutions. Data from 1168 patients who underwent anatomical pulmonary resection with a skin incision of &#x2264;&#x2009;8&#xa0;cm were analyzed. Patients were grouped based on the surgical approach: thoracoscopic surgery or minimally invasive open surgery. Propensity score matching was used to balance the groups. Logistic regression models were employed to identify independent factors associated with early-phase postoperative air leakage (E-AL). E-AL was observed in 290 (24.8%) patients. Factors associated with leakage included male sex (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001), body mass index of &lt;&#x2009;18.5&#xa0;kg/m2 (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.023), pleural adhesions (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001), and the use of fibrin sealant (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). The incidence of E-AL was significantly higher in the thoracoscopic surgery group than in the minimally invasive open surgery group (33.8% vs. 16.9%, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). The durations of air leakage and drainage were significantly shorter in the minimally invasive open surgery group (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.008 and p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001, respectively). Male sex, body mass index of &lt;&#x2009;18.5&#xa0;kg/m2, pleural adhesions, thoracoscopic surgery, and fibrin sealant use were associated with E-AL. Minimally invasive open surgery may more effectively control E-AL, leading to shorter durations of postoperative air leakage and drainage.

### PMID 40371059 (2025) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: Successful Treatment of a Refractory Lymphatic Fistula after Laparoscopic Para-Aortic Lymphadenectomy Using Dual Real-Time Lymphangiography with Indocyanine Green and a High-Fat Diet.
DOI: 10.70352/scrj.cr.24-0183 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Postoperative lymphatic fistula is a relatively rare complication of abdominal and pelvic surgery. Lymphatic fistula is classified based on whether it contains lymphatic ascites with clear lymphatic fluid from the lumbar lymphatic trunks or chylous ascites with milky chyle fluid from the intestinal lymphatic trunk. These two lymphatic trunks eventually converge into the cisterna chyli, which is located at vertebrae T10-L3. In cases of lymphatic fistula following lymphadenectomy in this region, lymphatic leakage from either the intestinal or lumbar lymphatic trunk, or both, should be suspected. Here, we report the successful treatment of a refractory lymphatic fistula after para-aortic lymphadenectomy for rectal cancer by visualizing intestinal lymphatic leakage using enteral high-fat milk and lumbar lymphatic leakage using inguinal intranodal lymphangiography with indocyanine green (ICG).
CASE PRESENTATION: A 57-year-old male developed chylous ascites with elevated triglyceride levels after para-aortic lymphadenectomy. Conservative treatments, including dietary management with fasting, total parenteral nutrition, and administration of octreotide, were ineffective. Although lymphangiography with lipiodol identified lumbar lymphatic leakage, it failed to stop the lymphatic fistula. The intestinal lymphatic leakage site detected by enteral high-fat milk was sutured laparoscopically, and the lumbar lymphatic leakage site was glued with a fibrin sealant patch. However, persistent lymphatic leakage required repeated abdominal paracentesis. Open suturing of the lymphatic leakage site was performed using navigation with ICG and high-fat milk to resolve the lymphatic fistula completely. Lymphatic leakage from the intestinal lymphatic system was detected using enteral high-fat milk and from the lumbar lymphatic trunk using inguinal intranodal lymphangiography with ICG. A total of 5 mL of ICG (1.25 mg/mL) was injected into the inguinal lymph node. ICG leakage was identified at the lumber lymphatic trunk. The leakage site was sutured until the leakage disappeared. Four months after surgery, the ascites disappeared utterly.
CONCLUSIONS: This case demonstrates the efficacy of combining enteral high-fat milk and inguinal intranodal lymphangiography with ICG for accurate detection and differentiation of lymphatic leakage sources. Our dual lymphangiography technique aids in distinguishing leakage from either the intestinal lymphatic or lumbar lymphatic systems, which is critical for the successful treatment of complex lymphatic fistula.

### PMID 40281602 (2025) — Respiratory research
TITLE: Medical thoracoscopy combined with argon plasma coagulation as an alternative treatment for intractable pneumothorax: a retrospective study.
DOI: 10.1186/s12931-025-03255-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A significant proportion of patients with pneumothorax who do not tolerate surgery develop intractable pneumothorax after prolonged failure of conservative treatment. This significantly lengthens the duration of hospitalization and patients' quality of life. As the application of medical thoracoscopy (MT) in the management of pleural diseases is explored, MT combined with argon plasma coagulation (APC) may be an alternative option for the treatment of intractable pneumothorax.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted on thirteen patients with intractable pneumothorax whose duration of the air leak exceeded seven days and subsequently treated with MT combined with APC at West China Hospital of Sichuan University. Under MT, we first dissected the pleural adhesions with an electrocautery knife, probed for the rupture located in the pulmonary bullae or pleural and cauterised it with APC. Subsequently, all pulmonary bullae were cauterised and human fibrin sealant was sprayed locally on the cauterised surface. Preoperative, intraoperative, and more than one year of postoperative follow-up information was collected from these patients. We divided the patients into two groups with and without detected ruptures treated under MT to compare the overall efficacy and safety of this treatment.
RESULTS: All patients had pulmonary comorbidities and the median duration of the current pneumothorax episode before MT treatment was 30 days. Nine patients had a history of recurrent pneumothorax episodes, two of whom had been treated with video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). Regarding efficacy, the overall median time of time to air leak cessation was 2.5 days, with 2 days in the group with detected ruptures treated and 5 days in the group without detected ruptures treated, and the overall median time of time to chest tube removal was 6 days, with 4 days in the group with detected ruptures treated and 7 days in the group without detected ruptures treated. Regarding safety, only 2 patients experienced postoperative adverse events of fever and chest pain.
CONCLUSIONS: For intractable pneumothorax patients with pleural adhesions that may limit lung re-expansion, who are not candidates for surgery, MT combined with APC can be an alternative treatment option.

### PMID 40208532 (2025) — Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.)
TITLE: Engineering a Multilayered Skin Substitute with Keratinocytes, Fibroblasts, Adipose Derived Stem Cells and Adipocytes.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-4510-9_10 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A variety of skin substitutes that restore epidermal and dermal structures are currently available on the market. While the main focus in research and clinical application lies in dermal and epidermal substitutes, the development of a subcutaneous replacement, the hypodermis, is often neglected. This chapter describes the use of fibrin sealant as a hydrogel scaffold to generate a three dimensional skin substitute. For the hypodermal layer, adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) and mature adipocytes are seeded within a fibrin hydrogel. On top, another fibrin clot with incorporated fibroblasts is placed for the construction of the dermal layer. Keratinocytes are added on top of the two-layered construct to form the epidermal layer. The three layered construct is cultivated for up to 3&#xa0;weeks with keratinocytes being exposed to air according to the air-liquid interface cultivation model.

### PMID 38528653 (2025) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: Contrast-Free Endovascular Aneurysm Repair Combined With Fibrin Sealant Filling for Treating Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm: Technical Note.
DOI: 10.1177/15266028241237465 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Endovascular aneurysm repair using iodinated contrast agents risks contrast-induced nephropathy, especially in high-risk patients. This technical note describes a contrast-free endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) protocol using preoperative imaging measurement and fibrin sealant (FS) filling.
TECHNIQUE: Preoperative imaging measurement and intraoperative guidewire manipulation facilitated anatomical identification without contrast. After endograft deployment, the aneurysm sac was filled with FS if endoleak was indicated by pressure fluctuations.
RESULT: Between 2017 and 2020, 6 high-risk patients underwent contrast-free EVAR with FS filling. Complete exclusion was achieved in all cases. Over follow-up, no endoleaks, deterioration in renal function, or other complications were observed.
CONCLUSION: Contrast-free EVAR with FS filling shows early feasibility as an alternative technique for contrast-induced nephropathy (CIN) high-risk patients, while larger studies with long-term monitoring are imperative to validate outcomes.Clinical ImpactThis study showcases a contrast-free EVAR technique with fibrin sealant filling for high-risk CIN patients. It offers a safer approach for those with renal challenges, reducing CIN risk. The technique's feasibility in a small cohort suggests its utility in treating AAA without iodinated contrast, crucial for patients with specific health risks. For clinicians, it introduces a method that decreases nephrotoxic risks, potentially changing practice for vulnerable patients.

### PMID 37933541 (2025) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: The Outcome of Sac Filling With Fibrin Sealant and Gentamicin After Endovascular Aortic Repair of Brucella-Related Aorto-Iliac Artery Aneurysms: A Retrospective Single-Center Study.
DOI: 10.1177/15266028231209943 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This study aimed to analyze the experience of our center and assess the efficacy of sac filling with fibrin sealant (FS) and gentamicin after endovascular aortic repair (EVAR) in patients with Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All patients who received sac filling with FS and gentamicin after EVAR for Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysms between March 2019 and September 2022 were reviewed. Before and after sac filling with FS and gentamicin, aneurysm sac thrombosis and endoleak were evaluated using a preloaded catheter to monitor immediate repair outcome. Short- to mid-term outcomes were assessed by the incidence of vascular graft infection (VGI), all-cause mortality, maximum aneurysm diameter, aneurysm sac thrombosis, and other adverse events.
RESULTS: There were 14 patients with Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysms who underwent sac filling with FS and gentamicin after EVAR. Perioperative death due to myocardial infarction in 1 patient resulted in a postoperative all-cause mortality rate of 7.1% (1/14). All patients received anti-Brucella drugs for a median of 6.0 (range: 3-12) months postoperatively. During a median follow-up period of 15.0 (range 0.5-36) months, the absolute and sagittal maximum diameters of the aorto-iliac aneurysm sac were significantly smaller than preoperation (from 46.3 &#xb1; 17.0 to 27.2 &#xb1; 16.3 mm, P&lt;.001, and from 39.2 &#xb1; 13.1 to 24.0 &#xb1; 13.8 mm, P&lt;.001). Two of these patients had a postoperative disappearance of the pseudoaneurysm. One patient was reintervened for bilateral femoral artery bypass surgery. Except for sac filling with gentamicin, all patients received anti-brucella medication for a median of 6.0 (range: 3-12) months. There were no allergic reactions, nephrotoxicity, endoleak, recurrence, VGI, aorta-related or infection-related deaths during the perioperative period and follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Sac filling with FS and gentamicin adjunctive to EVAR, with targeted drug delivery to the sites of Brucella-related aorto-iliac artery aneurysm infection lesions, may be an effective solution to control pseudoaneurysm infection and rupture.Clinical ImpactPrevious Brucella-associated aorto-iliac artery aneurysms have been limited to case reports. This study significantly increased the number of Brucella-associated aorto-iliac aneurysms by 19.7% (14/71) and extended the follow-up to 3 years. In this retrospective study of 14 patients with Brucella-associated aorto-iliac aneurysms treated endovascularly with fibrin sealant and gentamicin for sac filling and targeted administration to infection-related aneurysms, there were no aneurysm-related deaths or infection-related complications and may be an effective solution for controlling aneurysm infection and rupture. And, this approach is an attractive treatment for moving away from long-term dependence on antibiotics but still needs further evaluation.

### PMID 41555988 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Iatrogenic Right Ventricular Perforation Following an Endomyocardial Biopsy for Fulminant Myocarditis.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.99581 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Right ventricular (RV) perforation is a rare but potentially life-threatening complication of endomyocardial biopsy (EMB), particularly in patients with fulminant myocarditis, where myocardial edema increases myocardial fragility. We describe the case of a 50-year-old woman who developed acute RV free-wall perforation immediately after EMB performed for suspected fulminant myocarditis. Emergent pericardial drainage temporarily stabilized her hemodynamics, but ongoing hemorrhage necessitated urgent conversion to open surgical repair. A 3-mm perforation on the anterior RV wall was successfully sealed using a fibrin patch (TachoSil&#xae;) and a collagen-based hemostatic agent (Bolheal&#xae;), followed by extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support for circulatory stabilization. The patient recovered completely without recurrence and remained stable at the 10-month follow-up. This case highlights the need for early recognition of biopsy-related perforation, prompt surgical preparedness, and meticulous septal targeting during EMB, particularly in patients with myocarditis whose edematous myocardium is highly susceptible to mechanical injury.

### PMID 40353149 (2025) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Efficacy of topical hemostatic agents in neurosurgery: An experimental study in a rat model.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_791_2024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Few studies have compared different topical hemostatic agents in live models or brain tissue, and their doses are not standardized. Little is known about the combined use of these different elements in terms of efficacy and safety, especially in neurosurgery. The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of different topic hemostatic agents used in daily neurosurgical practice in an experimental animal model study.
METHODS: A group of 42 Wistar rats was used. A stereotaxic frame was fixed, and coordinates were determined to locate the bregma. A 3 mm hole was drilled with a bone-profile burr on each side of the midline. A stylet was inserted into the brain to create the defect and induce bleeding. The rats were randomly divided into seven groups, with each group assigned a hemostatic agent. Hemostasis time and control time on the opposite side were measured.
RESULTS: Hemostasis was achieved after an average of 1 82 s in the group treated with Beriplast, making it the hemostatic agent that stopped the bleeding the fastest. The control time was an average of 40, 14 s. Compared with the negative control, all the agents resulted in significantly better hemostasis (P &lt; 0.05).
CONCLUSION: A reduction in postoperative bleeding positively impacts annual morbidity and mortality rates, hospitalization time, and hospital bed turnover. Understanding the efficacy and safety of different hemostatic agents will enable surgeons to optimize intraoperative hemostasis, thereby achieving better postoperative outcomes and increased patient safety.

### PMID 39672946 (2025) — Aesthetic plastic surgery
TITLE: Efficacy of Fibrin Sealant in Submental Liposuction: A Prospective Randomized Study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00266-024-04615-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The incidence rate of submental liposuction has been increasing in recent years. Although this procedure is relatively simple, serious complications, including fatalities, have been reported, primarily owing to intraoperative and postoperative bleeding.
METHODS: To enhance the safety of liposuction, we examined the efficacy of Beriplast&#xae; P (CSL Behring, Melbourne, Australia), a physiological tissue adhesive fibrin sealant, in reducing postoperative swelling. Swelling was measured using the image analysis software VECTRA&#xae; (Vectra AI, Inc., CA, USA). Twenty-nine cases of submental liposuction performed from February to August 2024 were analyzed for tissue volume changes immediately postoperatively and at the time of suture removal, comparing those who received the fibrin sealant to those who did not.
RESULTS: The group using the fibrin sealant had significantly less postoperative swelling compared to the group that did not use the fibrin sealant (p&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The fibrin sealant may be used to effectively suppress postoperative swelling, reducing the risk of complications and improving patient satisfaction, thereby enhancing the overall safety and effectiveness of cosmetic surgery.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE I: This journal requires that authors assign a level of evidence to each article. For a full description of these Evidence-Based Medicine ratings, please refer to the Table of Contents or the online Instructions to Authors www.springer.com/00266 .

### PMID 41089584 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Postoperative Pelvic Abscess Risk in Gynecologic Surgery: A Four-Year Single Institution Experience.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.94383 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background Hemostatic agents (HAs) are often used in gynecologic surgery to control bleeding when conventional methods such as sutures, clips, and electrocautery are insufficient. Tisseel Fibrin Sealant (FS) and oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) (e.g., Surgicel Powder) are two HAs that are commonly utilized; however, there is limited clinical data regarding their safety profiles, specifically regarding the risk of postoperative complications such as pelvic abscess. This study was initiated following observations of increased readmissions for pelvic abscesses in patients receiving ORC. Objective The primary objective of this retrospective study was to evaluate the association between the intraoperative use of FS versus ORC and the incidence of postoperative pelvic abscess and other associated complications in patients undergoing gynecologic surgery. Methods A retrospective chart review was conducted on women who underwent gynecologic surgery by the author at a single academic institution in Baltimore, Maryland, between 2019 and 2023. Patient and surgical characteristics were extracted, and comparisons were made between those who received FS versus ORC. The association between intraoperative HA use and postoperative pelvic abscess formation was examined. Secondary outcomes included the assessment of other major postoperative complications. Results A total of 607 patients were identified, with 422 receiving ORC and 185 receiving FS; 72 (11.9%) patients experienced postoperative complications. Pelvic abscess occurred in 10.4% (95% CI, 7.5%-13.3%) of ORC-treated patients compared with 0% (95% CI, 0%-1.6%) of FS-treated patients (p &lt; 0.05). The overall complication rate was significantly greater at 15.6% (95% CI, 12.2-19.0%) for ORC versus 3.2% (95% CI 0.7%-5.8%) for FS. Readmission within 30 days of surgery occurred in 12.1% (95% CI, 9.0%-15.2%) of ORC-treated patients compared with 0.5% (95% CI, 0%-1.6%) of FS-treated patients, a significantly higher rate among those receiving ORC. Conclusion The use of ORC for adjunctive hemostasis in gynecologic surgery between 2019 and 2023 was associated with a significantly higher risk of pelvic abscess and other postoperative complications compared to FS. These findings suggest that FS may be a safer alternative for managing bleeding in gynecologic procedures, particularly in patients at higher risk for postoperative infections. Enhanced regimens of antibiotic prophylaxis are clinically significant and should be considered when ORC is used. These findings warrant prospective studies to validate these results and optimize clinical practice.

### PMID 40821238 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Sequential Surgical Management of a Recurrent Complex Transsphincteric Anal Fistula With Sphincter Disruption: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.88123 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: High transsphincteric anal fistulas represent a significant therapeutic challenge due to the risk of fecal incontinence associated with division of the sphincter complex. Management must be individualized, particularly in recurrent cases. We report the case of a 55-year-old male with a recurrent high posterior transsphincteric anal fistula who had undergone multiple previous surgical interventions. Initial treatment with fistulectomies and cryptectomies resulted in disruption of both the internal and external anal sphincters, leading to severe fecal incontinence. Due to persistent fistulous drainage, the patient underwent diagnostic laparoscopy with creation of a protective loop ileostomy, irrigation and drainage of the tract, primary transanal closure of the internal opening, and application of fibrin sealant (Tisseel&#xae;,&#xa0;Baxter Healthcare Corporation,&#xa0;Deerfield, IL). In the outpatient setting, tract curettage using a CitoBrush&#xae;&#xa0;(Medscand AB,&#xa0;Malm&#xf6;, Sweden) and repeat application of fibrin sealant were performed. Subsequent examination under anesthesia revealed fibrosis without evidence of an active tract. Intestinal continuity was ultimately restored. The patient's postoperative course was favorable, with no recurrence or continence impairment. This case illustrates the importance of a stepwise surgical approach integrating conventional and adjunctive techniques for the treatment of complex anal fistulas. The combined use of sphincteroplasty, temporary fecal diversion, and biological sealants provided effective disease control while preserving sphincter function. Current evidence supports the use of fibrin sealants as adjuncts in fibrotic tracts and the role of temporary diversion in cases involving sphincter disruption. Sequential and patient-specific surgical management led to successful resolution of the fistula without compromising continence. This multidisciplinary strategy may be considered in patients with complex anatomy and a history of multiple surgical failures.

### PMID 40812612 (2025) — Acta biomaterialia
TITLE: Chlorocatechol-functionalized gelatin nanoparticles as a hemostatic agent with antimicrobial properties.
DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2025.08.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage is one of the leading preventable causes of death associated with trauma, which is often complicated by wound infection. Current hemostatic materials are not ideal and lack antimicrobial properties needed for infection prevention. Here, we tested the feasibility for 6-chlorodopamine-functionalized gelatin (GDC) nanoparticles to function as a hemostatic powder with strong tissue adhesion and antibacterial properties. 6-Chlorodopamine contains a catechol sidechain that is further modified with an electron withdrawing chlorine atom, and provides strong tissue adhesion and antimicrobial property. These gelatin nanoparticles are not covalently crosslinked, which enablde them to rapidly transition into an adhesive film when hydrated with an aqueous solution or blood. The chlorination of catechol significantly increased structural integrity, interfacial bonding to tissue surface, and the rate of film formation. Additionally, GDC nanoparticles are noncytotoxic and nonhemolytic, and effectively killed Gram-positive (Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus aureus) and Gram-negative (Escherichia coli) bacteria. Finally, GDC nanoparticles achieved significantly faster hemostasis and reduced blood loss when compared to a commercial fibrin glue, Tisseel, in tail transection and liver hemorrhage models performed in mice. These findings highlight the potential of GDC nanoparticle as a versatile, multifunctional hemostatic agent capable of both rapid hemorrhage control and infection prevention. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Existing hemostatic agents often lack effective antimicrobial properties and may not be suited for application in a prehospital setting. This work evaluated a multifunctional, hemostatic nanoparticle that addresses key challenges in hemorrhage control and infection prevention, through a simple, bioinspired formulation. Gelatin nanoparticles were functionalized with chlorocatechol (GDC) that can rapidly transition into adhesive films when hydrated with blood. Chlorocatechol imparted the nanoparticles with strong tissue adhesion, film integrity, and antimicrobial property. In mouse hemorrhage models, GDC significantly reduced blood loss and bleeding time when compared to a commercial fibrin sealant. This powder-form material requires no mixing or specialized equipment to deploy, which makes it potentially suitable for application in a prehospital setting.

### PMID 40719199 (2025) — Biomaterials science
TITLE: Comparative evaluation of recombinant thrombin and fibrin hydrogel systems for extracellular vesicle delivery.
DOI: 10.1039/d5bm00705d | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: Extracellular vesicles (EVs) represent promising therapeutic agents in regenerative medicine due to their capacity to modulate cellular functions through cargo transport. However, their clinical effectiveness is limited by rapid systemic clearance and degradation, constraints potentially addressed through encapsulation within biocompatible hydrogel matrices. This study evaluates a novel fibrin hydrogel formulation derived from recombinant thrombin (Recothrom&#xae;) and residual fibrinogen present in purified exosome product (PEP) as an alternative to conventional fibrin sealant (TISSEEL&#xae;). We conducted comprehensive analyses of physicochemical properties, release kinetics, and cellular responses across four distinct hydrogel formulations: two conventional fibrin constructs with elevated fibrinogen-to-thrombin ratios (1) fibrin hydrogel with PEP supplementation (FG/T + PEP) and (2) non-supplemented fibrin hydrogel control (FG/T), and two Recothrom&#xae;-based variants with reduced fibrinogen-to-thrombin ratios (3) Recothrom&#xae; 25 units per ml + PEP (hrT25/PEP) and (4) Recothrom&#xae; 50 units per ml + PEP (hrT50/PEP). The Recothrom&#xae;-based formulations demonstrated significantly reduced mechanical stiffness characterized by thinner, more extensively branched fiber network architecture and decreased pore sizes. Although EV release dynamics were comparable across all groups, these structural characteristics facilitated enhanced cellular functionality promoting endothelial cell proliferation, upregulation of endothelial-specific markers, and improved fibroblast spreading, directional alignment, contractility, and type I collagen (COL-1) synthesis. These findings establish Recothrom&#xae;-based hydrogels as superior microenvironments for promoting angiogenesis and fibroblast-mediated extracellular matrix production, with significant implications for therapeutic EV delivery in tissue engineering applications.

### PMID 40718294 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Evaluating the Utility of Topical Haemostatic Adjuncts in Transoral Robotic Surgery (TORS).
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.86750 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Transoral robotic surgery (TORS) is a minimally invasive modern surgical technique, offering novel access to the oral cavity with important implications for the management of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. However, TORS carries complications including haemorrhage, pain and impaired swallowing, with potentially significant implications for patients and healthcare systems.
AIM: This combined retrospective cohort study and literature review aims to explore our experience with the use of topical haemostatic products in TORS to improve post-operative outcomes.
METHODS: We analysed our experience with the use of three different topical haemostatic adjuncts during TORS procedures at a major head and neck cancer centre from October 2023 to August 2024. The primary outcome measure was the rate of post-operative haemorrhage. This cohort study was complemented by a systematic review of the existing literature regarding the use of topical haemostatic products in TORS.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients met criteria for inclusion. The type of topical haemostatic adjunct used varied between Tisseel&#xa0;(n=8, 44.4%), Floseal&#xa0;(n=4, 22.2%) and Purabond&#xa0;(n=6, 33.3%). One patient (5.6%) developed a secondary post-operative haemorrhage. Another patient (n=1, 5.6%) required admission for management of post-operative pain. Our experience provides preliminary insight into the utility of topical haemostatic adjuncts in TORS and underlines the need for further research in this area.
CONCLUSION: Topical haemostatic adjuncts, in our view, are useful, surgeon-friendly products that may augment haemostasis in TORS. Further studies are required to determine the efficacy of individual topical haemostatic products in preventing post-operative haemorrhage and enhancing recovery following TORS.

### PMID 40583463 (2025) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: An Animal-Free Patient-Derived Tissue-Mimetic Biochip Model of the Human Synovial Membrane for Human-Relevant Osteoarthritis Research.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202404799 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Current synovial models fail to capture human-relevant OA traits. This study develops a fully humanized, animal-free synovial membrane model, mimicking OA synovial structure and molecular profile. Protocols for rheumatoid synovial micromasses are adapted for 3D biochip cultures of OA synoviocytes using TISSEEL fibrin and ELAREM lysate. Cell activity, mRNA expression, and structural changes are evaluated under varying hydrogel stiffness and cytokine exposure, with results compared to human OA and animal (equine and murine) synovial tissues. The animal-free biochip protocols replicate synovial architecture successfully. Improved gene expression of reticular collagen III (COL3A1) is achieved with 50&#xa0;mg&#xa0;mL-1 fibrinogen and 1% hPL. A 50 pg&#xa0;mL-1 TNF-&#x3b1; and IL-1&#x3b2; stimulus induced a pro-fibrotic phenotype (COL1A1, COL3A1) distinct from the inflammatory response triggered by ng/mL dosages (IL6, MMP1, MMP3, and MMP13, vs the pg/mL model). The clinical relevance of the patient-relevant OA synovial model is underscored by significant Yap1 overexpression, reflecting synovial hyperplasia from cell activation and inflammation. Yap1 distribution, as a biomarker (ctrl vs kOA tissue), is best replicated in the low-dose pg/ml-treated model. The tissue-mimetic biochips provide a human-relevant OA study platform offering patient-relevant molecular insights into the structure-function relationships of osteoarthritic synovial tissues while eliminating animal-derived materials.

### PMID 40456207 (2025) — Journal of neurosurgery. Case lessons
TITLE: Anaphylaxis associated with Tisseel fibrin sealant during re-resection of a craniopharyngioma: illustrative case.
DOI: 10.3171/CASE2517 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tisseel is a widely used fibrin sealant often used in cranial surgery to control bleeding from the cavernous sinus, often with successful results.
OBSERVATIONS: The authors present the case of a 10-year-old female patient who developed anaphylaxis during a re-resection of a craniopharyngioma, shortly after the application of Tisseel in the cavernous sinus. This reaction included a strong drop in blood pressure, rise in pulse, increase in oxygen requirements, and diffuse erythema and urticaria soon after after the use of Tisseel. Symptoms normalized after administration of adrenaline, clemastine, and hydrocortisone. A skin prick test later confirmed that the allergic reaction had not been to a single component of Tisseel but to a combination of its components.
LESSONS: This case and the accompanied literature can aid in recognizing patients at risk for an anaphylactic reaction against aprotinin. It also serves to remind us that medicine used locally in the surgical field can also cause anaphylaxis. https://thejns.org/doi/10.3171/CASE2517.

### PMID 40414118 (2025) — Differentiation; research in biological diversity
TITLE: Optimization of seeding cell density for differentiation of adipose-derived stem cells into epithelial-like cells on bioengineered composite scaffolds.
DOI: 10.1016/j.diff.2025.100870 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: This study investigates the biological factors influencing the epithelial differentiation of adipose-derived stem cells (ASC) to develop an engineered upper airway construct. One fraction of ASC was seeded onto a fibrin sealant (Tisseel) matrix encompassing an additional equal fraction of ASC that has been integrated into a porous polyethylene scaffold (Medpor&#xae;). Constructs with ASC seeded at total densities of 5&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;105, 1&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;106, 2.5&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;106, and 5&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;106&#xa0;cells cm-2 were cultured under submerged conditions for 11 days to achieve partial epithelial differentiation (PD). To simulate post-transplantation exposure to air and interaction with host epithelial cells, PD constructs with ASC at 5&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;106&#xa0;cells cm-2 were transitioned to air-liquid interface (ALI) conditions for additional 10 days (PD/ALI-21d) or 21 days (PD/ALI-32d). The latter cultures were either maintained alone or co-cultured with bronchial epithelial cells (PD/ALI-32d&#xa0;+&#xa0;BEAS). Gene expressions of mesenchymal and epithelial basal, secretory, and ciliated cell markers were assessed and validated via immunohistochemistry. ASC seeded at 5&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;106&#xa0;cells cm-2 achieved the highest partial epithelial differentiation, supporting the use of this density for further experiments. In PD/ALI-21d, basal and secretory epithelial marker gene expression significantly increased, while ciliated cell markers remained unchanged. In PD/ALI-32d, expression of basal and goblet cell markers and several mesenchymal stem cell markers decreased, but co-culturing with BEAS maintained the levels of their expression. These results indicate that long-term ALI cultures cannot sustain terminal differentiation of ASC into secretory phenotypes without co-culture with primary epithelial cells. In conclusion, partially differentiated ASC on constructs maintain a stem cell phenotype and may promote differentiation into basal/secretory phenotypes, but not ciliated cells. Enhancing ciliogenesis and ensuring ASC commitment to the epithelial lineage, require modifications to the study design.

### PMID 40265286 (2025) — Journal of laparoendoscopic &amp; advanced surgical techniques. Part A
TITLE: Sutureless Inguinal Hernia Repair Techniques: A Comparison Between Laparoscopic and Open Methods.
DOI: 10.1089/lap.2025.0039 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: Background: The study is designed to compare laparoscopic and anterior sutureless techniques for repairing inguinal hernia. Methods: For several years, our group has performed both laparoscopic and anterior sutureless inguinal hernia repairs. This retrospective cohort study analyzed 160 patients with inguinal hernias who underwent sutureless surgical alloplasty between July 2018 and July 2019. Eighty patients were treated laparoscopically (transabdominal preperitoneal approach) with a polypropylene mesh secured with fibrin glue (Tisseel&#xae;; Baxter Health, Deerfield, IL). The remaining 80 patients underwent open alloplasty using a preformed double-layered polypropylene mesh (Folded-Mesh; Angiologica, Italy) that did not require suture or glue fixation. Clinical follow-up data were collected for a period of 60 months. Results: The two groups were comparable in terms of age, gender, and ASA score. There was no statistically significant difference in operative time between the laparoscopic and open techniques (34.16&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.50 versus 40.17&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;7.92 minutes; P &gt; .05). No laparoscopic procedure required conversion to open surgery. No perioperative complications were reported in either group. A significant difference was observed in postoperative neuralgia, with 0 cases in the laparoscopic group versus 8 cases in the open group (P &lt; .05). Persistent pain (lasting more than 6 months) was reported in only 2 patients in the open group (P &gt; .05). Relapse was only observed in the open repair group. Conclusions: Sutureless inguinal hernia repair is a safe and effective procedure with minimal complications. The laparoscopic approach appears to be superior, offering a faster recovery and fewer postoperative issues, making it the preferred choice for sutureless hernia repair.

### PMID 40182452 (2025) — Journal of maxillofacial and oral surgery
TITLE: Comparing the Efficacy of Tisseel versus Surgicel as a Hemostatic Agent in Cleft Palate Surgery: A Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s12663-024-02364-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The purpose of this randomized clinical trial is to compare the efficacy of Tisseel (fibrin glue) with Surgicel as a hemostatic agent in cleft palate surgery.
METHODS: This prospective randomized clinical trial consists of 22 patients consenting to the study, and they were randomly allocated to Surgicel (Group 1) and Tisseel (fibrin glue-Group 2), with 11 patients in each. It was a parallel-group clinical trial with balanced randomization (1:1). Patients reported to Meenakshi cleft and craniofacial center for cleft palate surgery were included in this study. The primary outcome measures of this study were to assess the bleeding (intraoperative-bleeding scale) and healing in periodic intervals (healing chart).
RESULTS: This study includes 22 patients, of which 8 were bilateral cleft palate and 14 were unilateral cleft palate. The maximum width of the cleft at the level of hard and soft palate recorded was 1.5&#xa0;cm and 1.8&#xa0;cm, respectively. On comparing the bleeding scales among the two groups, the differences were said to be statistically significant (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.011). There were 2 reported cases of palatal fistula in Surgicel group I in the 9th and 13th month of follow-up. Our study occurrence of palatal fistula ranged 4.5% in the Surgicel group and 0% in the Tisseel group.
CONCLUSION: By comparing bleeding and wound healing in primary palate repair defects, the Tisseel group patients significantly showed better results compared to the Surgicel group. The tolerance to Tisseel was also evident by the way of reduced inflammation and less complications in that group.

### PMID 40081414 (2025) — Bone &amp; joint research
TITLE: The effect of metaphyseal holes and interposition material on the longitudinal growth stimulation of long bones in a rabbit model.
DOI: 10.1302/2046-3758.143.BJR-2024-0321.R2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIMS: It remains unclear which factors influence overgrowth of the tibia, resulting from the metaphyseal hole created during anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction in skeletally immature patients. This study aimed to investigate the effects of growth stimulation by creating a metaphyseal hole in a rabbit model, based on its distance from the physis and type of interposition material.
METHODS: In Experiment 1, 38 skeletally immature male New Zealand white rabbits were randomized into one of four groups: a metaphyseal hole created at 5, 10, or 15 mm distal to the physis of the left proximal tibia with the hole filled with bone wax, or a sham control group. In Experiment 2, after establishing the distance associated with the most overgrowth, a defect was created at 10 mm distal to the physis in 20 additional rabbits, which were randomly assigned to have the defect filled with Tisseel, or be left unfilled. The rabbits were euthanized six weeks postoperatively.
RESULTS: The length and rate of overgrowth were higher in the groups with holes drilled 5 and 10 mm distal to the physis compared to the sham group. A significant increase in new bone width was observed in the 10 mm distal hole group. Growth stimulation in both radiological and histological analyses was not significant in the unfilled and Tisseel groups. Valgus deformities were observed in all groups with metaphyseal holes compared to the sham group.
CONCLUSION: Creating a metaphyseal hole 10 mm distal to the physis of the proximal tibia can significantly stimulate longitudinal growth and induce tibia valga in rabbits; however, the effect varies depending on the type of interposition material. Notably, overgrowth was significant only in the group with holes filled with bone wax. Based on this study, the location of the metaphyseal hole during ACL reconstruction or physeal bar excision could be optimized.

### PMID 39966262 (2025) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Penetrating fixation device versus fibrin sealant for mesh fixation in laparoscopic repair of ventral hernia: a randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-025-03294-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Post-operative pain following intra peritoneal onlay mesh (IPOM) repair of ventral hernia is commonly attributed to mechanical fixation devices. Fibrin sealant is a novel technique of mesh fixation purported to cause less pain. The aim of this study was to compare postoperative pain in these two methods of mesh fixation.
METHODS: This was a double-blinded, randomized controlled trial. Eighty patients with primary ventral hernia underwent laparoscopic IPOM repair using PROCEED&#x2122; mesh, which was fixed with either mechanical fixation device, SECURESTRAP&#x2122; (MF group) or fibrin sealant, TISSEEL&#x2122; (FS group). Primary end point was postoperative pain at rest and movement on a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) of 0-10. Operative time, recurrence, seroma and quality of life (QoL) were secondary outcomes. Patients were followed up for one year.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in pain score at 12&#xa0;h, 24&#xa0;h, 7 days, 1, 3 and 12 months between the groups, except pain on movement, which was significantly less in the FS group on the seventh day (median VAS 3 vs. 2, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01). Mean operative time was 8&#xa0;min longer in the FS group (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.001). Two patients in the FS and none in the MF group had recurrence at one year (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.18). Seroma formation, postoperative QoL and patient satisfaction scores were similar in both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Use of fibrin sealant for mesh fixation does not provide significant advantage over mechanical fixation in laparoscopic IPOM repair.

### PMID 39850394 (2025) — Tzu chi medical journal
TITLE: Application of fibrin sealant in drain-free transoral endoscopic thyroidectomy vestibular approach.
DOI: 10.4103/tcmj.tcmj_41_24 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The transoral endoscopic thyroidectomy vestibular approach (TOETVA) is a minimally invasive technique. This study aimed to compare the safety of TOETVA with fibrin sealant (Tisseel) and TOETVA with drainage.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients who underwent TOETVA between January 2018 and December 2021 were divided into drainage (n = 20) and Tisseel (n = 30) groups.
RESULTS: The primary outcome was the incidence of complications. The secondary outcomes were operative time and postoperative pain. There were no significant differences in patient demographics, tumor size, intraoperative blood loss, and hospitalization days between the two groups. No patient required conversion to open thyroidectomy. The incidence of complications and postoperative pain was similar in the two groups. The operative time for TOETVA with Tisseel was significantly shorter than for TOETVA with drainage (P = 0.038).
CONCLUSION: TOETVA with Tisseel is a safe alternative to TOETVA with drainage, having a short operative time.

### PMID 38529836 (2025) — Veterinary ophthalmology
TITLE: Comparison of conjunctival pedicle flap to corneal fixation strength achieved by Tisseel&#xae; fibrin glue, ethyl cyanoacrylate adhesive, ReSure&#xae; hydrogel sealant, and conventional suturing with 8-0 VICRYL&#xae; ophthalmic suture.
DOI: 10.1111/vop.13197 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To determine and compare the fixation strength of conjunctival pedicle flaps to cornea achieved via conventional ophthalmic suture and three different adhesive compounds.
ANIMALS STUDIED: Ex vivo porcine globes.
PROCEDURES: Following a 6&#x2009;mm wide 500-micron-restricted depth lamellar keratectomy, conjunctival pedicle flaps were secured to the keratectomy site with either 8-0 VICRYL&#xae; suture or one of three adhesive products, including Tisseel&#xae; bioadhesive, ReSure&#xae; synthetic adhesive, or ethyl cyanoacrylate adhesive (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10 per surgical group). Adhesive application protocol varied by product based upon adhesive biocompatibility. Corneoconjunctival tissues were then harvested, clamped in a tensile testing device, and loaded at a rate of 1&#x2009;mm/s under video surveillance until the point of failure. Peak load was determined for each test and used to compare fixation strength between samples.
RESULTS: Forty conjunctival flaps were performed, with 6 omitted from evaluation due to dehiscence prior to tensile testing. Of the 34 flaps analyzed, 10 were secured with suture, 10 with cyanoacrylate, 8 with ReSure&#xae;, and 6 with Tisseel&#xae;. Flaps secured with suture withstood significantly higher applied tensile force compared with cyanoacrylate (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.02474), ReSure&#xae; (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.00000), and Tisseel&#xae; (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.00002). Flaps secured with cyanoacrylate withstood significantly greater force than those secured with ReSure&#xae; and Tisseel&#xae; (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.01194 and 0.01798, respectively). There was no significant difference in fixation strength between ReSure&#xae; and Tisseel&#xae; glue (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.95675).
CONCLUSIONS: Conjunctival pedicle flap fixation using 8-0 VICRYL&#xae; suture fixation was able to withstand significantly greater maximum tensile force compared to ReSure&#xae;, Tisseel&#xae;, or cyanoacrylate adhesives. Fixation strength achieved with cyanoacrylate adhesive was significantly greater than that achieved with ReSure&#xae; or Tisseel&#xae;.

### PMID 41113868 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Pilot Feasibility and Preliminary Cost Implications of a Day-Case Head and Neck Surgery Pathway Incorporating ARTISS Fibrin Sealant.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.94819 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to evaluate the feasibility, safety, and preliminary cost implications of implementing a standardized day-case pathway for common head and neck procedures that incorporates ARTISS fibrin sealant (human).
DESIGN: This was a single-center, retrospective pilot service evaluation of consecutive cases.
SETTING: The study was conducted at a UK National Health Service (NHS) district general hospital (day surgery unit without inpatient beds).
PARTICIPANTS: Participants included consecutive adults between October 2024 and February 2025 who underwent selected head and neck procedures judged suitable for day-case management under a predefined pathway.
INTERVENTION: A protocolized bundle including meticulous hemostasis, ARTISS applied at closure to promote adhesion and reduce dead space, drain avoidance where feasible (surgeon discretion permitted), structured recovery and explicit discharge criteria, and written or telephone safety-netting.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was same-day discharge, and the secondary outcomes included unplanned overnight admission, return to the operating room, 30-day readmission, hematoma or seroma, drain use, and other adverse events. A provider-perspective cost-consequence analysis compared day-case delivery with procedure-specific inpatient length of stay (LOS) estimates from the literature, and one-way sensitivity analyses were performed varying LOS, bed-day costs, and ARTISS price.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine patients underwent day-case head and neck surgery; 25/29 (86.2%; 95% CI 69.4-94.5) were discharged the same day. No returns to the operating room or 30-day readmissions for hemorrhage or seroma were observed (95% upper bound 10.3%). Drains were used in 1/29 (3.4%; 95% CI 0.6-17.2). Base-case modeling indicated bed-day cost savings versus inpatient care.
CONCLUSIONS: A standardized day-case pathway that incorporates ARTISS was feasible in this retrospective pilot, with a preliminary favorable safety profile and cost consequences in an NHS setting. As a single-center, non-comparative study, findings are preliminary and cannot isolate the independent effect of ARTISS. Future studies should include multicenter comparative evaluation (ARTISS versus no ARTISS within the same pathway) and formal economic analysis.

### PMID 41431582 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Safety and Feasibility of Microporous Polysaccharide Hemosphere Absorbable Hemostat in Robotic Liver Resection: A Single-Center Retrospective Cohort Study.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.97384 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: &#xa0;Numerous absorbable hemostats are often employed in liver surgery; however, the safety and efficacy of microporous polysaccharide hemosphere (MPH) absorbable hemostats in robotic liver resection (RLR) remain&#xa0;uncertain.
METHODS: &#xa0;This study included 141 cases that underwent RLR at Kokura Memorial Hospital between September 2021 and May 2025. The included patients were divided into three groups: those without using any hemostat (non-hemostat (non-HS) group, n=47), those with the use of fibrin sealant patch (FSP) hemostat&#xa0;(TachoSil&#xae;;&#xa0;CSL Behring K.K., Tokyo, Japan) (FSP group, n=23), and those with the use of MPH hemostat (Arista&#x2122; AH Absorbable Hemostat; Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, USA) (MPH group, n=71). The background characteristics and perioperative outcomes were compared between the groups.
RESULTS: &#xa0;There were no differences in any background characteristics. The rate of anatomical hepatectomy in the FSP group was higher than in the MPH or non-HS groups (95.7% vs. 35.2% vs. 36.2%, p&lt;0.001), and surgical blood loss was less in the MPH and non-HS groups than in the FSP group (11 mL vs. 0 mL vs. 34 mL, p&lt;0.001). There were no conversions to open hepatectomy in the MPH group, no serious postoperative complications such as hemorrhage or bile leakage, and no mortality. There were no differences in the time for MPH application between the anterolateral and posterosuperior segment areas (35 sec vs. 36 sec, p=0.396), but a significant difference was observed between FSP and MPH application time in anatomical hepatectomy (382 sec vs. 36 sec, p&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: &#xa0;Application of MPH is easy and effective for hemostasis without increasing the rate of bleeding complications after RLR. In addition, MPH may not raise the risk of bile leakage or intra-abdominal abscess. Thus, the use of MPH for RLR appears to be safe, effective, and time-efficient.

### PMID 41021128 (2025) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Dural repair after intraoperative CSF leakage in endoscopic endonasal skull base surgery without pedicled nasoseptal flap:&#xa0;is it a safe surgical technique?
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-025-03831-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In this study we evaluated the outcome and efficacy of a multilayer closure technique of the sellar floor after transsphenoidal endoscopic approaches for sellar pathologies in correlation to the intraoperative grading of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak.&#xa0;Overall 280 patients were reviewed retrospectively who underwent endonasal transsphenoidal endoscopic surgery for sellar pathologies from January 2011 to April 2020. Among them, 87 patients had an intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak and were included in this study. The intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid grading was based on the classification by Esposito. Clinical outcomes were evaluated based on postoperative complications and development of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak in correlation to the used closure technique and material of dural and skull base reconstruction. Their association with the intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak grade, underlying pathology and the tumor size were analyzed as well.&#xa0;From the 87 patients, there was 54 women (62%) and 33 men (38%). The mean age was 56.3 &#xb1; 14.8. The most frequent histological diagnosis was non-secreting adenoma in 40 cases (45%), followed by the secreting adenomas with 16 cases (18%). Eight cases of meningioma (9%), six cases of Rathke's cleft cyst (7%), six cases of craniopharyngioma (7%), four cases of colloid cysts (4%), four chordomas (4%) were observed. Of the 87 patients with intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid leaks, 20 cases were classified as grade 1, 37 cases as grade 2 and 30 cases as grade 3. The materials used for the closure of grade 1 were primarily sealant sponge Tachosil &#xae; (70%), followed by fibrin glue (55%) and bone (55%). For grade 2, Tachosil &#xae; (78%), bone (57%) and autologous fat graft (54%). In grade 3 dural leaks, the combination of lumbar drains (90%), autologous fat graft (87%) and fascia lata (60%) were mainly used. Only nine patients developed a new postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak in this series, and were treated conservatively with lumbar drains, but only three of them discontinued by this method. The remaining six patients with persistent postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak underwent revision surgery.&#xa0;The analyzed multilayer closure technique correlated to the intraoperative CSF leakage for endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery has been shown to be safe. This study shows a lower intraoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak rate compared to other studies and similar rate of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leak (3.1% vs. 3.9%) compared to the pedicled vascular flap and other techniques in the literature. Based on these results, the multilayer closure represents a real alternative to nasoseptal flap application in selected cases. However, in large defects and complex reconstruction of anterior skull base defects, use of lumbar drain and pedicled nasoseptal flap should remain the gold standard of treatment.

### PMID 40763361 (2025) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Comparison of sfilm-FS and TACHOSIL in patients undergoing liver surgical procedures requiring hemostasis - A phase 1/2, randomised, controlled study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2025.116543 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Multicenter Study, Clinical Trial, Phase II, Clinical Trial, Phase I, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: This Phase I/II randomized, controlled, multicenter study aimed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of sFilm-FS compared to Tachosil&#xae; in patients undergoing elective liver surgery requiring hemostasis at the liver surface. sFilm-FS is a new fibrin sealant patch, coating on a biodegradable tri-block polymeric film. The trial included 33 patients randomized 1:1 to receive sFilm-FS or Tachosil&#xae;. While most patients underwent liver resection, a subset underwent other hepatic surgical interventions. Safety was the primary outcome, including treatment-emergent adverse events, coagulopathies, and intraoperative blood loss. Efficacy was assessed as secondary endpoints by the time to hemostasis and hemostasis at 2, 3, 5, 7, and 10 &#x200b;min from product application. Hemostasis was defined as the absence of bleeding at the target bleeding site within 10 &#x200b;min. Both treatments were well tolerated, with no significant differences in adverse events. All patients achieved hemostasis within 10 &#x200b;min. The median time to hemostasis was 2 &#x200b;min for sFilm-FS and 3 &#x200b;min for Tachosil&#xae;. sFilm-FS is a promising, well tolerated, fibrin sealant patch, offering the potential for a superior Fibrin Sealant patch that could improve surgical outcomes. Further studies are recommended to validate these findings in larger populations.

### PMID 40291184 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Pneumatocele With Perforation of the Residual Lung Immediately After Thoracoscopic Left Lower Lobectomy: A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.81216 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cases of pneumatocele formation following pulmonary resection are increasingly reported, yet its underlying pathogenesis and optimal treatment remain unclear. Here, we present a case of pneumatocele perforation occurring immediately after thoracoscopic left lower lobectomy. A 66-year-old man was found to have a suspicious nodule in the left lower lung zone during a routine chest X-ray as part of a medical checkup. CT suggested lung cancer in the left lower lobe, prompting referral to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment. Contrasted CT imaging revealed a ground-glass nodule with a maximum diameter of 4.6 cm, including a 4 cm solid component, located in segments S9/10 of the left lower lobe. No signs of emphysema were observed, and pulmonary function tests indicated normal respiratory capacity. PET-CT showed mild uptake (SUVmax 2.04) in the left lower lobe mass, with no evidence of distant metastasis. Additionally, contrast-enhanced brain MRI showed no abnormalities suggestive of metastasis. Bronchoscopy was performed, but transbronchial lung biopsy and brushing/irrigation cytology yielded no evidence of malignancy. Based on these findings, stage IB primary lung cancer was suspected, and a surgical biopsy followed by lobectomy was planned. The procedure was conducted using a four-port, completely thoracoscopic approach. Intraoperative needle biopsy confirmed adenocarcinoma, leading to left lower lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection. Immediately after chest wound closure, a large volume of air leakage was observed, along with pneumatocele formation and perforation on the mediastinal side of the upper lobe. The pneumatocele was incised, its base cauterized, and covered with a TachoSil&#xae; fibrin sealant patch (CSL Behring, King of Prussia, PA, USA). Postoperatively, a mild air leak persisted, requiring a single session of adhesive therapy. Lung fragility and increased negative intrathoracic pressure following resection are key risk factors for pneumatocele formation. While most cases can be managed conservatively, surgical intervention should be considered in symptomatic cases, particularly those presenting with pneumothorax or hemoptysis. If a pneumatocele develops intraoperatively, positive pressure ventilation and compression may cause further expansion. Therefore, we recommend prompt incision to prevent enlargement, followed by air leak closure through cauterization of the base and application of a sealing material.

### PMID 39891932 (2025) — Neurosurgical focus
TITLE: Use of TachoSil for durotomy repair in spine surgery: a single-center retrospective review.
DOI: 10.3171/2024.11.FOCUS24667 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: A significant complication of spine surgery is persistent postoperative CSF leak secondary to intentional or incidental durotomy. Traditionally, the gold standard for repair of simple durotomy has been primary surgical repair; however, this technique alone may not be possible for more complex durotomy and is often supplemented with sealants or fibrin glues. The authors add to the literature the largest series of spine surgery patients treated with TachoSil, a synthetic collagen patch containing human fibrinogen and human thrombin, for the management of incidental or intentional durotomy.
METHODS: The authors identified all patients who underwent a spinal operation and were billed for operative use of TachoSil at their institution between January 1, 2023, and November 3, 2023. Demographic, clinical, and outcome variables were collected and analyzed using standard statistical methods. Categorical variables were reported as number (%), and continuous variables were reported as median (range).
RESULTS: The authors retrieved 55 patients meeting their inclusion criteria. The population consisted of 29 (52.7%) females, had a median age of 52 years, and had a median BMI of 28.3 kg/m2. Of the repaired durotomies, 37 (67.3%) were intentional to the operation and 18 (32.7%) were incidental or secondary to trauma. Abnormal residual fluid collections were appreciated in 1 (1.8%) patient. Wound breakdown was observed in 2 (3.6%) patients. Thirty-day readmission was observed in 6 (10.9%) patients, and 30-day reoperation was necessary in 2 (3.6%) patients. Ninety-day readmission was observed in 7 (12.7%) patients and 90-day reoperation was necessary in 3 (5.5%) patients. One (1.8%) case of 30-day readmission was related to CSF leak, and no cases of 30-day or 90-day reoperation were related to dural closure failure.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is a brief examination of the demographic characteristics, surgical variables, and outcomes of durotomy repair in spine surgery with TachoSil and provides encouraging results for the continued use of the material in this context. This study provides the impetus for examination of TachoSil in larger, multi-institutional studies to establish it as a standard of care in spinal dural repair.

### PMID 39842025 (2025) — Journal of lower genital tract disease
TITLE: Hemostatic Efficacy of TachoSil in Loop Electrosurgical Excisional Procedure: A Prospective Randomized Controlled Study.
DOI: 10.1097/LGT.0000000000000867 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate the hemostatic efficacy of the fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil) after loop electrosurgical excision (LEEP) and its influence on other complications and quality of life (QoL).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This single-blind, prospective, randomized study involved patients undergoing LEEP with or without TachoSil (1:1) between August 2014 and August 2015 in Asan Medical Center, Korea. Primary outcome measures were bleeding duration and the frequency of additional treatment owing to vaginal bleeding within 2 weeks after LEEP. Secondary outcome measures were vaginal bleeding volume using pictorial blood loss assessment chart (PBAC) score, the amount of vaginal discharge, the frequency of external genitalia, vaginal, and cervical infections within 2 weeks after LEEP, and changes in QoL.
RESULTS: Of the 140 patients enrolled, 126 (90.0%) were successfully followed up and analyzed. The median vaginal bleeding duration and frequency of additional treatment owing to vaginal bleeding showed no significant difference in the TachoSil applied and nonapplied groups ( p = .96 and p = .61, respectively). In addition, no significant difference was also observed in vaginal bleeding volume between 2 groups ( p = .64). In subgroup analysis for patients who underwent large LEEP (the longest dimension of &#x2265;2 cm), significant improvement was observed at physical functioning in QoL at 2-3 ( p = .03) and 6 weeks ( p = .03) after LEEP of the TachoSil applied group, compared to the nonapplied group.
CONCLUSIONS: TachoSil did not demonstrate significant hemostatic efficacy after LEEP. However, TachoSil improved patient recognition on physical function in patients who underwent large LEEP.

### PMID 41470204 (2025) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: Sensory Deficit Following Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction with Bone-Patellar Tendon-Bone Autograft: Platelet-Rich Fibrin (PRF) Could Provide a Solution.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina61122202 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: Despite the high rate of donor site morbidity, a bone-patellar tendon-bone (BPTB) graft remains the gold standard when choosing a graft for anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction. Damage to the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve (IPBSN) during graft harvesting results in sensory deficits. Despite its high occurrence in the postoperative period, many patients go untreated, leading to a lower quality of life and potential professional impairment. The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness of PRF therapy in alleviating sensory deficits and enhancing sensory nerve function in patients who have undergone BTB ACL reconstruction. Materials and Methods: This study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (Name of registry: ClinicalTrials.gov; Trial registration number: NCT07257666; Date of registration: 2 December 2025; Study start date: 7 January 2022). Over a one-year period, the pilot study enrolled 53 patients, treated them with BPTB ACL reconstruction, and divided them into two groups. The testing group's donor site and subcutaneous tissue were treated with Vivostat&#xae; PRF, whereas the standard group's donor site and subcutaneous tissue remained untreated. The primary outcome measured was a reduction in the subjective numbness, which was tested during follow-up checks. Secondary outcomes included the evaluation of subjective knee scores for functional recovery, reported by the patients on control exams. Results: The use of Vivostat&#xae; PRF resulted in a statistically significant reduction in sensory deficit among the groups at eight months (p &lt; 0.05) and twelve months (p &lt; 0.01) following surgery, favoring the testing group. The most substantial decrease in symptomatic patients was observed between four and eight months post-surgery, with no statistically significant difference found between the eight- and twelve-month follow-ups (p &gt; 0.05). Evaluations of subjective knee function and activity scores showed no statistically significant differences between the groups. Conclusions: Using Vivostat&#xae; PRF helps reduce sensory impairment in the area and minimizes donor site morbidity after BPTB ACL reconstruction.

### PMID 40469338 (2025) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Endoscopic subdural membranectomy for multi-septated chronic subdural hematoma: Finding a safe solution when middle meningeal artery embolization is not feasible.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_340_2025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Multi-septated chronic subdural hematoma (mCSDH) is a special type of chronic subdural hematoma (CSDH) that is characterized by a hematoma cavity separated by fibrous septa that hinders adequate drainage. Treatment of mCSDH using minimally invasive endoscopic-assisted techniques that may serve as an addition to the standard technique of burr-hole craniotomy drainage. No prior video on the nuances of endoscopic membranectomy (EM) has been described.
CASE DESCRIPTION: In this surgical video, we present the case of an 82-year-old female who presented with symptoms of right-sided body weakness and progressive headaches following a ground-level fall a month prior. Computed tomography (CT) head imaging revealed a subacute CSDH overlying the left frontotemporal and parietal regions, measuring 2.4 cm in maximum diameter, with a 0.9 cm midline shift toward the right side and multiple internal septations. Middle meningeal artery embolization could not be performed due to vascular access limitations. The patient consented to the procedure, and a mini left frontoparietal craniotomy was performed with traditional evacuation of the hematoma. Further, a rigid short endoscope (Karl Storz) with a 0&#xb0; and 30&#xb0; high-definition lens was introduced into the subdural space. EM and meticulous septation lysis were performed by microscissors and endoscopic bipolar coagulation along with intermittent irrigation, allowing for the maximal drainage of the subdural hematoma (SDH), hemostasis of friable and bleeding membranes with membranectomy, thereby promoting brain expansion. The duration of surgery was 3.7 h. The patient showed immediate improvement in the postoperative period and was discharged home on postoperative day 3. The interval CT scan at 6 months showed no recurrence. IRB approval was not required per the institutional policy.
CONCLUSION: This video case presentation highlights that EM enhances intra-operative visualization, identification, and division of neo membranes or solid clots under direct vision, helping to prevent recurrence and rebleeding. Judicious use of diluted peroxide, bipolar coagulation, SURGIFLO&#xae;, and fibrin glue effectively controls bleeding. A rigid 30&#xb0; endoscope aids in visualizing blind spots and bridging vein attachments, ensuring complete SDH evacuation. By adapting techniques over time, we have improved both patient outcomes by minimizing bleeding and operational effectiveness from aggressively peeling membranes off the dura, which could trigger bleeding, to focusing on lysis of unstable, hemorrhagic membranes while preserving thinner, non-bleeding ones. For distant membranous bleeds, SURGIFLO&#xae; and fibrin glue are sufficient, and aggressive lysis in the para-sagittal and parieto-occipital posterior areas is avoided.

### PMID 40291366 (2025) — International archives of otorhinolaryngology
TITLE: Regenerated Oxidized Cellulose as a Sealant and Adhesive in Endoscopic Endonasal Skull Base Reconstruction.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0044-1788599 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Introduction &#x2003;An ideal and long-lasting adhesive and sealant is essential during endoscopic endonasal skull-base surgery to hold the reconstruction intact and prevent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) permeation until complete healing occurs. Fibrin glue is the most common material used. Regenerated oxidized cellulose (ROC) has not been mentioned in the literature as sealant and adhesive, and, hence, we intended to study this role. Objective &#x2003;To evaluate the role of ROC as tissue sealant and adhesive in the reconstruction of skull-base defects in endoscopic endonasal skull-base surgery. Methods &#x2003;We retrospectively analyzed the medical records of patients who underwent endoscopic endonasal skull-base surgery with skull-base defect and intraoperative CSF leak, for which reconstruction was performed using fibrin glue or ROC, or both, as a sealant and adhesive. The type of sealant and adhesive used and postoperative CSF leak rates with different agents used were analyzed. Results &#x2003;A total of 64 patients were investigated. Fibrin glue alone was used initially in 6 patients, of which 4 (66.6%) experienced postoperative CSF leak. Both fibrin glue and ROC were used in 26 patients, among which 2 (7.6%) exhibited postoperative CSF leak. Regenerated oxidized cellulose alone was used in 24 patients, wherein 2 (8.3%) presented with postoperative CSF leak. Fibrin glue alone was once again used later in the learning curve in 8 patients, of which 2 (25%) experienced postoperative CSF leak ( p &#x2009;=&#x2009;0.002). Conclusion &#x2003;Fibrin glue provides intraoperative watertight seal. Regenerated oxidized cellulose has better intraoperative and long-term sealant and adhesive action in endoscopic endonasal skull-base reconstruction.

### PMID 40246197 (2025) — Journal of stomatology, oral and maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Buccal pad of fat, advanced platelet-rich fibrin, fibrin glue, and oxidized cellulose plug in the management of oroantral communication: A comparative clinical study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jormas.2025.102376 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: Oroantral communication (OAC) is a significant complication following the removal of maxillary posterior teeth that is a consequence of them being close to the maxillary sinus floor. The current study evaluated the efficacy of four treatment modalities for OAC management: buccal fat pads (BFPs), advanced platelet-rich fibrin (A-PRF), fibrin glue, and oxidized regenerated cellulose plugs. Twenty-four patients with OAC were randomly assigned to four treatment groups (n = 6 each) and clinically assessed for facial swelling, healing outcomes, and patient-reported pain at baseline, on day 3, and at weekly intervals for 4 weeks after their respective treatments. A linear mixed-effects model found a significant reduction in pain over time in all groups. Intergroup and intragroup comparisons of postoperative pain showed statistically significant differences between the groups at baseline and after 1 week. The BFP group had the highest scores for initial pain, while the A-PRF group had the least, with a consistent reduction throughout the study. The BFP group displayed significantly increased facial swelling on day 3, which had subsided after 2 weeks; the fibrin glue group followed a similar pattern but stabilized quickly. The A-PRF group showed minimal swelling and rapid tissue regeneration, while the oxidized regenerated cellulose group displayed less responsiveness for larger OACs. The choice of therapeutic technique for managing OACs should therefore be chosen according to the defect size and anatomical considerations. While BFP and fibrin glue were more efficacious for larger defects, the A-PRF technique showed rapid healing and less discomfort.

### PMID 39570354 (2025) — Acta neurochirurgica. Supplement
TITLE: Avoidance and Management of Complications in Retrosigmoid Approach to Vestibular Schwannomas.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-61601-3_16 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An experience with two rare complications during surgery of vestibular schwannomas (VSs) is presented, and measures to avoid and manage the complications are discussed.Case A: Spinal cord ischemia in semi-sitting position: A 47-year-old with a giant vestibular schwannoma (VS) underwent surgery through a retrosigmoid approach in the semi-sitting position. The intraoperative phase was uneventful, except for an episode of moderate hypotension. Postoperatively, the patient woke up with quadriparesis. MRI on the cervical spine revealed restricted diffusion from C4 to C7 suggestive of cord ischemia. Complete neurological recovery occurred over the following 3&#xa0;months. Awareness of this potential complication, preoperative screening for degenerative spine disease, avoiding excessive intraoperative cervical flexion, using sensory &amp; motor evoked potentials, and diligently avoiding intraoperative hypotension can prevent such occurrences.Case B: High-riding jugular bulb (HRJB) injury: A 42-year-old male patient underwent a retrosigmoid approach for a right-sided VS in the lateral position. During internal auditory canal (IAC) drilling, there was an injury to the HRJB, resulting in torrential bleeding. It was managed successfully with the sequential application of Gelfoam, fibrin glue, and Surgicel. The drilling was carefully continued by using a diamond drill, and the complete excision of VS was achieved with no injury to cranial nerve 7 (CN7) while maintaining normal facial symmetry. Awareness of an HRJB reduces the risk, and in case of injury, sequential hemostatic measures ensure adequate IAC drilling and the total excision of the tumor.

### PMID 39081094 (2025) — Journal of Korean Neurosurgical Society
TITLE: Effect of Intraoperative Ventricular Opening on Recurrence Patterns Following Bis-Chloroethyl-Nitrosourea Wafer Implantation for Newly Diagnosed Glioblastoma.
DOI: 10.3340/jkns.2024.0030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of ventricular opening (VO) on recurrence patterns in patients with newly diagnosed glioblastoma (GBM) treated with bis-chloroethyl-nitrosourea (BCNU) wafer implantation.
METHODS: This single-center retrospective study included 40 patients with newly diagnosed GBM who received BCNU wafer implantation after tumor resection between March 2013 and February 2022. The patients were categorized into two groups based on whether VO occurred during the GBM resection. While 18 patients had VO, 22 did not have VO. In cases with VO, the ventricular wall defect is closed with gelatin or oxidized regenerated cellulose and fibrin glue before BCNU wafer implantation. Recurrence patterns-classified as local, diffuse, distant, or multifocal-and time to recurrence were compared between patients with and without VO.
RESULTS: The median follow-up period for the entire cohort was 32.2 months (interquartile range, 16.7-38 months). Median survival time was comparable between patients with VO and patients without VO (38 vs. 26 months, p=0.53). Recurrence occurred in 31/40 patients (77.5%) in entire cohort. The incidence of recurrence was comparable between patients with VO and patients without VO (14 [77.8%] vs. 17 [77.3%], p=1.0). No significant differences were seen between the two groups in time to recurrence (p=0.59) or recurrence patterns (p=0.35).
CONCLUSION: Ventricular opening during surgery with BCNU wafer implantation does not seem to influence the recurrence patterns. Ventricular opening does not induce distant recurrence if appropriate ventricular closure is performed.

### PMID 40951134 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Spontaneous Lateral Sphenoid Sinus Meningocele Presenting With Recurrent Meningitis: Surgical Resolution via an Endoscopic Endonasal Transpterygoid Approach.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.89962 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 52-year-old woman with a history of recurrent bacterial meningitis and clear nasal discharge was diagnosed with a spontaneous meningocele of the lateral recess of the left sphenoid sinus. Radiological evaluation revealed a bony defect lateral to the vidian rotundum line, consistent with excessive lateral pneumatization and suggestive of a skull base defect. The patient underwent endoscopic endonasal transpterygoid repair, which provided sufficient access to the lateral recess. During surgery, the sphenopalatine artery was transected to achieve full exposure, which precluded the use of an ipsilateral vascularized flap. A multilayer closure was performed by using autologous fascia lata, fat, polyglycolic acid felt (Neoveil&#xae;, GUNZE Ltd., Osaka, Japan), and fibrin glue. The surgery was performed as a collaboration between otolaryngologists and neurosurgeons. The postoperative course was uneventful, with neither cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea nor meningitis recurring during five years of follow-up. This case illustrates the importance of precise anatomical assessment and individualized reconstruction strategies in the endoscopic management of lateral sphenoid sinus meningoceles.&#x3000;.

### PMID 40422854 (2025) — Journal of functional biomaterials
TITLE: Biomaterial-Based and Surgical Approaches to Local Hemostasis in Contemporary Oral Surgery: A Narrative Review.
DOI: 10.3390/jfb16050190 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Effective local hemostasis is essential in oral surgery to prevent complications such as delayed healing, infection, and the need for re-intervention. Postoperative bleeding occurs in 4-6% of cases, increasing to 9-12% in patients receiving anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy. This review evaluates the efficacy, safety, and clinical utility of local hemostatic agents based on 51 studies published between 1990 and 2023. Traditional agents, such as oxidized cellulose and gelatin sponges, control bleeding in over 85% of standard cases but offer limited regenerative benefits. Autologous platelet concentrates (APCs), including platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and leukocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF), reduce bleeding time by 30-50% and enhance soft tissue healing. Studies show the PRP may reduce postoperative bleeding in dental surgery by 30-50%, and in orthopedic and cardiac surgery by 10-30%, particularly in patients on anticoagulants. Tranexamic Acid mouthwash can reduce postoperative bleeding by up to 50-60%. Fibrin sealants achieve a 70-90% reduction in bleeding among high-risk patients, while topical tranexamic acid decreases hemorrhagic events by up to 80% in anticoagulated individuals without increasing thromboembolic risk. However, comparative studies remain limited, particularly in medically compromised populations. Additional gaps persist regarding long-term outcomes, cost-effectiveness, and the standardized use of emerging agents such as nanomaterials. Future research should prioritize high-quality trials across diverse patient groups and develop clinical guidelines that integrate both safety and regenerative outcomes.

### PMID 40254818 (2025) — Asian journal of endoscopic surgery
TITLE: Real-Time Identification of Lymph Vessels Using Indocyanine Green in a Patient With Chylothorax Associated With Lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
DOI: 10.1111/ases.70067 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is often complicated by chylothorax and may require surgical intervention; however, the treatment is complicated because of difficulties in identifying the location of the fistula intraoperatively. This is the first report to identify the site of a chyle fistula associated with LAM in real time during surgery by using indocyanine green (ICG) lymphangiography.
MATERIALS AND SURGICAL TECHNIQUE: A 56-year-old woman received a diagnosis of a treatment-resistant left chylothorax associated with LAM. To identify the chyle fistula during surgery, 1&#x2009;mL of ICG (2.5&#x2009;mg) was injected into both inguinal lymph nodes under ultrasound guidance after anesthesia, with 1&#x2009;mL per side for a total of 5&#x2009;mg of ICG. We performed video-assisted thoracic surgery and observed near-infrared light acquisition and overlay technology using Stryker. Approximately 1&#x2009;h after administration, fluorescence was observed in the anterior mediastinal lymph nodes, and a chyle fistula was observed around them. Although we attempted ligation of the lymph trunk, the surgical procedure damaged well-developed lymph vessels. The damaged area and anterior mediastinal lymph nodes, including the surrounding lymph vessels, were incinerated using soft coagulation and covered with polyglycolic acid sheets and fibrin glue. Consequently, the amount of chylous effusion decreased.
DISCUSSION: The use of ICG allowed visualization of the lymphatic pathway and location of the chyle fistula in real time during surgery, enabling precise local treatment to reduce chyle effusion.

### PMID 41221069 (2025) — HCA healthcare journal of medicine
TITLE: Use of Topical Hemostatic Agents in a Gynecologic Patient With Coagulopathy.
DOI: 10.36518/2689-0216.2029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The use of topical hemostatic agents has become common during surgical interventions. There is a wide variety of substances available to augment clotting, ranging from physical agents to topical thrombin combinations. Application of these agents in gynecologic surgery in patients with existing coagulopathies has not been studied.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 62-year-old woman with an inferior vena cava filter and a history of multiple deep vein thromboses presented to the clinic with pelvic pain, stress urinary incontinence, and uterovaginal prolapse. She underwent a total vaginal hysterectomy, sacral colpopexy, tension-free vaginal tape sling, and cystourethroscopy. Warfarin was cross titrated to enoxaparin prior to surgery. Patient had a 10-week sized uterus, normal appearing adnexa, and postoperatively bleeding was identified at the vaginal cuff. Preoperative hemoglobin was 9.0, and postoperative hemoglobin was 8.0 with normal coagulation factors. Several hemostatic techniques were used intraoperatively including combined gelatin-thrombin and gelatin-based agents. The procedure was complicated by a cystotomy which was repaired intraoperatively. The patient had postoperative bleeding from the incision site within the first 2 hours of recovery requiring a revision procedure. Exploration laparotomy was performed identifying the source of hemorrhage as a vaginal cuff hematoma. Suture and additional gelatin-thrombin sealant was applied to the pedicles and thrombin-soaked packing was placed in the vagina. Total estimated blood loss was 800 mL. The patient was transfused 2 units of packed red blood cells, 1 unit of platelets, and 1 unit of fresh frozen plasma. The patient made an uneventful recovery, and routine follow-up was conducted with no apparent complications.
CONCLUSION: This case illustrates special considerations for intraoperative topical hemostatic agent use for gynecologic patients taking chemoprophylaxis for history of thrombosis and the value of the material composition for timely activity. Fibrin sealants have more rapid hemostasis than an oxidized regenerated dry matrix of cellulose. Because of the proximity of the reproductive organs to the bladder and urinary system, procedures complicated by cystotomy may result in mild leakage of sanguineous urine. This leakage can reduce the efficacy of combined gelatin-thrombin spray by disrupting its chemical components, compared with other hemostatic agents.

### PMID 38760014 (2024) — Macromolecular rapid communications
TITLE: High-Performance Dopamine-Based Supramolecular Bio-Adhesives.
DOI: 10.1002/marc.202400345 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The need for wound closure or surgical procedures has been commonly met by the application of sutures. Unfortunately, these are often invasive or subject to contamination. Alternative solutions are offered by surgical adhesives that can be applied and set without major disruption; a new class of supramolecular-based adhesives provides potential solutions to some of these challenges. In this study, a series of polymers utilizing dopamine as a self-assembling unit are synthesized. It is found that these motifs act as extremely effective adhesives, with control over the mechanical strength of the adhesion and materials' tensile properties enabled by changing monomer feed ratios and levels of cross-linking. These materials significantly outperform commercially available bio-adhesives, showing yield strengths after adhesion at least two times higher than that of BioGlue and Tisseel, as well as the ability to re-adhere with significant recovery of adhesion strength. Promisingly, the materials are shown to be non-cytotoxic, with cell viability &gt; 90%, and able to perform in aqueous environments without significant loss in strength. Finally, the removal of the materials, is possible using benign organic solvents such as ethanol. These properties all demonstrate the effectiveness of the materials as potential bio-adhesives, with potential advantages for use in surgery.

### PMID 38470297 (2024) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Tissue Sealant Impact on Skull Base Reconstruction Outcomes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.31390 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Network Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Despite significant advances in understanding of skull base reconstruction principles, the role of tissue sealants in modifying postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak outcomes remains controversial. We evaluate postoperative CSF leak incidence associated with tissue sealant use in skull base defect repair during endoscopic skull base surgery (ESBS).
DATA SOURCES: Web of Science, PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, and Cochrane Library.
REVIEW METHODS: Systematic review and meta-analysis of risk differences (RD). A search strategy identified original studies reporting CSF leakage following ESBS with disaggregation by tissue sealant use and/or type.
RESULTS: 27 non-randomized studies (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;2,403) were included for qualitative and meta-analysis. Reconstruction with a tissue sealant did not significantly reduce postoperative CSF leak risk compared with reconstruction without sealant (RD[95% CI]&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.02[-0.01, 0.05]). Sub-analyses of dural sealant (-0.02[-0.11, 0.07]) and fibrin glue (0.00[-0.07, 0.07]) compared with no sealant were similarly unremarkable. Postoperative CSF leakage was not significantly modulated in further sub-analyses of DuraSeal (0.02[-0.02, 0.05]), Adherus (-0.03[-0.08, 0.03]), or Bioglue (-0.06[-0.23, 0.12]) versus no dural sealant use, or Tisseel/Tissucol versus fibrin glue nonuse (0.00[-0.05, 0.05]). No significant association was seen comparing dural sealant use versus fibrin glue use on pairwise (0.01[-0.03, 0.05]) or network meta-analysis (-0.01[-0.05, 0.04]). Limitations in source literature prevented sub-analyses stratified by leak characteristics, defect size and location, and accompanying reconstruction materials.
CONCLUSION: Tissue sealant use did not appear to impact postoperative CSF leak incidence when compared with nonuse. Higher quality studies are warranted to thoroughly elucidate the clinical value of adjunct sealant use in endoscopic skull base reconstruction.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: N/A Laryngoscope, 134:3425-3436, 2024.

### PMID 39728424 (2024) — Medical sciences (Basel, Switzerland)
TITLE: Could Fibrin Sealants (TISSEELTM) Be Effective in the Management of Burn Injuries? A Histopathological Study in Rats.
DOI: 10.3390/medsci12040075 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: Burn injuries remain a major clinical problem worldwide, which require special management by experienced plastic surgeons. However, they cannot be available in every healthcare unit; consequently, there is a need for effective treatment options that could be utilized by a wide range of non-expert healthcare professionals. The aim of the present experimental study was to investigate the safety and efficacy of using a fibrin sealant (TISSEELTM) compared to the conventional treatment with sulfadiazine on partial-thickness burn in a rat animal model. Methods: A cohort of Sprague Dawley rats underwent partial-thickness contact thermal burn wounds and were divided into three study groups: control group (no treatment), silver sulfadiazine cream group and TISSEELTM group. Following animal sacrifice, a blinded histopathologic analysis was conducted regarding inflammatory response, healing and tissue regeneration. Results: In total, 30 animals were included with a median weight of 236 &#xb1; 10 g. Two animals from the control group died on the first postoperative day. Animals in the TISSEELTM group presented dominant collagen expression compared to animals in the control and silver sulfadiazine cream group (p = 0.000). Histopathologic analysis also demonstrated marked leukocyte infiltration (p = 0.009), increased neovascularization (p = 0.000) and higher fibroblast expression (p = 0.002) in the TISSEELTM group compared to the other two groups. Conclusions: TISSEELTM seems to be a safe alternative (or even principal) option for the initial therapeutic approach of partial-thickness burn injuries. Moreover, it seems to be superior to silver sulfadiazine in terms of tissue healing and regeneration. However, additional experimental as well as clinical research is necessary prior to implementation in clinical practice.

### PMID 39315183 (2024) — Heliyon
TITLE: The combined application of electromagnetic navigation and porcine fibrin sealant in microwave ablation of lung tumors.
DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e37954 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: This retrospective study aims to assess the efficacy of the combined application of electromagnetic navigation (EMN) and porcine fibrin sealant (PFS) in the microwave ablation (MWA) treatment of lung tumors.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In our department from January 2022 to August 2023, 73 patients underwent MWA under standard computed tomography (CT) guidance (CT group) or CT guidance with additional application of EMN and PFS (CT-EMN-PFS group), respectively. The basic data of patients were recorded and analyzed using the Student's t-test and Chi-square test between the two groups, and single factor and multi-factors binary logistic regression analyses were conducted to determine the risk factors of pneumothorax; meanwhile the incidence of complications, the number of CT scans and dose length product (DLP) were calculated and compared between the two guidance modes.
RESULTS: Forty-seven patients underwent standard CT-guided MWA, meanwhile the remaining 26 patients underwent CT-guided MWA with combined application of EMN and PFS. The patients with lesions close to the bronchi or interlobar fissures, and underlying emphysema had a higher risk of pneumothorax, the corresponding odds ratio (OR) was 23.290 (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.004), 33.300 (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.019), and 8.007 (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.012), respectively; the combined use of EMN and PFS could reduce the incidence of pneumothorax, with an OR of 0.094 (95&#xa0;% confidence interval [CI]: 0.015-0.602, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.013). The incidence rates of pneumothorax, pneumorrhagia and pleural effusion were 59.57&#xa0;%, 61.70&#xa0;%, and 19.15&#xa0;% respectively in the CT group, and 30.77&#xa0;%, 50.00&#xa0;% and 7.69&#xa0;% respectively in the CT-EMN-PFS group. The incidence rate of pneumothorax in the CT-EMN-PFS group was significantly lower than that in the CT group (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.017). The median number of CT scans was 9 in the CT group and 5 in the CT-EMN-PFS group, respectively, meanwhile the median DLP was 1060.69&#xa0;mGy*cm in the CT group and 600.04&#xa0;mGy*cm in the CT-EMN-PFS group, respectively, which indicated there was a statistical difference in the amount of radiation exposure between the two groups (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001).
CONCLUSION: The combined application of EMN and PFS demonstrates for the first time that there is a lower incidence rate of pneumothorax and significantly less radiation exposure during the MWA of the lung tumors.

### PMID 39142955 (2024) — Journal of pediatric surgery
TITLE: A Phase 3, Randomized, Active-controlled, Single-blind Clinical Trial to Evaluate the Efficacy of Fibrin Sealant Grifols in Achieving Hemostasis in Pediatric Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2024.07.024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Clinical Trial, Phase III, Randomized Controlled Trial, Equivalence Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: In this study, two fibrin sealant products, Fibrin Sealant Grifols (FS Grifols 80&#xa0;mg/mL fibrinogen; 500&#xa0;IU/mL thrombin) and Evicel (fibrinogen 55-85&#xa0;mg/mL; thrombin 800-1200&#xa0;IU/mL) were studied for efficacy in achieving hemostasis at a targeted bleeding site (TBS) on parenchymous or soft tissue in pediatric surgeries.
METHODS: This phase 3, single-blind, active comparator, non-inferiority trial compared the number of patients achieving hemostasis at a TBS at four (T4 - primary endpoint), seven (T7) and 10 (T10) minutes after application, Safety and tolerability were assessed by recording adverse events during and after procedures. Eligible patients were &lt;18 years old undergoing elective, open, non-cardiac thoracic, abdominal or pelvic surgeries. Preterm (&lt;37 weeks gestation) and newborn (0-27 days) infants were eligible.
RESULTS: At T4, 98.7% of FS Grifols group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;91) and 95.4% of the Evicel group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;87) achieved hemostasis. All patients with residual bleeding at T4 were undergoing soft tissue surgery. All patients achieved hemostasis by T7. At T10, all patients achieved hemostasis except one (FS Grifols (no observation recorded)). There were no incidents of persistent bleeding. For FS Grifols, 26.5% of patients had treatment-emergent adverse events (TEAEs) and 18.4% for Evicel. One TEAE (moderate procedural pain - FS Grifols group) was considered possibly related to study treatment. Three patients died for reasons unrelated to the study medications.
CONCLUSIONS: FS Grifols was safe and effective at achieving hemostasis in pediatric patients having parenchymous or soft tissue surgeries. The efficacy of FS Grifols was non-inferior to Evicel.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: I.

### PMID 39108388 (2024) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Perspective: Timely diagnosis and repair of intraoperative thoracic/lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks.
DOI: 10.25259/SNI_509_2024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Our review of 12 articles for this perspective showed the frequency of intraoperative thoracic and/or lumbar CSF fistulas/dural tears (DT) ranged from 2.6% - 8% for primary surgical procedures. Delayed postoperative CSF leak/DT were also diagnosed in 0.83% (17/2052 patients) to 14.3% (2/14 patients) of patients undergoing thoracic and/or lumbar procedures. Further, the rate of recurrent postoperative CSF leaks/DT varied from 13.3% (2/15 patients) to 33.3% (4/12 patients).
METHODS: Intraoperative, postoperative delayed, and recurrent postoperative traumatic postsurgical thorac CSF leaks/DT can be limited by performing initially sufficient operative decompressions and/or decompressions/fusions (i.e., utilizing adequate open exposures vs. inadequate minimally invasive (MI) approaches). The incidence of CSF leaks/DT can be further reduced by spine surgeons' utilization of operating microscopes, and their avoiding routine attempts at total synovial cyst excision and/or complete resection of hypertrophied/ossified yellow ligament in the presence of significant dural adhesions.
RESULTS: Multiple CSF leak/CT repair techniques included; using interrupted, non-resorbable sutures for direct dural repairs (i.e. 7-0 Gore-Tex sutures where the suture is larger than the needle thus plugging needle holes), and adding where needed muscle patch grafts, microfibrillar collagen, the rotation of Multifidus muscle pedicle flaps, fibrin sealants (FS)/fibrin glues (FG), lumbar drains (LD), and/or lumbo-peritoneal (LP) shunts.
CONCLUSION: Intraoperative, postopertive delayed, and/or recurrent postoperative thorac and/or lumbar traumatic surgical CSF leaks can be reduced by choosing to initially perform the appropriately extensive open operative decompressions and/or decompresssions/fusions. It is critical to use an operating microscope, non-resorbable interrupted sutures, and where necessary, muscle patch grafts, microfibrillar collagen, the rotation of Multifidus Muscle Pedicle Flaps, FS/FG, LD, and/or LP shunts.

### PMID 38552641 (2024) — European journal of pediatric surgery : official journal of Austrian Association of Pediatric Surgery ... [et al] = Zeitschrift fur Kinderchirurgie
TITLE: A Study of Safety and Effectiveness of Evicel Fibrin Sealant as an Adjunctive Hemostat in Pediatric Surgery.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0044-1785443 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: &#x2003;Data on the use of fibrin sealants to control intraoperative bleeding in children are scarce. Evicel Fibrin Sealant (Ethicon Inc., Raritan, New Jersey, United States) was found safe and effective in clinical trials of adults undergoing various surgery types. We evaluated the safety and efficacy of Evicel versus Surgicel Absorbable Hemostat (Ethicon Inc.) as adjunctive topical hemostats for mild/moderate raw-surface bleeding in pediatric surgery.
METHODS: &#x2003;A phase III randomized clinical trial was designed as required by the European Medicines Agency's Evicel Pediatric Investigation Plan: 40 pediatric subjects undergoing abdominal, retroperitoneal, pelvic, or thoracic surgery were randomized to Evicel or Surgicel, to treat intraoperative mild-to-moderate bleeding. Descriptive analyses included time-to-hemostasis and rates of treatment success (4, 7, 10&#x2009;minutes), intraoperative treatment failure, rebleeding, and thromboembolic events.
RESULTS: &#x2003;Forty of 130 screened subjects aged 0.9 to 17 years were randomized 1:1 to Evicel or Surgicel. Surgeries were predominantly open abdominal procedures. The median bleeding area was 4.0&#x2009;cm2 for Evicel and 1.0&#x2009;cm2 for Surgicel. The median time-to-hemostasis was 4.0&#x2009;minutes for both groups. The 4-, 7-, and 10-minute treatment success rates were 80.0% versus 65.0%, 100.0% versus 80.0%, and 95.0% versus 90.0%, whereas treatment failure rates were 5.0% versus 25.0%, for Evicel and Surgicel, respectively. No deaths or thrombotic events occurred. Re-bleeding occurred in 5.0% of Evicel and 10.0% of Surgicel subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: &#x2003;In accordance with adult clinical trials, this randomized study supports the safety and efficacy of Evicel for controlling mild-to-moderate surgical bleeding in a broad range of pediatric surgical procedures.

### PMID 38531089 (2024) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Posterior Transdural Approach for Thoracic Corpectomies in the Setting of Complex Spine Deformity Reconstruction.
DOI: 10.1227/ons.0000000000001118 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: There are many surgical approaches for execution of a thoracic corpectomy. In cases of challenging deformity, traditional posterior approaches might not be sufficient to complete the resection of the vertebral body. In this technical note, we describe indications and technique for a transdural multilevel high thoracic corpectomy.
METHODS: A 25-year-old man with a history of neurofibromatosis type 1 presented with instrumentation failure after a previous T1-T12 posterior spinal fusion, extensive laminectomy, and tumor resection. The patient presented with progressive back pain, had broad dural ectasia, and a progressive kyphotic rotational and anteriorly translated spinal deformity. To resect the medial-most aspect of the vertebral body, a bilateral extracavitary approach was attempted, but was found insufficient. A transdural approach was subsequently performed. A left paramedian durotomy was made, followed by generous arachnoid dissection, bilateral dentate ligament division, and T4 rootlet sacrifice to mobilize the spinal cord. A ventral durotomy was then made and the ventral dura was reflected over the spinal cord to protect it while drilling. The corpectomy was then completed. The ventral and dorsal durotomies were closed primarily and reinforced with fibrin glue and fibrin sealant patch. The corpectomy defect was filled with nonstructural autograft.
RESULTS: The focal kyphosis was corrected with a combination of rod contouring, compression, and in situ bending. During the surgery, the patient had stable neuromonitoring data, and postoperatively had no neurological deficits. On follow-up until 1 year, the patient presented with no signs of cerebrospinal spinal leaks, no motor or sensory deficits, minimal incisional pain, and significantly improved posture.
CONCLUSION: Complex high thoracic (T3-5) ventral pathology inaccessible via a bilateral extracavitary approach may be accessed via a transdural approach as opposed to an anterior/lateral transthoracic approach that requires mobilization of cardiovascular structures or scapula.

### PMID 38475667 (2024) — Spine
TITLE: Alaska Pollock-derived Gelatin Sealant has Higher Sealing Strength than, and Comparable Biocompatibility with, Fibrin Sealant in Porcine and Rat Dural Injury Models.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0000000000004985 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Burst strength study in porcine dural models and functional and histological study in rat dural models.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the sealing strength and biocompatibility of Alaska pollock-derived gelatin (ApGltn) and fibrin sealants in disrupted dural injuries.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Disruption of the dura mater occurs during spine surgery, leading to cerebrospinal fluid leakage. Fibrin sealant is usually applied to ruptured sites; however, it lacks sealing strength. A novel biocompatible sealant composed of ApGltn was recently demonstrated to have good burst strength and biocompatibility in the porcine aorta.
METHODS: Ten porcine dura maters with central holes were covered with ApGltn and fibrin sealants (five samples per group). The maximum burst strength of each sealant was measured, and histological examination was performed after burst testing. Twenty-seven dura maters of male Wistar rats were used for functional and histopathological evaluations. The rats were treated with three surgical interventions: defect + ApGltn sealant; defect + fibrin sealant; defect alone (nine rats per group). Macroscopic confirmation of the sealant, hindlimb motor function analysis, and histopathological examination were performed at two, four, and eight weeks after the procedure.
RESULTS: The maximum burst strength of the ApGltn sealant was ~4.4 times higher than that of the fibrin sealant (68.1&#xb1;12.1 vs . 15.6&#xb1;8.7&#xa0;mmHg; P &lt;0.001). Histological examination confirmed that the ApGltn sealant showed tight adhesion to the dural surface, whereas a gap was observed between the fibrin sealant and the dura mater. In the rat model, the ApGltn sealant resulted in spinal function and dural histological findings similar to those of the fibrin sealant.
CONCLUSION: The ApGltn sealant had a higher sealing strength than, and comparable effect on dura regeneration with, the fibrin sealant.

### PMID 38452332 (2024) — Texas Heart Institute journal
TITLE: Successful Suture-Free Repair of Left Ventricular Rupture Using the EVARREST Patch.
DOI: 10.14503/THIJ-23-8277 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Left ventricular free wall rupture is a lethal complication of myocardial infarction. Although emergent surgical repair is the treatment of choice, the method of repair remains highly individualized. This report presents a case of spontaneous coronary artery dissection in a patient with Turner syndrome that led to left ventricular free wall rupture and was successfully repaired on cardiopulmonary bypass using a suture-free technique with the EVARREST Fibrin Sealant Patch.

### PMID 38413288 (2024) — Heart, lung &amp; circulation
TITLE: Thoracoscopic Management of Chylothorax by Application of a Fibrin Sealant Patch.
DOI: 10.1016/j.hlc.2024.01.038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Thoracic duct ligation is a demanding procedure when the chyle leak and/or the duct itself are not identified. This report describes a new procedure using thoracoscopic closure of the chyle leak by application of a fibrin sealant patch. This strategy was successfully applied for closing (i) a small fistula due to a postoperative lesion of the lymphatic tributary vessels in one case, and (ii) a large fistula due to idiopathic rupture of the thoracic duct in another case.

### PMID 38355514 (2024) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Improved early risk stratification of deep sternal wound infection risk after coronary artery bypass grafting.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-024-02570-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Deep sternal wound infection (DSWI) following open heart surgery is associated with excessive morbidity and mortality. Contemporary DSWI risk prediction models aim at identifying high-risk patients with varying complexity and performance characteristics. We aimed to optimize the DSWI risk factor set and to identify additional risk factors for early postoperative detection of patients prone to DSWI.
METHODS: Single-centre retrospective analysis of patients with isolated multivessel coronary artery disease undergoing myocardial revascularization at Paracelsus Medical University Nuremberg between 2007 and 2022 was performed to identify risk factors for DSWI. Three data sets were created to examine preoperative, intraoperative, and early postoperative parameters, constituting the "Baseline", the "Improved Baseline" and the "Extended" models. The "Extended" data set included risk factors that had not been analysed before. Univariable and stepwise forward multiple logistic regression analyses were performed for each respective set of variables.
RESULTS: From 5221 patients, 179 (3.4%) developed DSWI. The "Extended" model performed best, with the area under the curve (AUC) of 0.80, 95%-CI: [0.76, 0.83]. Pleural effusion requiring intervention, postoperative delirium, preoperative hospital stay&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;24&#xa0;h, and the use of fibrin sealant were new independent predictors of DSWI in addition to age, Diabetes Mellitus on insulin, Body Mass Index, peripheral artery disease, mediastinal re-exploration, bilateral internal mammary harvesting, acute kidney injury and blood transfusions.
CONCLUSIONS: The "Extended" regression model with the short-term postoperative complications significantly improved DSWI risk discrimination after surgical revascularization. Short preoperative stay, prevention of postoperative delirium, protocols reducing the need for evacuation of effusion and restrictive use of fibrin sealant for sternal closure facilitate DSWI reduction.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: The registered retrospective study was registered at the study centre and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Paracelsus Medical University Nuremberg (IRB-2019-005).

### PMID 38102397 (2024) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Fibrin sealant for closure of mucosal penetration at the oesophagus or cardia during submucosal tunnelling endoscopic resection for gastrointestinal submucosal tumours.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-023-10563-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIM: To assess the efficacy and safety of a fibrin sealant for the prevention of leak resulting from mucosal penetration at the esophagus or cardia during a STER procedure to remove gastrointestinal submucosal tumors (SMTs).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between April 2014 and October 2022, a total of 290 patients with oesophageal or cardiac SMTs underwent STER at our centre. We retrospectively identified patients with oesophageal or cardia SMTs who underwent STER and experienced mucosal penetration of the cardia or oesophagus during the procedure. A total of 31 mucosal penetrations in 30 procedures were included. Of the 31 mucosal penetrations, 12 occurred in the cardia, and the other 19 occurred in the oesophagus. All 31 sites received the fibrin sealant to close the mucosal penetration. Clinical characteristics, procedure-related parameters, detailed data of the mucosal penetrations, and treatment outcomes using the fibrin sealant were reviewed for all 30 patients to assess the efficacy and safety of the fibrin sealant for closure of mucosal penetration at the cardia or oesophagus.
RESULTS: For the 31 mucosal penetrations, the mean size was 0.08&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.06&#xa0;cm2 (range 0.01-0.25&#xa0;cm2). Mucosal closure using the fibrin sealant was performed successfully in all 31 mucosal penetrations. Of the 31 mucosal penetrations, clips were used in 13 cases. All 30 patients were discharged after a median of 7&#xa0;days (range 4-20&#xa0;day) postoperatively. During a mean 62&#xa0;months (range 6-107&#xa0;months) follow-up, all 31 mucosal penetrations successfully healed without the occurrence of infection, ulcer, oesophagitis, chest infection or abdominal infection.
CONCLUSION: For the closure of mucosal penetration during STER at the cardia or oesophagus, a fibrin sealant is both safe and efficacious. It is necessary to conduct more research on the viability, effectiveness, and safety of using a fibrin sealant to close wider mucosal penetrations.

### PMID 38834636 (2024) — Scientific reports
TITLE: Impact of different fibrin glue application methods on inguinal hernia mesh fixation capability.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-63682-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The use of fibrin glue for inguinal hernia mesh fixation has been suggested to be effective in preventing hematomas and reducing postoperative pain compared to tacks and sutures.. The effect of fibrin glue can vary significantly based on the device used. This study assessed the efficacy of fibrin glue based on the type of devices used in an ex vivo system. The rabbit's abdominal wall was trimmed to a size of 3.0&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;6.0 cm and was secured at the edges with metal fixtures. To measure the maximum tensile strength at the point of adhesion failure, the hernia mesh was fixed to the rabbit's abdominal wall using fibrin glue in a 2&#xa0;cm square area, left for 3 min, and then pulled at a speed of 50 cm/min. The test was conducted 10 times for each group. The median (minimum-maximum) tensile strength values using the spraying, two-liquid mixing, and sequential layering methods were 3.58 (1.99-4.95), 0.51 (0.27-1.89), and 1.32 (0.63-1.66) N, respectively. The spraying method had predominantly higher tensile strength values than the two-liquid mixing and sequential layering methods (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). In conclusion, in hernia mesh fixation, the spraying method can be adopted to achieve appropriate adhesive effects.

### PMID 38515189 (2024) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Investigation of the appropriate viscosity of fibrinogen in repairing pleural defects using ventilation and anchoring in an ex vivo pig model.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-024-02643-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Our previous study revealed that the viscosity of fibrinogen could influence the effectiveness of ventilation and anchoring (V/A) methods for controlling air leakages. Here, we examined the association between the viscosity of fibrinogen and effectiveness using an ex vivo pig model.
METHODS: The fibrin glue used in this study was BOLHEAL&#xae; (KM Biologics Co., Ltd., Kumamoto, Japan). We prepared three types of fibrinogen with different viscosities (higher and lower than normal), including one without additives. Using an ex vivo pig model, a pleural defect was made, and the defect was repaired using three different viscosities of fibrinogen through the V/A method. We measured the rupture pressure at the repair site (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;10) and histologically evaluated the depth of fibrin infiltration into the lung parenchyma at the repair sites.
RESULTS: The median rupture pressure was 51.5 (40-73) cmH2O in Group 1 (lower viscosity), 47.0 (47-88) cmH2O in Group 2 (no change in viscosity), and 35.5 (25-61) cmH2O in Group 3 (higher viscosity). There was no statistically significant difference between Groups 1 and 2 (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.819), but the rupture pressure was significantly higher in Group 2 than in Group 3 (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0136). Histological evaluation revealed deep infiltration of fibrin into the lung parenchyma in Groups 1 and 2, but no such infiltration was observed in the higher-viscosity group.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this experiment suggested that the V/A method using fibrin glue containing low-viscosity fibrinogen was more effective in controlling air leakage due to pleural defects.

### PMID 39068048 (2024) — International journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Matched cohort study evaluating the hemostatic efficacy of fibrin sealant versus conventional approaches following dental surgery in patients with hemophilia.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijom.2024.07.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: Patients with hemophilia frequently require supplementary interventions, either invasive (suturing, gel foam, or cauterization) or non-invasive (fibrin sealant/glue), to attain hemostasis post dental procedures. This study aimed to compare the efficacy of fibrin sealant against traditional methods for achieving hemostasis post dental surgery. The medical records of patients with factor VIII or IX deficiency, or von Willebrand disease, who underwent dental procedures in the Department of Dentistry, Seth GSMC and KEM Hospital, were evaluated for inclusion in this retrospective matched cohort study. Cohort-1 included those treated with a fibrin sealant (Tisseel Lyo) with/without traditional hemostatic measures post-procedure, while cohort-2 (controls) included those in whom no fibrin sealant was used. A total of 128 patients, 64 in each group, were evaluated. There was no statistically significant difference in demographics, disease-related variables, dental complaints, or preoperative treatment given between the groups. However, there was a significant reduction (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001) in the requirement for secondary procedures for hemostasis (suturing, gel foam application, and/or cauterization) and postoperative requirement for factor replacement (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.003) in the fibrin glue group as compared to the controls. In this study, fibrin sealant demonstrated superior efficacy in mitigating the necessity for active hemostasis control.

### PMID 38993419 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Efficiency Analysis of Hemostatic Agents in Drainless Neck Surgery: Cellulose-Based Versus Liquid Fibrin Sealants.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.62147 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: &#xa0;Using liquid fibrin sealants has once again questioned the benefit of drain placement in head and neck operations. Cellulose-based hemostats offering different hemostasis mechanisms have scarcely been investigated in drainless neck surgeries.&#xa0;This study aimed to evaluate whether liquid fibrin sealant offers any advantage over cellulose-based hemostats in various head and neck surgeries.
METHODS: A prospective trial of patients who underwent various neck surgeries between 2020 and 2022. Baseline characteristics and postoperative outcomes were compared between the drain-placed and the drainless groups, with the latter sub-categorized into three groups: fibrin sealant, cellulose-based hemostats, and a combination of both.
RESULTS: A total of 119 patients were included (63 thyroidectomies, 40 parathyroidectomies, and 16 sialoadenectomies). Fifty eight had a drain placed and 61 had no drain. In the drainless group, 23 patients received cellulose-based absorbable hemostats (SURGICEL&#xae;/ FIBRILLAR&#x2122;); 18 patients had fibrin sealants (EVICEL&#xae;/TachoSil&#xae;/TISSEEL); in 16, a combination of both was used; and in four patients, no hemostatic agent was used. Three (5%) of the 61 drainless patients developed a seroma compared to one (2%) seroma in the drain-placed patients. No advantage was demonstrated using a combination of FIBRILLAR&#x2122; with a fibrin sealant nor for any used separately. Drain placement delayed patient discharge by at least one day compared to the group without a drain (p &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Drain placement offered a minor advantage in the postoperative course reducing rates of seroma formation, while delaying patient discharge by at least one day. There was no advantage in using a specific hemostatic agent over the other.

### PMID 38839179 (2024) — Mayo Clinic proceedings
TITLE: Exosome Therapy for a Nonhealing Scalp Wound Following Chemoradiation and Surgical Therapy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2024.04.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This case report describes the safety and utility of a noninvasive therapy, Purified Exosome Product (PEP), for poorly healing scalp wounds in the setting of prior chemoradiation and surgery. A man in his 60s with a history of high-grade angiosarcoma of the right temporoparietal scalp reconstruction had a 1-year history of 2 nonhealing scalp wounds after neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by concurrent chemoradiation therapy, wide local excision, and latissimus dorsi free flap and split-thickness skin graft. The patient underwent d&#xe9;bridement followed by 4 collagen (Bellafill)-PEP and 4 fibrin (Tisseel)-PEP applications during 7 months in 2022. Photographs of the area of exposed bone of the temporoparietal wound were measured and standardized by ImageJ open-source software. The frontal wound was not routinely measured and therefore was qualitatively assessed by reviewing photographs over time. The frontal wound completely healed, and the temporoparietal wound showed a 96% decrease in overall size. The patient had no adverse effects of treatment and continues to demonstrate ongoing healing. This case exhibits the safety and utility of topical PEP therapy for noninvasive treatment of poorly healing scalp wounds and offers the potential for an alternative treatment of patients who are poor candidates for additional surgical intervention.

### PMID 38830847 (2024) — Nature communications
TITLE: Instantly adhesive and ultra-elastic patches for dynamic organ and wound repair.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-48980-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bioadhesive materials and patches are promising alternatives to surgical sutures and staples. However, many existing bioadhesives do not meet the functional requirements of current surgical procedures and interventions. Here, we present a translational patch material that exhibits instant adhesion to tissues (2.5-fold stronger than Tisseel, an FDA-approved fibrin glue), ultra-stretchability (stretching to &gt;300% its original length without losing elasticity), compatibility with rapid photo-projection (&lt;2&#x2009;min fabrication time/patch), and ability to deliver therapeutics. Using our established procedures for the in silico design and optimization of anisotropic-auxetic patches, we created next-generation patches for instant attachment to tissues while conforming to a broad range of organ mechanics ex vivo and in vivo. Patches coated with extracellular vesicles derived from mesenchymal stem cells demonstrate robust wound healing capability in vivo without inducing a foreign body response and without the need for patch removal that can cause pain and bleeding. We further demonstrate a single material-based, void-filling auxetic patch designed for the treatment of lung puncture wounds.

### PMID 38657627 (2024) — Biomedical materials (Bristol, England)
TITLE: Ultrafast gelling bioadhesive based on blood plasma and gelatin for wound closure and healing.
DOI: 10.1088/1748-605X/ad42ec | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Tissue adhesives offer a plethora of advantages in achieving efficient wound closure over conventional sutures and staples. Such materials are of great value, especially in cases where suturing could potentially damage tissues or compromise blood flow or in cases of hard-to-reach areas. Besides providing wound closure, the tissue adhesives must also facilitate wound healing. Previously, plasma-based tissue adhesives and similar bioinspired strategies have been utilized to aid in wound healing. Still, their application is constrained by factors such as high cost, diminished biocompatibility, prolonged gelation times, inadequate swelling, quick resorption, as well as short-term and inconsistent efficacy. To address these limitations, we report the development of a highly biocompatible and ultrafast-gelling tissue adhesive hydrogels. Freeze-dried platelet-rich plasma, heat-denatured freeze-dried platelet-poor plasma, and gelatin were utilized as the base matrix. Gelation was initiated by adding tetrakis hydroxymethyl phosphonium chloride. The fabricated gels displayed rapid gelation (3-4 s), low swelling, increased proliferation, and migration against L929 cells and had porcine skin tissue adhesion strength similar to that of plasma-based commercial glue (Tisseel&#xae;).

### PMID 38520703 (2024) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part B, Applied biomaterials
TITLE: Photocurable extracellular matrix sealant for cessation of venous hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.b.35401 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S., Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage is the second leading cause of death in patients under 46&#x2009;years of age in the United States. Cessation of hemorrhage prevents hemorrhagic shock and tissue hypoxia. Controlling the bleed via direct pressure or tourniquet is often the first line of defense, but long-term care requires staples, hemostatic agents, or sealants that seal the vessel and restore blood flow. Here, we compare a new photocurable extracellular matrix sealant (pcECM) with low, medium, and high crosslink density formulations to a commercially available fibrin-based sealant, TISSEEL&#xae;. pcECM has potential uses in surgical and remote settings due to room temperature storage conditions and fast preparation time. Here, we determine if pcECM sealant can stop venous hemorrhage in a murine model, adhere to the wound site in vivo throughout the wound-healing process, and has the mechanical properties necessary for stopping hemorrhage. Adjusting pcECM crosslinking density significantly affected viscosity, swelling, burst strength, tensile strength, and elasticity of the sealant. 3-Dimensional ultrasound volume segmentations showed pcECM degrades to 17&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8% of its initial implant volume by day 28. Initially, local hemodynamic changes were observed, but returned close to baseline levels by day 28. Acute inflammation was observed near the puncture site in pcECM implanted mice, and we observed inflammatory markers at the 14-day explant for both sealants. pcECM and fibrin sealant successfully sealed the vessel in all cases, and consistently degraded over 14-28&#x2009;days. pcECM is a durable sealant with tunable mechanical properties and possible uses in hemorrhage control and other surgical procedures.

### PMID 38456966 (2024) — Journal of materials science. Materials in medicine
TITLE: Biochemical and biomechanical characterization of an autologous protein-based fibrin sealant for regenerative medicine.
DOI: 10.1007/s10856-024-06780-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Accidental events or surgical procedures usually lead to tissue injury. Fibrin sealants have proven to optimize the healing process but have some drawbacks due to their allogeneic nature. Autologous fibrin sealants present several advantages. The aim of this study is to evaluate the performance of a new autologous fibrin sealant based on Endoret&#xae;PRGF&#xae; technology (E-sealant). One of the most widely used commercial fibrin sealants (Tisseel&#xae;) was included as comparative Control. E-sealant&#xb4;s hematological and biological properties were characterized. The coagulation kinetics and the microstructure were compared. Their rheological profile and biomechanical behavior were also recorded. Finally, the swelling/shrinkage capacity and the enzymatic degradation of adhesives were determined. E-sealant presented a moderate platelet concentration and physiological levels of fibrinogen and thrombin. It clotted 30&#x2009;s after activation. The microstructure of E-sealant showed a homogeneous fibrillar scaffold with numerous and scattered platelet aggregates. In contrast, Control presented absence of blood cells and amorphous protein deposits. Although in different order of magnitude, both adhesives had similar rheological profiles and viscoelasticity. Control showed a higher hardness but both adhesives presented a pseudoplastic hydrogel nature with a shear thinning behavior. Regarding their adhesiveness, E-sealant presented a higher tensile strength before cohesive failure but their elastic stretching capacity and maximum elongation was similar. While E-sealant presented a significant shrinkage process, Control showed a slight swelling over time. In addition, E-sealant presented a high enzymatic resorption rate, while Control showed to withstand the biodegradation process in a significant way. E-sealant presents optimal biochemical and biomechanical properties suitable for its use as a fibrin sealant with regenerative purposes.

### PMID 38375996 (2024) — Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI
TITLE: Cotyledon-Specific Flow Evaluation of Rhesus Macaque Placental Injury Using Ferumoxytol Dynamic Contrast-Enhanced MRI.
DOI: 10.1002/jmri.29291 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Recently, dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) MRI with ferumoxytol as contrast agent has recently been introduced for the noninvasive assessment of placental structure and function throughout. However, it has not been demonstrated under pathological conditions.
PURPOSE: To measure cotyledon-specific rhesus macaque maternal placental blood flow using ferumoxytol DCE MRI in a novel animal model for local placental injury.
STUDY TYPE: Prospective animal model.
SUBJECTS: Placental injections of Tisseel (three with 0.5&#x2009;mL and two with 1.5&#x2009;mL), monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (three with 100&#x2009;&#x3bc;g), and three with saline as controls were performed in a total of 11 rhesus macaque pregnancies at approximate gestational day (GD 101). DCE MRI scans were performed prior (GD 100) and after (GD 115 and GD 145) the injection (term&#x2009;=&#x2009;GD 165).
FIELD STRENGTH/SEQUENCE: 3&#x2009;T, T1-weighted spoiled gradient echo sequence (product sequence, DISCO).
ASSESSMENT: Source images were inspected for motion artefacts from the mother or fetus. Placenta segmentation and DCE processing were performed for the dynamic image series to measure cotyledon specific volume, flow, and normalized flow. Overall placental histopathology was conducted for controls, Tisseel, and MCP-1 animals and regions of tissue infarctions and necrosis were documented. Visual inspections for potential necrotic tissue were conducted for the two Tisseelx3 animals.
STATISTICAL TESTS: Wilcoxon rank sum test, significance level P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05.
RESULTS: No motion artefacts were observed. For the group treated with 1.5&#x2009;mL of Tisseel, significantly lower cotyledon volume, flow, and normalized flow per cotyledon were observed for the third gestational time point of imaging (day ~145), with mean normalized flow of 0.53&#x2009;minute-1. Preliminary histopathological analysis shows areas of tissue necrosis from a selected cotyledon in one Tisseel-treated (single dose) animal and both Tisseelx3 (triple dose) animals.
DATA CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates the feasibility of cotyledon-specific functional analysis at multiple gestational time points and injury detection in a placental rhesus macaque model through ferumoxytol-enhanced DCE MRI.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: NA TECHNICAL EFFICACY: Stage 2.

### PMID 38091191 (2024) — Updates in surgery
TITLE: Pedicle stabilization with fibrin sealant in DIEP flap breast reconstruction.
DOI: 10.1007/s13304-023-01711-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microsurgical procedures are nowadays routinely performed worldwide in reconstructive surgery. The deep inferior epigastric artery perforator (DIEP) flap has become the gold standard in breast reconstruction due to its excellent outcomes and lower donor site morbidity. However, complications, including flap failure, still occur in DIEP flap breast reconstruction. Often, according to our experience, these complications result from pedicle disorders, which can be attributed to postoperative mobilization. In the present study, we evaluated the efficacy and safety of using a fibrin sealant as a method for pedicle stabilization to prevent pedicle mobilization in the postoperative period. With our technique, after the flap insetting and microsurgical anastomosis, the pedicle was stabilized by applying a fibrin sealant (TISSEEL&#x2122;) around and over the entire pedicle. Our study included a homogeneous series of 70 patients who received a delayed DIEP flap breast reconstruction. A retrospective study was conducted to evaluate this novel technique compared to the conventional method. In our experience, the fibrin glue allowed us to reduce the strain for correct pedicle positioning and all subsequent efforts to avoid displacements in the postoperative period. Our preliminary results suggest that this method may lead to a reduction in overall complications attributable to pedicle disorders.

### PMID 36974340 (2024) — Cartilage
TITLE: Mechanical Evaluation of Commercially Available Fibrin Sealants for Cartilage Repair.
DOI: 10.1177/19476035231163273 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Fibrin sealants are routinely used for intra-articular surgical fixation of cartilage fragments and implants. However, the mechanical properties of fibrin sealants in the context of cartilage repair are unknown. The purpose of this study was to characterize the adhesive and frictional properties of fibrin sealants using an ex vivo model.
DESIGN: Native bovine cartilage-bone composites were assembled with a single application of Tisseel or Vistaseal. Composites were tested in tension and lap shear. In addition, the coefficient of friction (COF) was measured in a native cartilage annulus model alone and with minced cartilage. Finally, the effect of a double application of fibrin sealant was evaluated.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in tensile modulus, ultimate tensile strength (UTS), shear modulus, or ultimate shear strength (USS) between the 2 fibrin sealants. Both fibrin sealants demonstrated a UTS and USS of &lt;8 and &lt;30 kPa, respectively. There were no differences in COF between the sealants when tested alone or with minced cartilage. A double application of fibrin sealant did not alter the mechanical properties compared with a single application of fibrin sealant.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant adhesive properties are not affected by the sealant type studied or the number of applications in a bovine cartilage-bone model. Fibrin sealant tribological properties are not affected by sealant type or the addition of minced cartilage. The adhesive properties of Tisseel and Vistaseal were less than those desired for the in vivo fixation of cartilage repair implants. These findings motivate the development of an improved cartilage-specific adhesive for cartilage repair applications.

### PMID 39553430 (2024) — Bioengineering &amp; translational medicine
TITLE: A stretchable, electroconductive tissue adhesive for the treatment of neural injury.
DOI: 10.1002/btm2.10667 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Successful&#xa0;nerve repair using bioadhesive hydrogels demands minimizing tissue-material interfacial mechanical mismatch to reduce immune responses and scar tissue formation. Furthermore, it is crucial to maintain the bioelectrical stimulation-mediated cell-signaling mechanism to overcome communication barriers within injured nerve tissues. Therefore, engineering bioadhesives for neural tissue regeneration necessitates the integration of electroconductive properties with tissue-like biomechanics. In this study, we propose a stretchable bioadhesive based on a custom-designed chemically modified elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs) and a choline-based bioionic liquid (Bio-IL), providing an electroconductive microenvironment to reconnect damaged nerve tissue. The stretchability akin to native neural tissue was achieved by incorporating hydrophobic ELP pockets, and a robust tissue adhesion was obtained due to multi-mode tissue-material interactions through covalent and noncovalent bonding at the tissue interface. Adhesion tests revealed adhesive strength ~10 times higher&#xa0;than commercially available tissue adhesive, Evicel&#xae;. Furthermore, the engineered hydrogel supported in vitro viability and proliferation of human glial cells. We also evaluated the biodegradability and biocompatibility of the engineered bioadhesive in vivo using a rat subcutaneous implantation model, which demonstrated facile tissue infiltration and minimal immune response. The outlined functionalities empower the engineered elastic and electroconductive adhesive hydrogel to effectively enable sutureless surgical sealing of neural injuries and promote tissue regeneration.

### PMID 38995396 (2024) — Child's nervous system : ChNS : official journal of the International Society for Pediatric Neurosurgery
TITLE: Correction to: Safety and effectiveness of Evicel&#xae; fibrin sealant as an adjunct to sutured dural repair in children undergoing cranial neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00381-024-06503-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016425">Published Erratum
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 38727726 (2024) — Child's nervous system : ChNS : official journal of the International Society for Pediatric Neurosurgery
TITLE: Safety and effectiveness of Evicel&#xae;&#xa0;fibrin sealant as an adjunct to sutured dural repair in children undergoing cranial neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00381-024-06434-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a challenging complication of intradural cranial surgery, and children are particularly at risk. The use of dural sealants confers protection in adults, but pediatric studies are scarce. We evaluated the safety and efficacy of Evicel&#xae; fibrin sealant as an adjunct to primary dural suturing in children undergoing cranial surgery.
METHODS: A multicenter trial prospectively enrolled pediatric subjects (&lt;&#x2009;18&#xa0;years) undergoing cranial neurosurgery who, upon completion of primary sutured dural repair, experienced CSF leakage. As agreed by the EMA Evicel&#xae; Pediatric Investigation Plan, 40 subjects were intra-operatively randomized 2:1 to Evicel&#xae; or additional sutures ('Sutures'). Data analysis was descriptive. The efficacy endpoint was treatment success rate, with success defined as intra-operative watertight closure after provocative Valsalva maneuver (primary endpoint). Safety endpoints were postoperative CSF leakage (incisional CSF leakage, pseudomeningocele or both) and surgical site complications (secondary endpoints).
RESULTS: Forty subjects (0.6-17&#xa0;years) were randomized to Evicel&#xae; (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;25) or Sutures (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;15) (intention-to-treat). Intracranial tumor was the most common indication and procedures were mostly supratentorial craniotomies. Success rates were 92.0% for Evicel&#xae; and 33.3% for Sutures, with a 2.76 estimated ratio of success rates (Farrington-Manning 95% CI [1.53, 6.16]). Sensitivity analyses in per-protocol and safety sets showed similar results. Despite a higher rescue treatment rate, the frequencies of postoperative CSF leakage and wound complications were higher for Sutures than for Evicel&#xae;.
CONCLUSION: This small-scale prospective study shows Evicel&#xae; treatment to be safe and effective as an adjunct to primary sutured dura mater closure in a pediatric population. Compared to additional sutures, Evicel&#xae; was associated with reduced postoperative CSF leakage and surgical site complications. (Trial registration: The trial was registered as NCT02309645 and EudraCT 2013-003558-26).

### PMID 39332771 (2024) — The Journal of nutrition
TITLE: Reply to K Jenn and J Artiss.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tjnut.2024.09.030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 38987080 (2024) — Burns : journal of the International Society for Burn Injuries
TITLE: Artiss fibrin sealant for the fixation of autografts in pediatric burn care.
DOI: 10.1016/j.burns.2024.05.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Traditional fixation of autografts in the treatment of burns involves the use of sutures and staples. A novel fibrin sealant, Artiss, has been introduced as an alternate method of fixation and has shown promising safety and efficacy results in the adult population. Our study assessed the effectiveness of fibrin sealant to secure autologous split thickness skin grafts (ASTSG) in the pediatric burn population.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective cohort study of pediatric patients under 18 years of age who received autografting for the treatment of burns at our institution between 2017 and 2023. We compared ASTSG secured with fibrin sealant to those managed traditionally with sutures or staples. Outcomes of interest include the need for return trips to the operating room (OR), time to wound healing, graft take, and total time in the operating room.
RESULTS: 83 patients underwent a total of 142 individual ASTSGs for management of unique body area injuries. 66.3&#xa0;% were male, median age was 79 months, and scald was the most common mechanism of injury (41.0&#xa0;%). Forty-five (39.5&#xa0;%) traditionally affixed ASTSG required at least one return to the OR while only one (3.6&#xa0;%) ASTSG secured with fibrin sealant required an additional return to the OR (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001). Graft take was similar in both groups (92.9&#xa0;% for fibrin sealant vs. 93.9&#xa0;% for traditional methods, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;1). Time to wound healing was also similar: 16 vs. 15 days for fibrin glue and traditional methods, respectively (p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.23).
CONCLUSION: Outcomes from autograft fixation with fibrin sealant were comparable to those treated with traditional methods, with a reduction in the need for return trips to the operating room. These data suggest that fibrin sealant is a suitable alternative to traditional fixation methods in pediatric autografting.

### PMID 38600399 (2024) — Journal of general internal medicine
TITLE: The Patient-Physician Relationship: Medical Students' Perceptions in a Novel Course.
DOI: 10.1007/s11606-024-08759-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016421">Editorial
ABSTRACT: The patient-physician relationship, especially in the case of severely ill patients, is often fraught with anxiety, grief, and guilt in the physician who may come to feel that he or she has failed the patient and thereby becomes a "second victim." This notion was first explored in a 1973 publication (Artiss and Levine N Engl J Med 288(23):1210-4, 1973) that described a novel interactive seminar series for oncology fellows that had been designed to address and possibly remedy the frequent disquiet experienced by young physicians in this setting. Fifty years later, the medical student co-authors of this Perspective enrolled in an elective course that comprised a similar series of interactive seminars, now addressing the contemporary patient-physician relationship. The earlier paper was employed as a historical background, and the framework of the course then broadened such that the students considered the current environmental changes in medical practice (social, cultural, financial, legal, policy) that may be linked to the character of individual patient-physician relationships. This essay reports on the students' perception of such relationships, and on the environmental elements that may be helpful or harmful to the well-being of both patients and physicians.

### PMID 38465445 (2024) — Head &amp; neck
TITLE: Drainless, day-case lateral neck dissection with Artiss&#x2122; fibrin sealant: A prospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.1002/hed.27715 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D064888">Observational Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Lateral neck dissection (LND) is performed for staging/treatment of head and neck lesions. This traditionally includes placement of a drain and inpatient admission. Drainless, day-case head and neck surgery is attractive due to cost-effectiveness and reduced length of stay, but evidence is lacking in LND. We aim to investigate Artiss&#x2122; as an alternative to drain placement, facilitating day-case LND.
METHODS: A prospective review was conducted of patients who underwent LND in a UK hospital over a 22-month period.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients were identified (27 Artiss&#x2122; only; 12 Artiss&#x2122; with a drain). Eight Artiss&#x2122; only patients were day-case. All drains were removed by post-operative day 2. There was no statistically significant difference in the number of complications between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: This observational study demonstrates that for selected patients, Artiss&#x2122; could facilitate drainless, day-case LND. Further controlled studies with matched groups and larger numbers are required to validate this.

### PMID 39169092 (2024) — Scientific reports
TITLE: Cryopreserved nanostructured fibrin-agarose hydrogels are efficient and safe hemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-70456-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Uncontrolled bleeding during surgery is associated with high mortality and prolonged hospital stay, necessitating the use of hemostatic agents. Fibrin sealant patches offer an efficient solution to achieve hemostasis and improve patient outcomes in liver resection surgery. We have previously demonstrated the efficacy of a nanostructured fibrin-agarose hydrogel (NFAH). However, for the widespread distribution and commercialization of the product, it is necessary to develop an optimal preservation method that allows for prolonged stability and facilitates storage and distribution. We investigated cryopreservation as a potential method for preserving NFAH using trehalose. Structural changes in cryopreserved NFAH (Cryo-NFAH) were investigated and comparative in vitro and in vivo efficacy and safety studies were performed with freshly prepared NFAH. We also examined the long-term safety of Cryo-NFAH versus TachoSil in a rat partial hepatectomy model, including time to hemostasis, intra-abdominal adhesion, hepatic hematoma, inflammatory factors, histopathological variables, temperature and body weight, hemocompatibility and cytotoxicity. Structural analyses demonstrated that Cryo-NFAH retained most of its macro- and microscopic properties after cryopreservation. Likewise, hemostatic efficacy assays showed no significant differences with fresh NFAH. Safety evaluations indicated that Cryo-NFAH had a similar overall profile to TachoSil up to 40&#xa0;days post-surgery in rats. In addition, Cryo-NFAH demonstrated superior hemostatic efficacy compared with TachoSil while also demonstrating lower levels of erythrolysis and cytotoxicity than both TachoSil and other commercially available hemostatic agents. These results indicate that Cryo-NFAH is highly effective hemostatic patch with a favorable safety and tolerability profile, supporting its potential for clinical use.

### PMID 39052209 (2024) — Updates in surgery
TITLE: Long-term persistence of carrier-bound fibrin sealant (TachoSil&#xae;) following abdominal surgery: a decade-long follow-up study.
DOI: 10.1007/s13304-024-01952-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study analyzed the long-term effects of carrier-bound fibrin sealant (CBFS) following abdominal surgery by tracking patients for years post-application. From 2006 to 2022, patients who underwent this procedure were contacted via telephone. Those who died due to underlying diseases, natural causes, or refused the check-up were excluded from the study. After 11&#xa0;years of follow-up, CBFS was observed in different forms on computed tomography scans in four patients. Our findings indicate that CBFS can persist for years after the procedure. While we cannot confirm any secondary effects, it appears that CBFS sponges are not resorbed within 12&#xa0;weeks and can remain for many years post-implantation.

### PMID 38777317 (2024) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Giant Thoracic Meningocele: A Multidisciplinary Surgical Approach with Innovative Exclusion Technique.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2024.05.075 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: Thoracic meningocele is a rare medical condition that is usually linked to neurofibromatosis type I.1 Respiratory and neurologic symptoms characterize it.2 Although there have been some improvements in surgical techniques, the condition has a high recurrence rate, with most cases recurring within a year of surgery.3 A 56-year-old woman was observed due to respiratory and pyramidal signs. A chest computed tomography scan and magnetic resonance imaging revealed a thoracic meningocele, occupying the lower sectors of the right hemithorax, communicating with the cerebrospinal fluid space at the T10-T11 level. Multidisciplinary surgery was performed. After selectively intubating both bronchi, the patient was placed in prone position and a posterior median thoracic spine approach was performed. After T10-T11 laminectomy, 3 dural longitudinal incisions were performed. The first incision was placed in the middle to deflate the collection, the second was made on the right side to obtain a complete view of the meningocele, and the third was made on the right lateral side to exclude the meningocele. The lateral dura at the last incision was sutured to the dura propria lining the vertebral body of T11 and T10. The paramedian and median incisions were closed, with Tachosil placed above and below the sutures. Subsequently, the patient was placed in a supine position, the right lung was deflated, and a triportal thoracoscopic approach was performed to dissect and remove the lesion.4 The breach was closed using Tachosil (Baxter&#xa0;Healthcare Corp, Deerfield, Illinois, USA) and fibrin glue. An early 1-month computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the surgery was successful.

### PMID 33769186 (2024) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery reconstruction using the fibrin sealant patch Tachosil&#xae;.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2021.1905771 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The incidence of CSF leak following endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery remains the most important measure in the success of any repair. The nasoseptal flap (NSF) has played a pivotal role in reconstructing defects. However, morbidity associated with the NSF includes bleeding, septal injury, altered smell and crusting. Tachosil&#xae; is an absorbable fibrin sealant patch that promotes haemostasis and wound healing. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of Tachosil&#xae; to repair intraoperative defects during an endoscopic transsphenoidal approach.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All patients who underwent an endoscopic transsphenoidal approach with the use of Tachosil&#xae; at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, between January 2013 and June 2020 were retrospectively analysed. Tachosil&#xae; was used as an overlay patch over of the bony defect, in a multi-layered repair depending on the defect and grade of CSF leak. The primary outcome measure was post-operative CSF leak.
RESULTS: A total of 52 primary procedures where Tachosil&#xae; was used as the overlay were analysed. There were 23 (44.2%) intraoperative CSF leaks. The overall post-operative CSF leak rate was 7.8% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4), with all cases having had a Tachosil&#xae; overlay reconstruction with no NSF. A formal NSF was harvested in only five cases alongside the Tachosil&#xae; patch, where a grade 2 or more leak was identified at the time of the primary procedure, none of which developed a post-operative leak. No patient had any post-operative adverse outcomes that were attributed to Tachosil&#xae;.
CONCLUSIONS: We believe this to be the largest case series evaluating the endoscopic use of Tachosil&#xae; in skull base reconstruction. Our data show that in endoscopic transsphenoidal approach, Tachosil&#xae; may be used safely in a multi-layered approach as an effective alternative to the NSF in low flow CSF leak cases, or alongside a NSF in higher flow leaks.

### PMID 38723241 (2024) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Meniscal Repair with ArthroZheal&#xae; an Autologous Bioactive Fibrin Scaffold. A New Technique and Treatment Option.
DOI: 10.52198/24.STI.44.OS1783 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Injuries of the meniscus often lead to changes in joint biomechanics, which a&#xfb00;ect the load distribution and contact stresses. The menisci consist of a peripheral vascular region (red zone) and an inner avascular region (white zone). The blood supply plays an important role in the healing of meniscal tears. Surgical treatment of such lesions includes meniscectomy/meniscoplasty and repair, depending on the type of injury, where "meniscoplasty" refers to the treatment modality that occurs under coblation. The application of Autologous Bioactive Matrix (ABM) has been shown to promote healing in such lesions. In addition, a special type of PRF (ArthroZheal&#xae;, Vivostat A/S, Aller&#xf8;d, Denmark) has been demonstrated to have healing effects in extracellular matrix synthesis and cell proliferation, as well as regenerative and remodeling effects. This autologous product can be applied directly at the meniscal repair site. We performed a prospective study on meniscus repair with ArthroZheal&#xae; alone (plus meniscoplasty) and ArthroZheal&#xae; together with an all-inside suturing technique using the STAR AccurFix Meniscal Repair Device system (STAR Sports Medicine, Beijing, China), depending on the type and the site of the lesion. One hundred twenty knees (110 patients) were identified through the use of clinical examination and MRI scan. The study took place between January 2023 and August 2023. Two groups were created: GROUP A was treated only with ArthroZheal&#xae;(plus meniscoplasty) and GROUP B was treated with a combination of ArthroZheal&#xae; and an all-inside suturing technique (STAR AccurFix). Pre- and postoperative grading was performed with the International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) score and the Tegner Activity Level Scale (Tegner Score). The results with both treatment methods were excellent and meniscus restoration has been documented on MRIs conducted 6 months post-op. In 15 patients, 2nd-look arthroscopy was performed through a nanoscope on an outpatient basis, and showed meniscal healing and remodeling. Tegner scores and IKDC scores in both groups showed significant improvement. Meniscal repair should be performed at all costs to maintain meniscal integrity and prevent long-term degenerative changes. New treatment methods include orthobiologics and all-inside suturing techniques. The main idea is to apply an autologous biological sca&#xfb00;old which is able to carry cells into the meniscal lesion and to allow their di&#xfb00;erentiation, proliferation, and extracellular matrix synthesis to produce a meniscal-like tissue. Our results suggest that the application of autologous ABM (ArthroZheal&#xae;) for the treatment of such lesions by means of dry arthroscopy results in better MRI, pain management and functional results at 3 months post-op, and these improvements can persist for up to 6 months.

### PMID 38256414 (2024) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: The Influence of Platelet-Rich Fibrin on the Healing of Bone Defects after Harvesting Bone-Patellar Tendon-Bone Grafts.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina60010154 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: A bone-patellar tendon-bone (BTB) autograft in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction (ACLR) is still considered the gold standard among many orthopedic surgeons, despite anterior knee pain and kneeling pain being associated with bone defects at the harvest site. Bioregenerative products could be used to treat these defects, perhaps improving both the postoperative discomfort and the overall reconstruction. Materials and methods: During a year-long period, 40 patients were enrolled in a pilot study and divided into a study group, in which bone defects were filled with Vivostat&#xae; PRF (platelet-rich fibrin), and a standard group, in which bone defects were not filled. The main outcome was a decrease in the height and width of the bone defects, as determined by magnetic resonance imaging on the control exams during the one-year follow-up. The secondary outcomes included an evaluation of kneeling pain, measured with a visual analog scale (VAS), and an evaluation of the subjective knee scores. Results: The application of Vivostat&#xae; PRF resulted in a more statistically significant reduction in the width of the defect compared with that of the standard group, especially at 8 and 12 months post operation (p &lt; 0.05). Eight months following the surgery, the study group's anterior knee pain intensity during kneeling was statistically considerably lower than that of the standard group (p &lt; 0.05), and the statistical difference was even more obvious (p &lt; 0.01) at the last follow-up. Each control examination saw a significant decrease in pain intensity in both the groups, with the values at each exam being lower than those from the prior exam (p &lt; 0.01). A comparison of subjective functional test results 12 months post operation with the preoperative ones did not prove a statistically significant difference between the groups. Conclusions: The use of Vivostat&#xae; PRF reduces kneeling pain and accelerates the narrowing of bone defects after ACLR with a BTB graft, but without confirmation of its influence on the subjective knee score.

### PMID 39542637 (2024) — Zhongguo xiu fu chong jian wai ke za zhi = Zhongguo xiufu chongjian waike zazhi = Chinese journal of reparative and reconstructive surgery
TITLE: [Progress in application of medical absorbable haemostatic materials for haemostasis in orthopaedic surgery].
DOI: 10.7507/1002-1892.202405068 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review, English Abstract
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The application progress of medical absorbable haemostatic material (MAHM) in hemostasis during orthoapedic surgery was reviewed, in order to provide reference for clinical hemostasis program.
METHODS: The domestic and foreign literature on the application of MAHM for hemostasis in orthopedic surgery was extensively reviewed and summarized.
RESULTS: According to biocompatibility, MAHM can be divided into oxidized cellulose/oxidized regenerated cellulose materials, chitosan and its derivatives materials, starch materials, collagen and gelatin materials, and fibrin glue materials, etc., which can effectively reduce blood loss when used in orthopedic surgery for hemostasis. Each hemostatic material has different coagulation mechanism and suitable population. Oxidized cellulose/oxidized regenerated cellulose, chitosan and its derivatives, starch hemostatic material mainly stops bleeding by stimulating blood vessel contraction and gathering blood cells, which is suitable for people with abnormal coagulation function. Collagen, gelatin and fibrin glue hemostatic materials mainly affect the physiological coagulation mechanism of the human body to stop bleeding, suitable for people with normal coagulation function.
CONCLUSION: Reasonable selection of MAHM can effectively reduce perioperative blood loss and reduce the risk of postoperative complications, but at present, single hemostatic material can not meet clinical needs, and a new composite hemostatic material with higher hemostatic efficiency needs to be developed.
&#x76ee;&#x7684;: &#x5bf9;&#x533b;&#x7528;&#x578b;&#x53ef;&#x5438;&#x6536;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#xff08;medical absorbable haemostatic material&#xff0c;MAHM&#xff09;&#x5728;&#x9aa8;&#x79d1;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x7684;&#x5e94;&#x7528;&#x8fdb;&#x5c55;&#x8fdb;&#x884c;&#x7efc;&#x8ff0;&#xff0c;&#x4ee5;&#x671f;&#x4e3a;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x65b9;&#x6848;&#x63d0;&#x4f9b;&#x53c2;&#x8003;&#x3002;.
&#x65b9;&#x6cd5;: &#x5e7f;&#x6cdb;&#x67e5;&#x9605;&#x56fd;&#x5185;&#x5916;&#x5173;&#x4e8e;MAHM&#x5e94;&#x7528;&#x4e8e;&#x9aa8;&#x79d1;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x7684;&#x7814;&#x7a76;&#x6587;&#x732e;&#xff0c;&#x5e76;&#x5bf9;&#x5176;&#x8fdb;&#x884c;&#x5f52;&#x7eb3;&#x3001;&#x603b;&#x7ed3;&#x3002;.
&#x7ed3;&#x679c;: MAHM&#x6839;&#x636e;&#x751f;&#x7269;&#x76f8;&#x5bb9;&#x6027;&#x53ef;&#x5206;&#x4e3a;&#x6c27;&#x5316;&#x7ea4;&#x7ef4;&#x7d20;/&#x6c27;&#x5316;&#x518d;&#x751f;&#x7ea4;&#x7ef4;&#x7d20;&#x7c7b;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x3001;&#x58f3;&#x805a;&#x7cd6;&#x53ca;&#x5176;&#x884d;&#x751f;&#x7269;&#x7c7b;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x3001;&#x6dc0;&#x7c89;&#x7c7b;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x3001;&#x80f6;&#x539f;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x53ca;&#x660e;&#x80f6;&#x7c7b;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x548c;&#x7ea4;&#x7ef4;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x80f6;&#x7c7b;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x7b49;&#xff0c;&#x7528;&#x4e8e;&#x9aa8;&#x79d1;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x5747;&#x80fd;&#x6709;&#x6548;&#x51cf;&#x5c11;&#x5931;&#x8840;&#x91cf;&#x3002;&#x6bcf;&#x79cd;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x5177;&#x6709;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x7684;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x673a;&#x5236;&#x548c;&#x9002;&#x7528;&#x4eba;&#x7fa4;&#xff0c;&#x6c27;&#x5316;&#x7ea4;&#x7ef4;&#x7d20;/&#x6c27;&#x5316;&#x518d;&#x751f;&#x7ea4;&#x7ef4;&#x7d20;&#x3001;&#x58f3;&#x805a;&#x7cd6;&#x53ca;&#x5176;&#x884d;&#x751f;&#x7269;&#x3001;&#x6dc0;&#x7c89;&#x7c7b;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x4e3b;&#x8981;&#x901a;&#x8fc7;&#x523a;&#x6fc0;&#x8840;&#x7ba1;&#x6536;&#x7f29;&#x548c;&#x805a;&#x96c6;&#x8840;&#x6db2;&#x7ec6;&#x80de;&#x7269;&#x7406;&#x4f5c;&#x7528;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#xff0c;&#x9002;&#x7528;&#x4e8e;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x529f;&#x80fd;&#x5f02;&#x5e38;&#x4eba;&#x7fa4;&#x3002;&#x80f6;&#x539f;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x53ca;&#x660e;&#x80f6;&#x3001;&#x7ea4;&#x7ef4;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x80f6;&#x7c7b;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x4e3b;&#x8981;&#x901a;&#x8fc7;&#x5f71;&#x54cd;&#x4eba;&#x4f53;&#x751f;&#x7406;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x673a;&#x5236;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#xff0c;&#x9002;&#x7528;&#x4e8e;&#x51dd;&#x8840;&#x529f;&#x80fd;&#x6b63;&#x5e38;&#x4eba;&#x7fa4;&#x3002;.
&#x7ed3;&#x8bba;: &#x5408;&#x7406;&#x9009;&#x7528;MAHM&#x80fd;&#x6709;&#x6548;&#x51cf;&#x5c11;&#x56f4;&#x672f;&#x671f;&#x5931;&#x8840;&#x91cf;&#x53ca;&#x964d;&#x4f4e;&#x672f;&#x540e;&#x5e76;&#x53d1;&#x75c7;&#x98ce;&#x9669;&#xff0c;&#x4f46;&#x76ee;&#x524d;&#x5355;&#x4e00;&#x7c7b;&#x578b;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x5c1a;&#x4e0d;&#x80fd;&#x6ee1;&#x8db3;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x9700;&#x6c42;&#xff0c;&#x9700;&#x7814;&#x53d1;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x6548;&#x7387;&#x66f4;&#x9ad8;&#x7684;&#x590d;&#x5408;&#x6b62;&#x8840;&#x6750;&#x6599;&#x3002;.

### PMID 38740614 (2024) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Comparison of transposition and interposition methods in microvascular decompression for hemifacial spasm: an analysis of 109 cases performed by a single surgeon in a single-center retrospective study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-024-06111-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Microvascular decompression (MVD), the standard surgical approach for hemifacial spasm (HFS), can be divided into the interposition and transposition methods. Although the risk of HFS recurrence following interposition has been reported, there is limited data comparing long-term outcomes between both methods performed by a single surgeon. This study aimed to investigate the efficacy of MVD techniques on HFS by comparing surgical outcomes performed by a single surgeon in a single-center setting.
METHODS: A total of 109 patients who underwent MVD were analyzed and divided into the transposition (86 patients) and interposition (23 patients) groups. Postoperative outcomes at 1&#xa0;month and 1&#xa0;year were assessed and compared, including rates of spasm relief, complications, and recurrence.
RESULTS: Outcome assessment revealed higher rates of early spasm relief in the interposition group (66.3% vs. 100%, transposition vs. interposition, respectively, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0004), although spasm relief at 1-year postoperatively was comparable between the two groups (84.9% vs. 95.7%, transposition vs. interposition, respectively, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.2929). No significant differences were observed in complication and recurrence rates. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated no significant differences in the duration of spasm resolution by MVD method (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.4347, log-rank test).
CONCLUSION: This study shows that both the transposition (Surgicel&#xae; and fibrin glue) and interposition (sponge) methods were excellent surgical techniques. The interposition method may achieve earlier spasm resolution compared to the transposition method.

### PMID 38907082 (2024) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Surgical sealant using free pericardial fat pad with fibrin glue and polyglycolic acid sheets for secondary spontaneous pneumothorax: a novel technique.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-024-02050-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report on the "Triple-FP technique," a novel surgical approach for secondary spontaneous pneumothoraces, which combines a free pericardial fat pad, fibrin glue, and polyglycolic acid sheets. In our experience with 13 patients suffering from secondary spontaneous pneumothoraces, this method effectively prevented postoperative air leaks and re-operations. The technique includes the following steps: (1) harvesting free pericardial fat; (2) suturing around the lung parenchymal defect with the needles and thread left outside the thoracic cavity; (3) ensuring contact between the mediastinal pleural side of the fat and the lung; (4) applying fibrin glue to both the lung and fat before suturing; (5) securing the fat to the lung via the suture thread, reinforced with fibrin glue; and (6) stabilization with polyglycolic acid sheets and additional fibrin glue. This innovative technique is a reliable and effective treatment strategy for secondary spontaneous pneumothoraces, especially for patients with fragile lung tissue.

### PMID 39200878 (2024) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Omentoplasty for Cervical Lymphocele after Aortic Arch Replacement.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm13164737 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Lymphocele formation is a rare complication after surgical procedures involving the mediastinum. While uncomplicated lymphoceles show high rates of spontaneous closure and are usually treated conservatively, surgical treatment might be required in cases with persistent or recurrent lymphoceles. We present the case of a 53-year-old male with reoccurring cervical swelling after two surgeries of the thoracic aorta. After 1.5 years, the swelling occurred for the first time and appeared for the next 2 years repeatedly without clinical or laboratory signs of infection. A cervical lymphocele was suspected, and the decision for surgical revision was made. Fibrin glue was applied to the potential leakage of the thoracic duct, and the cavity was filled with a free omental flap. This resulted in a complete regression of the swelling.

### PMID 38466475 (2024) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: Pulmonary cyst newly formed after lobectomy in various underlying lung conditions.
DOI: 10.1186/s40792-024-01861-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: It has been recently recognized that pulmonary cyst may develop after pulmonary resection, causing various symptoms. Most previously reported cases were after upper lobectomy in patients with chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD).
CASE PRESENTATION: Case 1 was a man in his 70&#xa0;s with interstitial pneumonia (IP). Right lower lobectomy was performed for metastatic lung tumor using video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). On postoperative day (POD) 19, computed tomography (CT) revealed a large cyst at the upper interlobular surface of the middle lobe, with pneumoderma and pneumomediastinum. The cyst was incised, polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheet and fibrin glue were applied, and the cyst was sutured. The sutured line was covered again with PGA sheet and fibrin glue. Case 2 was a man in his 70&#xa0;s with COPD. Right upper lobectomy for primary lung cancer was performed using VATS. On POD 17, CT revealed a large pulmonary cyst at the apex of S6 and massive air leakage was observed. The same surgical procedure as that used in case 1 was performed. Cases 3 and 4 were healthy donors for living-donor lung transplantation. Two months after the right lower lobectomy in Case 3 and 3&#xa0;months after the left lower lobectomy in Case 4, the patients had respiratory symptoms such as dyspnea and hemosputum. CT revealed a large cyst on the diaphragmatic surface of the right middle lobe in Case 3 and on the posterior mediastinal surface of the left upper lobe in Case 4. Cyst incision, soft coagulation, and application of PGA sheet with fibrin glue were performed in both cases. CT performed 1&#xa0;year after surgery showed no development of a pulmonary cyst or air space in these four cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary cysts newly formed after lobectomy can develop not only in COPD or IP but also in healthy lungs. Our findings suggest that incision of the cyst and application of fibrin glue and PGA sheet with or without suturing the cyst wall is effective for management.

### PMID 38174454 (2023) — Neurology India
TITLE: Histopathological Study of the Effects of Dura Adhesive Agents Used in Spinal Surgery Practice on Spinal Epidural Fibrosis in Experimental Animal Model.
DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.391384 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Histopathological examination of the effects of Tisseel, Cova, Glubran and Coseal, which are used for sealing purposes in spinal surgery practice, on epidural fibrosis is aimed.
METHODS: Forty Sprague Dawley rats were randomly divided into five groups in our study as Group 1 (n=8) control group (Laminectomy); Group 2 (n=8) Cova group (Laminectomy + Cova); Group 3 (n=8) Tissel group (Laminectomy + Tisseel); Group 4 (n=8) Coseal group (Laminectomy + Coseal); and Group 5 Glubrane group (Laminectomy + Glubrane). Control group was only applied laminectomy. After laminectomy to other groups, Cova was applied to the 2nd group, Tissel to the 3rd group, Coseal to the 4th group and Glubran to the 5th group in surgical fields. After the rats were monitored in separate cages for 6 weeks after the operation, the relevant spinal level was extracted and the samples were examined histopathologically and the results were evaluated statistically.
RESULTS: It was found that there was a statistically significant difference in Tisseel and Glubran groups in terms of fibrosis grading compared to the control group, and this had a positive effect on fibrosis. Compared to the control group, there was no statistically significant difference on fibrosis in Cova and Coseal groups.
CONCLUSION: As dura adhesive agents used in spinal surgery practice did not increase spinal epidural fibrosis statistically significantly, we concluded that these products can be used safely during spinal surgery if necessary.

### PMID 37019734 (2023) — International journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Evaluation of fibrin, cyanoacrylate, and polyurethane-based tissue adhesives in sutureless vascular anastomosis: a comparative mechanical ex vivo study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijom.2023.03.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: The stability of a microvascular anastomosis is an important prerequisite for successful tissue transfer. Advances in tissue adhesives are potentially opening new avenues for their use in sutureless microsurgical anastomosis, however they have not yet gained clinical acceptance. In this ex vivo study, a novel polyurethane-based adhesive (PA) was used in sutureless anastomoses and its stability compared with that of sutureless anastomoses performed with fibrin glue (FG) and a cyanoacrylate (CA). Stability was assessed using hydrostatic (15 per group) and mechanical tests (13 per group). A total of 84 chicken femoral arteries were used in this study. The time taken to create the PA and CA anastomoses was significantly faster when compared to the FG anastomoses (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001): 1.55&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.14&#xa0;min and 1.39&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.06&#xa0;min, respectively, compared to 2.03&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.35&#xa0;min. Both sustained significantly higher pressures (289.3&#xa0;mmHg and 292.7&#xa0;mmHg, respectively) than anastomoses using FG (137.3&#xa0;mmHg) (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001). CA anastomoses (0.99&#xa0;N; P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001) and PA anastomoses (0.38&#xa0;N; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.009) could both withstand significantly higher longitudinal tensile forces compared to FG anastomoses (0.10&#xa0;N). Considering the background of an in vitro study, the PA and CA anastomosis techniques were shown to be similar to each other and superior to FG, due to their stability and faster handling. These findings need to be validated and confirmed in further in vivo studies.

### PMID 37969310 (2023) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Which bioabsorbable sheet is optimal for combined application with fibrin sealant against alveolar air leakage?
DOI: 10.21037/jtd-23-773 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: There are few basic comparative data on the sealing effect of various bioabsorbable sheets in combination with fibrin sealant (FS), which is a more effective tool for the control of alveolar air leakage than the single use of FS alone. The objective of this study was to investigate which bioabsorbable sheet had the best sealing effect against alveolar air leakage when used in combination with FS, in terms of material quality, weaving pattern, and/or thickness.
METHODS: Standardized 20 mm &#xd7; 30 mm pleural defects were covered with three pieces of the following sheets using the Rub + Soak B technique in an ex vivo porcine lung model. Seal-breaking burst pressure (SBBP) was compared between groups. Experiment 1: 0.15 mm-thick (Group 1), 0.3 mm-thick (Group 2) and 0.5 mm-thick (Group 3) non-woven polyglycolic acid (PGA) felt were compared. Experiment 2: 0.15 mm-thick non-woven PGA felt (Group 1), 0.15 mm-thick meshed oxidised regenerated cellulose (ORC) (Group 4); 0.11 mm-thick woven PGA (Group 5) and 0.18 mm-thick knitted PGA (Group 6) were compared. Experiment 3: TachoSil&#xae; alone (Group 7), TachoSil&#xae; combined with FS (Group 8) and 0.15 mm-thick non-woven PGA felt (1 piece) (Group 9) were compared.
RESULTS: In Experiment 1, SBBP was significantly higher in Group 1 than in Group 3. The SBBP in Group 2 was significantly higher than that in Group 3. In Experiment 2, SBBP in Group 4 was significantly lower than that in Groups 1, 5, and 6. In Experiment 3, SBBP in Group 7 was significantly lower than that in Groups 8 and 9.
CONCLUSIONS: Regarding the sheet thickness of PGA felt, the 0.15 mm was the most effective. Regarding the material quality, the ORC was the least suitable. TachoSil&#xae; combined with FS was comparable to the most effective 0.15 mm-thick non-woven PGA felt.

### PMID 36800489 (2023) — The Cochrane database of systematic reviews
TITLE: Drugs to reduce bleeding and transfusion in major open vascular or endovascular surgery: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD013649.pub2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review, Network Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Vascular surgery may be followed by internal bleeding due to inadequate surgical haemostasis, abnormal clotting, or surgical complications. Bleeding ranges from minor, with no transfusion requirement, to massive, requiring multiple blood product transfusions. There are a number of drugs, given systemically or applied locally, which may reduce the need for blood transfusion.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness and safety of anti-fibrinolytic and haemostatic drugs and agents in reducing bleeding and the need for blood transfusion in people undergoing major vascular surgery or vascular procedures with a risk of moderate or severe (&gt; 500 mL) blood loss.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched: Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials; MEDLINE; Embase; CINAHL, and Transfusion Evidence Library. We also searched the WHO ICTRP and ClinicalTrials.gov trial registries for ongoing and unpublished trials. Searches used a combination of MeSH and free text terms from database inception to 31 March 2022, without restriction on language or publication status.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in adults of drug treatments to reduce bleeding due to major vascular surgery or vascular procedures with a risk of moderate or severe blood loss, which used placebo, usual care or another drug regimen as control.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard Cochrane methods. Our primary outcomes were units of red cells transfused and all-cause mortality. Our secondary outcomes included risk of receiving an allogeneic blood product, risk of reoperation or repeat procedure due to bleeding, risk of a thromboembolic event, risk of a serious adverse event and length of hospital stay. We used GRADE to assess certainty of evidence.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 22 RCTs with 3393 participants analysed, of which one RCT with 69 participants was reported only in abstract form, with no usable data. Seven RCTs evaluated systemic drug treatments (three aprotinin, two desmopressin, two tranexamic acid) and 15 RCTs evaluated topical drug treatments (drug-containing bioabsorbable dressings or glues), including fibrin, thrombin, collagen, gelatin, synthetic sealants and one investigational new agent. Most trials were conducted in high-income countries and the majority of the trials only included participants undergoing elective surgery. We also identified two ongoing RCTs. We were unable to perform the planned network meta-analysis due to the sparse reporting of outcomes relevant to this review. Systemic drug treatments We identified seven trials of three systemic drugs: aprotinin, desmopressin and tranexamic acid, all with placebo controls. The trials of aprotinin and desmopressin were small with very low-certainty evidence for all of our outcomes. Tranexamic acid versus placebo was the systemic drug comparison with the largest number of participants (2 trials; 1460 participants), both at low risk of bias. The largest of these included a total of 9535 individuals undergoing a number of different higher risk surgeries and reported limited information on the vascular subgroup (1399 participants). Neither trial reported the number of units of red cells transfused per participant up to 30 days. Three outcomes were associated with very low-certainty evidence due to the very wide confidence intervals (CIs) resulting from small study sizes and low number of events. These were: all-cause mortality up to 30 days; number of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion up to 30 days; and risk of requiring a repeat procedure or operation due to bleeding. Tranexamic acid may have no effect on the risk of thromboembolic events up to 30 days (risk ratio (RR) 1.10, 95% CI 0.88 to 1.36; 1 trial, 1360 participants; low-certainty evidence due to imprecision). There is one large ongoing trial (8320 participants) comparing tranexamic acid versus placebo in people undergoing non-cardiac surgery who are at high risk of requiring a red cell transfusion. This aims to complete recruitment in April 2023. This trial has primary outcomes of proportion of participants transfused with red blood cells and incidence of venous thromboembolism (DVT or PE). Topical drug treatments Most trials of topical drug treatments were at high risk of bias due to their open-label design (compared with usual care, or liquids were compared with sponges). All of the trials were small, most were very small, and few reported clinically relevant outcomes in the postoperative period. Fibrin sealant versus usual care was the topical drug comparison with the largest number of participants (5 trials, 784 participants). The five trials that compared fibrin sealant with usual care were all at high risk of bias, due to the open-label trial design with no measures put in place to minimise reporting bias. All of the trials were funded by pharmaceutical companies. None of the five trials reported the number of red cells transfused per participant up to 30 days or the number of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion up to 30 days. The other three outcomes were associated with very low-certainty evidence with wide confidence intervals due to small sample sizes and the low number of events, these were: all-cause mortality up to 30 days; risk of requiring a repeat procedure due to bleeding; and risk of thromboembolic disease up to 30 days. We identified one large trial (500 participants) comparing fibrin sealant versus usual care in participants undergoing abdominal aortic aneurysm repair, which has not yet started recruitment. This trial lists death due to arterial disease and reintervention rates as primary outcomes.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Because of a lack of data, we are uncertain whether any systemic or topical treatments used to reduce bleeding due to major vascular surgery have an effect on: all-cause mortality up to 30 days; risk of requiring a repeat procedure or operation due to bleeding; number of red cells transfused per participant up to 30 days or the number of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion up to 30 days. There may be no effect of tranexamic acid on the risk of thromboembolic events up to 30 days, this is important as there has been concern that this risk may be increased. Trials with sample size targets of thousands of participants and clinically relevant outcomes are needed, and we look forward to seeing the results of the ongoing trials in the future.

### PMID 36441022 (2023) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Volumetric analysis of effectiveness of embolization for preventing type II endoleaks following endovascular aortic aneurysm repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2022.10.033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The presence of endoleak was associated with the failure of endovascular aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) treatment. The key to eliminating type II endoleak has shifted from reintervention to prevention. This study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of applying fibrin sealant to prevent type II endoleak in conjunction with EVAR.
METHODS: All patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm who underwent EVAR from June 2019 to July 2021 were reviewed. Patients were grouped as Group A: standard EVAR with preemptive embolization and Group B: standard EVAR alone. The primary endpoint was the incidence of type II endoleak. The secondary endpoints were aneurysm sac regression, the inferior mesenteric artery patency, the numbers of patent lumbar arteries, and all-cause mortality.
RESULTS: A total of 104 patients were included in Group A, and 116 were included in Group B. Technical success rate was 100%. The overall incidence of type II endoleak in Group A was significantly lower than that in Group B (4.8% vs 19.0%). The mean time of freedom from type II endoleak was 22.71&#xa0;months for Group A (95% confidence interval, 21.59-23.83&#xa0;months) and 19.89&#xa0;months for Group B (95% confidence interval, 18.08-21.70&#xa0;months). The Kaplan-Meier estimate of freedom from type II endoleak showed a significantly longer duration of freedom from type II endoleak in Group A (81.0% vs 95.2%). Group A showed a continuous sac regression tendency. In Group B, the sac volume decreased within 12&#xa0;months but increased by 3.07&#xa0;cm3 at 24&#xa0;months. No complications were noted in both groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Nonselective preemptive embolization with porcine fibrin sealant during EVAR was safe and effective in preventing type II endoleak in the short and mid-term. Preemptive embolization can lead to a significantly higher sac regression rate. Larger patient populations and longer follow-ups with randomized control designed trials are expected to verify the long-term effectiveness and safety of preemptive embolization in preventing type II endoleak.

### PMID 31502478 (2023) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Post-surgical thoracic spinal cord herniation following an unrepaired dural defect: a rare complication.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2019.1661966 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgery for ossification of the ligamentum flavum (OLF) comes with a relatively high risk of dural tear. We report a 50-year-old woman, who presented with symptomatic spinal stenosis from OLF at T11-T12 and lower lumbar spondylosis for which a single stage posterior decompression and instrumented fusion of both sites was done. Removal of the OLF resulted in a small dural tear with intact arachanoid which was covered using a fibrin sealant. In the first post-operative day, the patient's neurology started deteriorating. An MR scan was done to look for hematoma. It showed the spinal cord herniating out of the thecal sac at the operated level. Emergency re-operation was done to reduce the herniation and the dural defect was repaired. The patient gradually recovered to her best functional status. Based on this experience, we advise primary repair of inadvertent durotomies.

### PMID 38138181 (2023) — Medicina (Kaunas, Lithuania)
TITLE: Topical Fibrin Sealant (Tisseel@) Does Not Provide a Synergic Blood-Conservation Effect with Tranexamic Acid in Total Knee Arthroplasty-A Prospective Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.3390/medicina59122078 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and Objectives: The efficacy of tranexamic acid (TXA) in reducing perioperative blood loss during total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is well established. However, the potential synergistic blood-conservation effect of topical fibrin sealant (Tisseel@) remains unclear. This study aims to assess the effectiveness of the combination of Tisseel and TXA during TKA. Materials and Methods: A single-blinded, prospective, randomized controlled trial was conducted with 100 patients (100 knees) undergoing primary TKA. Participants were randomly assigned to either the TXA group (n = 50), receiving intravenous (IV) TXA, or the Tisseel@ + TXA group (n = 50), receiving intra-articular Tisseel@ combined with IV TXA. The primary outcomes included blood transfusion rate, decrease in Hb level, calculated blood loss, and estimated total postoperative blood loss. Secondary outcomes involved assessing clinical differences between the groups. Results: The transfusion rate was zero in both groups. The average estimated blood loss in the Tisseel@ + TXA group was 0.463 &#xb1; 0.2422 L, which was similar to that of the TXA group at 0.455 &#xb1; 0.2522 L. The total calculated blood loss in the Tisseel@ + TXA group was 0.259 &#xb1; 0.1 L, compared with the TXA group's 0.268 &#xb1; 0.108 L. The mean hemoglobin reduction in the first 24 h postoperatively was 1.57 &#xb1; 0.83 g/dL for the Tisseel@ + TXA group and 1.46 &#xb1; 0.82 g/dL for the TXA-only group. The reduction in blood loss in the topical Tisseel@ + TXA group was not significantly different from that achieved in the TXA-only group. The clinical results of TKA up to the 6-week follow-up were comparable between the groups. Conclusions: The combination of the topical fibrin sealant Tisseel@ and perioperative IV TXA administration, following the described protocol, demonstrated no significant synergistic blood-conservation effect in patients undergoing TKR.

### PMID 38015168 (2023) — Translational vision science &amp; technology
TITLE: Biological and Adhesive Properties of an Autologous Protein-Based Fibrin Sealant for Ophthalmological Applications.
DOI: 10.1167/tvst.12.11.32 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the biological and adhesive properties of a new autologous sealant based on plasma rich in growth factors (PRGF), named E-Sealant.
METHODS: Conventional PRGF and a commercial fibrin sealant (Tisseel) were included as controls. The hematological and protein content of E-Sealant was determined. Its bioactivity and biocompatibility were tested for human keratocytes (HKs). To evaluate its adhesion and regenerative capacity, E-Sealant was used on an animal model of conjunctival autograft surgery and compared to Tisseel.
RESULTS: E-Sealant presented a high growth factor content with levels similar to those of conventional PRGF. E-Sealant induced proliferative and migratory activity on HK cells equivalent to PRGF. Although autologous membranes induced the proliferation of HKs, cells cultured over Tisseel did not adhere nor proliferate. HK cells showed increased number and flattened morphology over PRGF and E-Sealant compared to scarce and round-shape cells detected in Tisseel. Conjunctival autograft glued with E-Sealant adhered successfully, whereas Tisseel application formed irregular clots. During follow-up, both adhesives showed good integration and no dehiscence. However, Tisseel-treated samples presented slightly increased hemorrhage and inflammation. In contrast to Tisseel, E-Sealant-treated autografts presented a continuous layer of non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Inflammatory infiltrates were minimal in E-Sealant-treated conjunctiva, whereas the Tisseel group showed noticeable immune reactions. Unlike Tisseel-treated grafts, E-Sealant presented low immunoreactivity for smooth muscle actin (SMA), suggesting decreased fibrotic tissue formation.
CONCLUSIONS: E-Sealant presents optimal biological and adhesive properties suitable for use as an ophthalmic glue, with regenerative purposes superior to commercial fibrin sealants.
TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE: Our study analyzed the characterization and biological activity of a new autologous fibrin sealant in ocular surface cells and in an animal model in which the adhesive and regenerative properties of the fibrin sealant were evaluated.

### PMID 37873247 (2023) — bioRxiv : the preprint server for biology
TITLE: Sea squirt-inspired bio-derived tissue sealants.
DOI: 10.1101/2023.10.02.560578 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000076942">Preprint, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Sea squirts' or tunicates' bodies are composed of cellulose nanofibers and gallol- functionalized proteins. These sea creatures are known to heal their injuries under seawater by forming crosslinks between gallols and functional groups from other proteins in their bodies. Inspired by their wound healing mechanism, herein, we have developed a tissue sealant using zein (a plant-based protein) and tannic acid (gallol-containing polyphenol). Except for fibrin- based sealants, most commercial surgical adhesives, and sealants available today are derived from petroleum products that compromise their biodegradability. They often have complicated and multi-step synthesis processes that ultimately affect their affordability. To overcome this challenge, we ensured that these sea squirt-inspired tissue sealants are bio-based, easily synthesized, and low-cost. The sealants were studied on their own and with a food-grade enzyme transglutaminase. The adhesion performances of the sealants were found to be higher than physiological pressures in seven out of nine different tissue substrates studied here. Their performance was also better than or on par with the FDA-approved fibrin sealant Tisseel. Ex vivo models demonstrate instant sealing of leaking wounds in less than a minute. The sealants were not only cytocompatible but also showed complete wound healing on par with sutures and Tisseel when applied in vivo on skin incisions in rats. Overall, these sea squirt-inspired bio-based sealants show great potential to replace currently available wound closure methods.

### PMID 37771759 (2023) — North American Spine Society journal
TITLE: Delayed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak following anterior cervical discectomy and fusion surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.xnsj.2023.100271 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An uncommon complication of anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) is dura tear, which may be further complicated by cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) leak. Dural tears with CSF leak can lead to catastrophic neurologic outcomes and should be recognized early.
CASE DESCRIPTION: This case report describes a 43-year-old female patient with history of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome who presented 1-year post-ACDF with positional headaches and lightheadedness. Imaging revealed ACDF plate subsidence and CSF leak with inferior displacement of the cerebellar tonsils.
OUTCOME: The patient underwent a revision procedure with removal of index screws and CSF repair using epidural blood patch, fat graft, and Tisseel. The original bicortical screws were replaced with shorter larger diameter unicortical screws. Post-operative imaging at 2 and 6 weeks confirmed resolution of CSF leak.
CONCLUSIONS: Healthcare professionals and patients undergoing spinal surgery should be aware of late presentation CSF leaks which can represent gradual decline in neurological function. Surgical candidates at risk to develop CSF leaks should be counseled about possible complications in preoperative planning.

### PMID 37594146 (2023) — Pediatric pulmonology
TITLE: Endobronchial valve and fibrin sealant placement for successful control of pulmonary hemorrhage in a pediatric patient.
DOI: 10.1002/ppul.26639 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 37427979 (2023) — Science progress
TITLE: Fibrin Sealant TISSEEL Lyo as a haemostatic agent in vascular surgery: Results of randomized, controlled, patient-blinded, multicentre clinical study in the Russian population.
DOI: 10.1177/00368504231182834 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Multicenter Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This phase III, controlled, patient-blinded, multicentre study in two parallel, equal-sized treatment groups compared the efficacy and safety of TISSEEL Lyo, fibrin sealant versus Manual Compression (MC) with surgical gauze pads for use as a haemostatic agent in patients who underwent vascular surgery in Russia.
METHODS: Adult patients, both genders, who received peripheral vascular expanded polytetrafluoroethylene conduits and had suture line bleeding after surgical haemostasis were enrolled. Patients were randomized to be treated with TISSEEL Lyo or MC. The bleeding needed additional treatment and had to be assessed as grade 1 or 2 bleeding according to the Validated Intraoperative Bleeding scale. The primary efficacy endpoint was the proportion of patients achieving haemostasis at 4&#x2005;min after treatment application (T4) at the study suture line, which was maintained until the closure of the surgical wound. The secondary efficacy endpoints included the proportion of patients achieving haemostasis at 6&#x2005;min (T6) and 10&#x2005;min (T10) after treatment application at the study suture line, which was maintained until closure of the surgical wound, as well as the proportion of patients with intraoperative and postoperative rebleeding. Safety outcomes included incidence of adverse events (AEs), surgical site infections and graft occlusions.
RESULTS: A total of 110 patients were screened; 104 patients were randomized: (TISSEEL Lyo: 51 [49%] patients; MC: 53 [51%] patients). T4 haemostasis was achieved in 43 (84.3%) patients in the TISSEEL Lyo group and in 11 (20.8%) patients in the MC group (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Significantly more patients in TISSEEL Lyo group achieved the haemostasis at T6 (relative risk (RR) of achieving haemostasis 1.74 [95% confidence interval (CI) 1.37; 2.35]) and T10 (RR 1.18 [95% CI 1.05; 1.38]) versus MC. No one had intraoperative rebleeding. Postoperative rebleeding was reported only in one patient in the MC group. No treatment-emergent serious AEs (TESAEs) related to TISSEEL Lyo/MC, TESAEs leading to withdrawal and TESAEs leading to death were reported in patients during the study.
CONCLUSIONS: Data demonstrated TISSEEL Lyo had clinically and statistically significant superiority to MC as a haemostatic agent in vascular surgery at all measured time points including 4, 6 and 10&#x2005;min and had proven to be safe.

### PMID 37202965 (2023) — Indian journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Dacryocystectomy: A fibrin glue-assisted subfascial excision.
DOI: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_2667_22 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This article describes a technique of dacryocystectomy involving dissection within the subfascial plane, in which the lacrimal sac fascia is preserved and the orbital fat remains undisturbed. The lacrimal sac cavity was directly injected with Tisseel fibrin glue mixed with trypan blue. This led to sac distension and facilitated its separation from surrounding periosteal and fascial attachments. Staining the lacrimal sac epithelium improved definition of the mucosal lining. Transverse sections of the lacrimal sac specimen were histologically analyzed, which confirmed that dissection was completed within a subfascial plane. The technique herein described facilitates en bloc excision of the lacrimal sac without breaching the fascial plane that separates the sac from orbital fat.

### PMID 37174110 (2023) — Cancers
TITLE: US Evaluation of Topical Hemostatic Agents in Post-Thyroidectomy.
DOI: 10.3390/cancers15092644 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: the aim of this study was to describe the ultrasound appearance of topical hemostatics after thyroidectomy.
METHODS: we enrolled 84 patients who were undergoing thyroid surgery and were treated with two types of topical hemostats, 49 with an absorbable hemostat of oxidized regenerated cellulose (Oxitamp&#xae;) and 35 with a fibrin glue-based hemostat (Tisseel&#xae;). All patients were examined using B-mode ultrasound.
RESULTS: In 39 patients of the first group (approximately 80%), a hemostatic residue was detected and in some cases confused with a native gland residue, or with cancer recurrence in oncological patients. No residue was detected in patients in the second group. The main ultrasound characteristics of the tampon were analyzed and arranged according to predefined patterns, and suggestions to recognize it and avoid wrong diagnoses were provided. A part of the group of patients with tampon residue was re-evaluated after 6-12 months, ensuring that the swab remained for months after the maximum resorption time declared by the manufacturer.
CONCLUSIONS: with equal hemostatic effectiveness, the fibrin glue pad is more favorable in the ultrasound follow-up because it creates reduced surgical outcomes. It is also important to know and recognize the ultrasound characteristics of oxidized cellulose-based hemostats in order to reduce the number of diagnostic errors and inappropriate diagnostic investigations.

### PMID 37168862 (2023) — Frontiers in immunology
TITLE: Physiological fibrin hydrogel modulates immune cells and molecules and accelerates mouse skin wound healing.
DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1170153 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Wound healing is a complex process to restore homeostasis after injury and insufficient skin wound healing is a considerable problem in medicine. Whereas many attempts of regenerative medicine have been made for wound healing with growth factors and cell therapies, simple pharmacological and immunological studies are lagging behind. We investigated how fibrin hydrogels modulate immune cells and molecules in skin wound healing in mice.
METHODS: Physiological fibrin hydrogels (3.5 mg/mL fibrinogen) were generated, biophysically analyzed for stiffness and protein contents and were structurally studied by scanning electron microscopy. Physiological fibrin hydrogels were applied to full thickness skin wounds and, after 3 days, cells and molecules in wound tissues were analyzed. Leukocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblasts and keratinocytes were explored with the use of Flow Cytometry, whereas cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases were analyzed with the use of qPCR, ELISAs and zymography. Skin wound healing was analyzed microscopically at day 3, macroscopically followed daily during repair in mice and compared with commercially available fibrin sealant Tisseel.
RESULTS: Exogenous fibrin at physiological concentrations decreased neutrophil and increased non-classical Ly6Clow monocyte and resolutive macrophage (CD206+ and CX3CR1+) populations, at day 3 after injury. Fibrin hydrogel reduced the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and increased IL-10 levels. In line with these findings, gelatinase B/MMP-9 was decreased, whereas gelatinase A/MMP-2 levels remained unaltered. Frequencies of dermal endothelial cells, fibroblasts and keratinocytes were increased and keratinocyte migration was enhanced by fibrin hydrogel. Importantly, physiological fibrin accelerated the healing of skin wounds in contrast to the highly concentrated fibrin sealant Tisseel, which delayed wound repair and possessed a higher fiber density.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, we show that adding a tailored fibrin hydrogel scaffold to a wound bed positively influences the healing process, modulating leukocyte populations and inflammatory responses towards a faster wound repair.

### PMID 36861575 (2023) — Neurology India
TITLE: Is Popularity of Fibrin Glue a Misrepresentation? A Comparative Study with Fibrin Glue and Suture Anastomosis in Rat Sciatic Nerve Injury Analysing Functional, Histological, Electrophysiological Parameters.
DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.370473 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin glue as an adjunct in peripheral nerve injuries has gained recent popularity. Whether fibrosis and inflammatory processes which are the major hindrances in repair reduce with fibrin glue has more of theoretical support than experimental.
METHODOLOGY: A prospective nerve repair study was conducted between two different species of rats as donor and recipient. Four comparison groups with 40 rats were outlined with or without fibrin glue in immediate post-injury period with fresh or cold preserved grafts were examined based on histological, macroscopic, functional, and electrophysiological criteria.
RESULTS: There was suture site granuloma along with neuroma formation and inflammatory reaction and severe epineural inflammation in allografts with immediate suturing (Group A), whereas suture site inflammation and epineural inflammation were negligible in cold preserved allografts with immediate suturing (Group B). Allografts with minimal suturing and glue (Group C) had less severe epineural inflammation with less severe suture site granuloma and neuroma formation as compared to first two groups. Continuity of nerve was partial in later group as compared to other two. In fibrin glue only group (Group D), suture site granuloma and neuroma were absent, with negligible epineural inflammation, but continuity nerve was partial to absent in most of the rats with some showing partial continuity. Functionally, microsuturing with or without glue demonstrated significant difference with better SLR and toe spread (p = 0.042) as compared with only glue. Electrophysiologically, NCV was maximum in Group A and least in Group D at 12 weeks. We report significant difference in CMAP and NCV between microsuturing group vs. only glue group (p &lt; 0.05) and also between microsuturing with glue group vs. only glue group (p &lt; 0.05).
CONCLUSION: There may be more data required with proper standardization for adept usage of fibrin glue. Though our results have shown partial success, it nonetheless highlights the lack of sufficient data for widespread glue usage.

### PMID 36355631 (2023) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
TITLE: A comparative high-resolution physicochemical analysis of commercially available fibrin sealants: Impact of sealant osmolality on biological performance.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.37466 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Fibrin sealants are well-established components of the surgical toolbox, especially in procedures that harbor a high risk of perioperative bleeding. Their widespread use as hemostats, sealants or tissue-adhesives in various surgical settings has shown that the choice of the appropriate sealant system affects the clinical outcome. While many studies have compared the hemostatic efficiency of fibrin sealants to that of other natural or synthetic sealants, there is still limited data on how subtle differences in fibrin sealant formulations relate to their biological performance. Here, we performed an in-depth physicochemical and biological characterization of the two most commonly used fibrin sealants in the US and Europe: TISSEEL&#x2122; ("FS") and VISTASEAL&#x2122;/VERASEAL&#x2122; ("FS+Osm"). Our chemical analyses demonstrated differences between the two sealants, with lower fibrinogen concentrations and supraphysiological osmolality in the FS+Osm formulation. Rheological testing revealed FS clots have greater clot stiffness, which strongly correlated with network density. Ultrastructural analysis by scanning electron microscopy revealed differences between FS and FS+Osm fibrin networks, the latter characterized by a largely amorphous hydrogel structure in contrast to the physiological fibrillar network of FS. Cytocompatibility experiments with human fibroblasts seeded on FS and FS+Osm fibrin networks, or cultured in presence of sealant extracts, revealed that FS+Osm induced apoptosis, which was not observed with FS. Although differential sealant osmolality and amounts of fibrinogen, as well as the presence of Factor XIII or additives such as antifibrinolytics, may explain the mechanical and structural differences observed between the two fibrin sealants, none of these substances are known to cause apoptosis at the respective concentrations in the sealant formulation. We thus conclude that hyper osmolality in the FS+Osm formulation is the primary trigger of apoptosis-a mechanism that should be evaluated in more detail, as it may affect the cellular wound healing response in situ.

### PMID 36149620 (2023) — International ophthalmology
TITLE: A comparative study of conventional intermarginal split lamella with labial mucous membrane graft versus sutureless procedure using fibrin sealant to manage major trichiasis.
DOI: 10.1007/s10792-022-02541-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: In the intermarginal split lamella with labial mucous membrane graft procedure to manage major trichiasis, the graft is usually sutured in the receptor bed using 6-0 polyglactin sutures. We aimed to compare the use of fibrin sealant to seal the graft to the receptor bed versus the conventional technique using sutures.
METHODS: This is a retrospective comparative study of patients who underwent conventional intermarginal split lamella with labial mucous membrane graft or sutureless procedure using fibrin sealant (Tisseel, Baxter Healthcare Corp) between 2016 and 2021. Etiology of the trichiasis, procedure duration, postoperative discomfort and edema, complications, and follow-up period were extracted from these patients' charts.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven eyelids from 19 patients underwent the procedure: twelve patients underwent the sutureless procedure, while seven underwent the conventional procedure. Mean follow-up was 8.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.9&#xa0;months and 13.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;6.5&#xa0;months for the sutureless and conventional groups, respectively. Patients who underwent the sutureless procedure reported no postoperative foreign body sensation, while 71.4% of patients who underwent the conventional procedure reported some degree of ocular discomfort. In the sutureless group, operating time and postoperative edema were significantly reduced. Labial mucous membrane graft dehiscence was observed in one eyelid (8.3%) on the first postoperative day in the sutureless group. No dehiscence was observed in the conventional technique group.
CONCLUSION: The use of fibrin sealant showed to be a good alternative to conventional absorbable sutures. Advantages include expedited operating time, decreased postoperative discomfort, and expedite postoperative recovery.

### PMID 36006657 (2023) — Journal of laparoendoscopic &amp; advanced surgical techniques. Part A
TITLE: The Effects of the Staple Line Reinforcement Procedures on Gastrointestinal Symptoms and Its Early Results in Sleeve Gastrectomy.
DOI: 10.1089/lap.2022.0210 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: The laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) procedure is the most common bariatric surgical technique worldwide, but controversy continues over staple line reinforcement (SLR) techniques. This prospective randomized study aimed to compare the effects of SLR methods on early postoperative complications and gastrointestinal symptoms in patients undergoing LSG for morbid obesity. Materials and Methods: Ninety patients who underwent LSG surgery for obesity between June 2019 and February 2020 in the Department of General Surgery of Bezmialem Vak&#x131;f University were included in our prospective randomized study. According to the SLR techniques, three groups were determined as Group 1: using fibrin sealant (Tisseel&#xae;), Group 2: omentopexy, Group 3: no SLR, with each group having 30 randomly assigned patients. Gastrointestinal symptoms were assessed by performing the Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS) for all patients following the first week and first month. On the second postoperative day, all patients underwent swallow-graphy to investigate twists and fistula. Results: The test group included 90 patients totally, of which 17 are males and 73 are females with a mean age of 35.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;11.6 years and a mean body mass index of 45.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;7.7&#x2009;kg/m2. According to the GSRS, reflux and indigestion scores in Group 3 were significantly higher than those in the other groups in the first week (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.001). There was no statistically significant difference in abdominal pain scores in the first week. Group 3's operation time was statistically significantly shorter than the other groups (Group 1 P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.005; Group 2 P&#x2009;=&#x2009;.001). In Group 3, 2 patients (2.2%) had bleeding. There was no mortality. There were no twists or fistulas found in swallow graphs. Symptomatic reflux was not observed in the first-year follow-up period. Conclusions: SLR methods reduce gastrointestinal system complaints in the early postoperative period. In our study, omentopexy and fibrin sealant used in LSG did not show a statistically significant difference in early postoperative complications.

### PMID 33538190 (2023) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Use of tissue sealant patch (TachoSil) in the management of cerebrospinal fluid leaks after anterior cervical spine discectomy and fusion.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2021.1881444 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate a fast, sutureless technique to repair anterior cervical dural tears. Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) is a commonly performed procedure for the treatment of cervical degenerative diseases. Although uncommon, incidental durotomy with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak during ACDF is a potentially serious complication. Yet, its technical management for the prevention of CSF leak is controversial.
METHODS: Between September 2012 and June 2018 we encountered seven cases (2 female/5 male) presenting with intraoperative CSF leaks secondary to incidental dural tears during ACDF surgery. All the cases were surgically treated using a topical fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil) with high adesive strength and fibrin glue (Tisseel). Intraoperative source of leakage, time to leakage control, quantity of Sealant Sponge used and postoperative complications were evaluated.
RESULTS: Dural tears were tipically the result of dissection of adherent posterior longitudinal ligament and/or calcified disc from the cervical dural sac to allow full decompression of the spinal cord. Effective repair of dural tear defined as cessation of CSF leak after topical sealant agents application was achieved no later than one minute in all cases. Evident clinical and/or radiological postoperative CSF leak was used to determine the patient's postoperative result. Postoperative CSF leak was not evident during a minimum 6 months follow up.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we have reported our experience with a new sealing technique to manage CSF leaks from iatrogenic cervical dural lacerations. Tachosil tissue sealant patch is a rapid sutureless technique that may help in repairing introperatively incidental dural tears, thus reducing the risk of postoperative CSF leaks. To our knowledge, this is the first series to report the use of Tachosil adhesive sealant patch for the treatment of incidental dural tears during anterior cervical discectomy.

### PMID 32897107 (2023) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Cauda equina syndrome after use of dural sealant in revision lumbar decompression surgery.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2020.1817855 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We report a case of cauda equina syndrome related to the use of fibrin glue dural sealant "TISSEEL".
BACKGROUND: Incidental durotomy (ID) is not uncommon in revision spinal surgery. Augmentation of the dural repair after primary closure is gaining popularity. The use of dural sealants is not risk-free.
METHOD: A 65-year old man who underwent revision lumbar decompression surgery developed postoperative cauda equina syndrome. He had urinary retention, bilateral leg pain and perianal numbness on the third postoperative day. We believe this complication was related to the use of fibrin glue to manage an ID.
RESULT: After the urgent surgical removal of the fibrin glue patch, the patient fully recovered with no residual neurological deficit.
CONCLUSION: Cauda equina syndrome development is a potential complication after the use of fibrin glue to augment intraoperative ID. Surgeons should be aware of this potential risk so it can be managed in a timely fashion.

### PMID 37904229 (2023) — Stem cell research &amp; therapy
TITLE: Autologous mesenchymal stromal cells embedded with Tissucol Duo&#xae; for prevention of air leak after anatomical lung resection: results of a prospective phase I/II clinical trial with long-term follow-up.
DOI: 10.1186/s13287-023-03545-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017427">Clinical Trial, Phase II, Clinical Trial, Phase I, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Prolonged air leak (PAL) is the most frequent complication after pulmonary resection. Several measures have been described to prevent the occurrence of PAL in high-risk patients, however, the potential role of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) applied in the parenchymal suture line to prevent postoperative air leak in this setting has not been fully addressed.
OBJECTIVE: To analyse the feasibility, safety and potential clinical efficacy of the implantation of autologous MSCs embedded in Tissucol Duo&#xae; as a prophylactic alternative to prevent postoperative prolonged air leak after pulmonary resection in high-risk patients.
STUDY DESIGN: Phase I/II single-arm prospective clinical trial.
METHODS: Six patients with high risk of PAL undergoing elective pulmonary resection were included. Autologous bone marrow-derived MSCs were expanded at our Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Facility and implanted (embedded in a Tissucol Duo&#xae; carrier) in the parenchymal suture line during pulmonary resection surgery. Patients were monitored in the early postoperative period and evaluated for possible complications or adverse reactions. In addition, all patients were followed-up to 5 years for clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: The median age of patients included was 66 years (range: 55-70 years), and male/female ratio was 5/1. Autologous MSCs were expanded in five cases, in one case MSCs expansion was insufficient. There were no adverse effects related to cell implantation. Regarding efficacy, median air leak duration was 0 days (range: 0-2 days). The incidence of PAL was nil. Radiologically, only one patient presented pneumothorax in the chest X-ray at discharge. No adverse effects related to the procedure were recorded during the follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of autologous MSCs for prevention of PAL in patients with high risk of PAL is feasible, safe and potentially effective.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NO: EudraCT: 2013-000535-27.
CLINICALTRIALS: gov idenfier: NCT02045745.

### PMID 37087833 (2023) — European journal of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive biology
TITLE: Incidental damage of obturator nerve during laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy in endometrial cancer - Demonstration of a successful repairing procedure.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2023.03.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Video-Audio Media, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: In order to highlight the importance of intraoperative complications and their management, we demonstrate a video of an iatrogenic left obturator nerve lesion during a pelvic lymphadenectomy for endometrial cancer staging. The repair was promptly performed using an intracorporeal laparoscopic suture for an end-to-end tension-free nerve anastomosis.
DESIGN: Stepwise demonstration of the technique with narrated video footage.
SETTING: A 70-year-old woman with a stage IB grade I endometrial adenocarcinoma was submitted to a surgical laparoscopic staging with total hysterectomy(TH), bilateral adnexectomy(BA), and bilateral pelvic and lomboaortic lymphadenectomy. After an uneventful retroperitoneal lomboaortic lymphadenectomy, the left paravesical space was dissected until the obturator fossae and a left pelvic lymphadenectomy followed, during which the left obturator nerve was accidentally transected with LigaSure&#x2122;.
INTERVENTIONS: A careful inspection revealed an almost complete transection (80%) of the nerve, with both proximal and distal cut ends identifiable and no fraying of the edges. The thickness of the non-sectioned nervous portion was less than 3&#xa0;mm, but a tension-free reattachment of both edges seemed manageable. The edges were oriented towards each other and a single stitch suture was placed using a 5-0 prolene, providing an epineural end-to-end coaptation. To reinforce the suture, a Fibrin sealant Tissucol&#xae; was applied. The contralateral pelvic lymphadenectomy was then performed, followed by TH and BA. The pieces were removed through the vagina using an endobag. The patient was discharged on the second postoperative day. During the follow-up, there were no signs of diminished adductor function, and neither there was any other detectable residual neuropathy or neurologic deficit involving the left thigh.
CONCLUSION: It is crucial to identify intraoperative complications and to develop abilities to manage them. This video proves that it is possible to repair a transected obturator nerve using laparoscopy, when performed by an experienced onco-gynecologist, with extremely good functional results.

### PMID 37300448 (2023) — Advanced healthcare materials
TITLE: Injectable, Antibacterial, and Hemostatic Tissue Sealant Hydrogels.
DOI: 10.1002/adhm.202301551 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage and bacterial infections are major hurdles in the management of life-threatening surgical wounds. Most bioadhesives for wound closure lack sufficient hemostatic and antibacterial properties. Furthermore, they suffer from weak sealing efficacy, particularly for stretchable organs, such as the lung and bladder. Accordingly, there is an unmet need for mechanically robust hemostatic sealants with simultaneous antibacterial effects. Here, an injectable, photocrosslinkable, and stretchable hydrogel sealant based on gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA), supplemented with antibacterial zinc ferrite (ZF) nanoparticles and hemostatic silicate nanoplatelets (SNs) for rapid blood coagulation is nanoengineered. The hydrogel reduces the in vitro viability of Staphylococcus aureus by more than 90%. The addition of SNs (2% w/v) and ZF nanoparticles (1.5&#xa0;mg mL-1 ) to GelMA (20% w/v) improves the burst pressure of perforated ex vivo porcine lungs by more than 40%. Such enhancement translated to &#x2248;250% improvement in the tissue sealing capability compared with a commercial hemostatic sealant, Evicel. Furthermore, the hydrogels reduce bleeding by &#x2248;50% in rat bleeding models. The nanoengineered hydrogel may open new translational opportunities for the effective sealing of complex wounds that require mechanical flexibility, infection management, and hemostasis.

### PMID 35579451 (2023) — ANZ journal of surgery
TITLE: Evicel&#xae;-induced small bowel obstruction.
DOI: 10.1111/ans.17779 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 34176297 (2023) — The American surgeon
TITLE: The Use of Hemostatic Agents to Decrease Bleeding Complications in Breast Cancer Surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/00031348211029866 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Following breast cancer surgery, patients often require adjuvant radiation and chemotherapy for locoregional and systemic disease control. These procedures may result in postoperative complications, which may delay adjuvant therapy. To potentially decrease these complications, hemostatic agents may be used. This study evaluated the rate of postoperative bleeding complications and duration of Jackson-Pratt (JP) drain use in oncologic breast surgery with and without hemostatic agents.
METHODS: After obtaining institutional review board approval, a retrospective chart review was performed. Patients who underwent oncoplastic breast surgery, mastectomy with or without expander/implant-based reconstruction, and subsequent reconstruction with expander to implant exchange were included. Data collected included indication for surgery, type of operation, use of hemostatic agent, specifically fibrin sealant (FS, EVICEL&#xae;, Ethicon, USA) or combination powder (CP, HEMOBLAST&#x2122; Bellows, biom'up, France), length of follow-up, time to JP drain removal, and post-operative complications (seroma, hematoma, or operating room (OR) takeback). This was a consecutive experience where initially no hemostatic agent was used, followed by use of FS, and then CP.
RESULTS: The use of a hemostatic agent resulted in fewer bleeding complications and significantly decreased time until JP drain removal. Although not significant, subgroup analysis demonstrated that this was more pronounced in the CP group. JP drain duration was decreased among all procedures for CP compared to FS.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of hemostatic agents in oncologic breast surgery may result in decreased postoperative complications and significantly reduce time to JP drain removal.

### PMID 35613868 (2023) — The Journal of laryngology and otology
TITLE: Drain-free neck dissection: the use of Artiss fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1017/S0022215122001256 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To study the safety and efficacy of Artiss fibrin sealant in lateral neck dissection, focusing on drain retention time, length of hospital stay and post-operative complications.
METHODS: A retrospective review was conducted of patients who underwent neck dissection in a UK hospital over a 12-month period.
RESULTS: Twenty-three patients were identified; 13 patients had Artiss and a drain, 10 patients had Artiss only. All drains were removed by post-operative day 2. No post-operative fluid collections or complications were recorded. Patients who had Artiss only without a drain were discharged on post-operative day 1.
CONCLUSION: The use of Artiss reduced the drain retention time and hospital stay, with no post-operative complications. Neck dissection can be safely undertaken with no drain, and can potentially be carried out as a day-case procedure, with the application of Artiss. These findings benefit patients and the National Health Service by improving the patient journey and reducing overall costs.

### PMID 37641071 (2023) — BMC surgery
TITLE: NHS-POx-loaded patch versus fibrin sealant patch in a porcine robotic liver bleeding model.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-023-02159-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The management of bleeding is paramount to any surgical procedure. With the increased use of less invasive laparoscopic and robotic methods, achieving hemostasis can be challenging since the surgeons cannot manually apply hemostatic agents directly onto bleeding tissue. In this study, we assessed the use of a pliable hemostatic sealant patch comprising fibrous gelatin carrier impregnated with poly(2-oxazoline) (NHS-POx) for hemostasis in robotic liver resection in a porcine bleeding model.
METHODS: The NHS-POx-loaded patch (GATT-Patch), was first evaluated in a Feasibility Study to treat surgical bleeding in 10 lesions, followed by a Comparative Study in which the NHS-POx patch was compared to a standard-of-care fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil), in 36 lesions (superficial, resection, or deep injuries mimicking metastasectomies). For each lesion type, the NHS-POx and fibrin sealant patches were used in an alternating fashion with 18 lesions treated with NHS-POx and 18 with the fibrin patch. Animal preparation and surgical procedures were consistent across studies. The primary outcome was time to hemostasis (TTH) within 3&#xa0;min for the Feasibility Study and within 5&#xa0;min for the Comparative Study.
RESULTS: In the Feasibility Study, 8 of the 10 NHS-POx-treated lesions achieved hemostasis at 30&#xa0;s and 3&#xa0;min. In the Comparative Study, all 18 NHS-POx patch-treated lesions and 9 of the 18 fibrin sealant patch-treated lesions achieved hemostasis at 5&#xa0;min. Median TTH with NHS-POx vs fibrin sealant patch was 30 vs 300&#xa0;s (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In this animal study, hemostasis during robotic liver surgery was achieved faster and more often with the NHS-POx loaded vs fibrin sealant patch.

### PMID 37182003 (2023) — Cureus
TITLE: Quick and Easy Application Method of TachoSil&#xae;&#xfe0f; During Laparoscopic and Robotic Liver Resections.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.37252 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: TachoSil&#xae;&#xfe0f;, a fibrin sealant patch, is a sheet-type hemostatic agent. Therefore, it is technically demanding to put it on the target place especially in laparoscopic surgeries due to the motion restriction of straight-fixed instruments. This article describes a quick and easy technique of TachoSil&#xa0;application during laparoscopic liver surgeries, by sewing it to the laparoscopic gauze in advance. This method allows for one-handed operation and stress-free application even in the situation of active bleeding.

### PMID 36847975 (2023) — International urology and nephrology
TITLE: Are hemostatic agents for selective cases of tubeless percutaneous nephrolithotomy necessary for access tract control? A randomized control trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s11255-023-03492-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficacy of percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL) access tract sealing agent. Fibrin glue and Tachosil&#xae; were used for sealing the access tract and compared to the control. Post operative computed tomography (CT) scan was used to evaluate those efficacies.
METHODS: A total of 108 patients were randomized to three groups: In group 1, the access tract was sutured, and compressive dressing was done. In group 2, the fibrin glue was injected into the access tract with a tip applicator at the end of operation. And group 3, Tachosil&#xae; was rolled on its longitudinal axis and plugged into the access tract. Non-contrast CT at POD 1 was taken and perirenal hematoma thickness was measured and graded. Hemoglobin, hematocrit, VAS score, stone-free status, and hospital stay were analyzed.
RESULTS: Preoperative demographic differences were not significant in all three arms. Postoperative CT scans in all groups demonstrated mostly minimal grade access tract hematomas. Mean perirenal hematoma thickness showed no significant differences (2.66&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.74, 2.73&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.85, 2.54&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4.37&#xa0;mm, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.981), respectively. Postoperative hemoglobin drop (0.75&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.58, 0.84&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.47, 0.91&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.60&#xa0;g/dl, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.74), stone-free rate (93.75, 87.87, 87.87%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.121), VAS (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.499) and hospital stay (1.81&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.84, 1.48&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.71, 1.59&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.75&#xa0;day, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.127) were not significantly different between the groups.
CONCLUSION: Fibrin glue and Tachosil&#xae; in tubeless PCNL were not necessary for postoperative access tract control.

### PMID 36984982 (2023) — Micromachines
TITLE: Influence of Aerosolization on Endothelial Cells for Efficient Cell Deposition in Biohybrid and Regenerative Applications.
DOI: 10.3390/mi14030575 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The endothelialization of gas exchange membranes can increase the hemocompatibility of extracorporeal membrane oxygenators and thus become a long-term lung replacement option. Cell seeding on large or uneven surfaces of oxygenator membranes is challenging, with cell aerosolization being a possible solution. In this study, we evaluated the endothelial cell aerosolization for biohybrid lung application. A Vivostat&#xae; system was used for the aerosolization of human umbilical vein endothelial cells with non-sprayed cells serving as a control. The general suitability was evaluated using various flow velocities, substrate distances and cell concentrations. Cells were analyzed for survival, apoptosis and necrosis levels. In addition, aerosolized and non-sprayed cells were cultured either static or under flow conditions in a dynamic microfluidic model. Evaluation included immunocytochemistry and gene expression via quantitative PCR. Cell survival for all tested parameters was higher than 90%. No increase in apoptosis and necrosis levels was seen 24 h after aerosolization. Spraying did not influence the ability of the endothelial cells to form a confluent cell layer and withstand shear stresses in a dynamic microfluidic model. Immunocytochemistry revealed typical expression of CD31 and von Willebrand factor with cobble-stone cell morphology. No change in shear stress-induced factors after aerosolization was reported by quantitative PCR analysis. With this study, we have shown the feasibility of endothelial cell aerosolization with no significant changes in cell behavior. Thus, this technique could be used for efficient the endothelialization of gas exchange membranes in biohybrid lung applications.

### PMID 36763553 (2023) — Zhurnal voprosy neirokhirurgii imeni N. N. Burdenko
TITLE: Autologous fibrin glue for endoscopic skull base repair in patients with cerebrospinal fluid leakage.
DOI: 10.17116/neiro20238701149 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: The main stages of endoscopic skull base repair in patients with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage are identification of bone boundaries of the fistula and its closure by auto- and allografts. Fibrin glue can be used to fix plastic materials and additionally seal skull base defect.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze efficacy and safety of Vivostat autologous fibrin glue for endoscopic skull base repair in patients with nasal CSF leakage and to compare postoperative outcomes after defect closure by Vivostat fibrin glue and allogeneic fibrin glue.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A retro- and prospective analysis included 56 patients with nasal CSF leakage who were treated at the Burdenko Neurosurgery Center between January 2021 and June 2022. Patients were divided into 2 groups: Vivostat fibrin glue (n=27, 48.2%) and allogeneic fibrin glue (n=29, 51.8%). Demographic and clinical perioperative data were analyzed.
RESULTS: No early postoperative recurrence of CSF leakage was registered in both groups, whereas meningitis occurred in 2 cases in each group. Recurrent CSF leakage in delayed postoperative period occurred in 1 patient (3.4%) of the control group (p&gt;0.05). Incidence of perioperative complications, subfebrile temperature in early postoperative period, surgery time and hospital-stay were similar.
CONCLUSION: Vivostat autologous fibrin glue is a safe and effective method for fixing the grafts in endoscopic skull base repair. The advantages of this approach are easy application, elimination of the risk of allergic, immunological and infectious complications, as well as acceleration of tissue regeneration.
UNLABELLED: &#x41e;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x43c;&#x438; &#x44d;&#x442;&#x430;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x43c;&#x438; &#x44d;&#x43d;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43f;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x438; &#x434;&#x435;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x430; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x447;&#x435;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438; &#x43d;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43b;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x435;&#x435; &#x44f;&#x432;&#x43b;&#x44f;&#x44e;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x438;&#x434;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x438;&#x444;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x433;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x446; &#x444;&#x438;&#x441;&#x442;&#x443;&#x43b;&#x44b; &#x438; &#x435;&#x435; &#x437;&#x430;&#x43a;&#x440;&#x44b;&#x442;&#x438;&#x435; &#x430;&#x443;&#x442;&#x43e;- &#x438; &#x430;&#x43b;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x430;&#x43c;&#x438;. &#x414;&#x43b;&#x44f; &#x444;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x441;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x43f;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x43c;&#x430;&#x442;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x438; &#x434;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x442;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x433;&#x435;&#x440;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x438;&#x437;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x434;&#x435;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x430; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x447;&#x435;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430; &#x43c;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x435;&#x442; &#x431;&#x44b;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x438;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x44b;&#x439; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x439;.
&#x426;&#x415;&#x41b;&#x42c; &#x418;&#x421;&#x421;&#x41b;&#x415;&#x414;&#x41e;&#x412;&#x410;&#x41d;&#x418;&#x42f;: &#x41f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x437;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x44d;&#x444;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x438; &#x431;&#x435;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x430;&#x443;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x44f; Vivostat (&#xab;Vivostat A/S&#xbb;, &#x414;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f;) &#x432; &#x44d;&#x43d;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43f;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x435; &#x434;&#x435;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x447;&#x435;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438; &#x43d;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x43b;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x435;&#x44f;&#x445;, &#x441;&#x440;&#x430;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x440;&#x435;&#x437;&#x443;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x44b; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43b;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x432; &#x433;&#x440;&#x443;&#x43f;&#x43f;&#x435; &#x441; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43c; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x44f; Vivostat &#x438; &#x432; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x433;&#x440;&#x443;&#x43f;&#x43f;&#x435; &#x441; &#x438;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43c; &#x430;&#x43b;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x44f;.
&#x41c;&#x410;&#x422;&#x415;&#x420;&#x418;&#x410;&#x41b; &#x418; &#x41c;&#x415;&#x422;&#x41e;&#x414;&#x42b;: &#x41f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x435;&#x434;&#x435;&#x43d; &#x440;&#x435;&#x442;&#x440;&#x43e;- &#x438; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x439; &#x430;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x437; &#x441;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x438; &#x438;&#x437; 56 &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x441; &#x43d;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43b;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x435;&#x435;&#x439;, &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x445;&#x43e;&#x434;&#x438;&#x432;&#x448;&#x438;&#x445; &#x43b;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x432; &#x424;&#x413;&#x410;&#x423; &#xab;&#x41d;&#x41c;&#x418;&#x426; &#x43d;&#x435;&#x439;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x438; &#x438;&#x43c;. &#x430;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x434;. &#x41d;.&#x41d;. &#x411;&#x443;&#x440;&#x434;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#xbb; &#x41c;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x437;&#x434;&#x440;&#x430;&#x432;&#x430; &#x420;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x441;&#x438;&#x438; &#x432; &#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x434; &#x441; &#x44f;&#x43d;&#x432;&#x430;&#x440;&#x44f; 2021 &#x43f;&#x43e; &#x438;&#x44e;&#x43d;&#x44c; 2022 &#x433;. &#x41f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x44b; &#x440;&#x430;&#x437;&#x434;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x44b; &#x43d;&#x430; &#x434;&#x432;&#x435; &#x433;&#x440;&#x443;&#x43f;&#x43f;&#x44b;: &#x441; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43c; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x44f; Vivostat (n=27, 48,2%) &#x438; &#x430;&#x43b;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x44f; (n=29, 51,8%). &#x41e;&#x441;&#x443;&#x449;&#x435;&#x441;&#x442;&#x432;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43d; &#x430;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x437; &#x434;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x440;&#x430;&#x444;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x438; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x434;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x431;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445;. &#x412; &#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43c; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x434;&#x435; &#x440;&#x435;&#x446;&#x438;&#x434;&#x438;&#x432; &#x43d;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43b;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x435;&#x438; &#x43d;&#x435; &#x431;&#x44b;&#x43b; &#x437;&#x430;&#x440;&#x435;&#x433;&#x438;&#x441;&#x442;&#x440;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d; &#x43d;&#x438; &#x432; &#x43e;&#x434;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x438;&#x437; &#x433;&#x440;&#x443;&#x43f;&#x43f; (&#x432; &#x43e;&#x442;&#x434;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x2014; &#x443; 1 (3,4%) &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x430; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x433;&#x440;&#x443;&#x43f;&#x43f;&#x44b;, p&gt;0,05), &#x440;&#x430;&#x437;&#x432;&#x438;&#x442;&#x438;&#x435; &#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x433;&#x438;&#x442;&#x430; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x438;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x448;&#x43b;&#x43e; &#x432; &#x434;&#x432;&#x443;&#x445; &#x441;&#x43b;&#x443;&#x447;&#x430;&#x44f;&#x445; &#x438;&#x437; &#x434;&#x432;&#x443;&#x445; &#x433;&#x440;&#x443;&#x43f;&#x43f;. &#x41a;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x435; &#x442;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e;, &#x43d;&#x435; &#x431;&#x44b;&#x43b;&#x43e; &#x43e;&#x431;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x440;&#x443;&#x436;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43e; &#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x438;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438; &#x437;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x447;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x440;&#x430;&#x437;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x446;&#x44b; &#x432; &#x43e;&#x442;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x448;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x438; &#x447;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x44b; &#x438;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430;- &#x438; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439;, &#x440;&#x430;&#x437;&#x432;&#x438;&#x442;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x441;&#x443;&#x431;&#x444;&#x435;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x442;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x442;&#x443;&#x440;&#x44b; &#x442;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x430; &#x432; &#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43c; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x434;&#x435;, &#x430; &#x442;&#x430;&#x43a;&#x436;&#x435; &#x434;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x442;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x432;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x448;&#x430;&#x442;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x441;&#x442;&#x432;&#x430; &#x438; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x431;&#x44b;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x431;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x432; &#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x440;&#x435;.
&#x412;&#x42b;&#x412;&#x41e;&#x414;&#x42b;: &#x41f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x430;&#x443;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x444;&#x438;&#x431;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x44f; Vivostat &#x44f;&#x432;&#x43b;&#x44f;&#x435;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x431;&#x435;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x43c; &#x438; &#x44d;&#x444;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x43c; &#x43c;&#x435;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x444;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x441;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438; &#x44d;&#x43d;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x43f;&#x43b;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x435; &#x434;&#x435;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x447;&#x435;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430;, &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x443;&#x449;&#x435;&#x441;&#x442;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43c;&#x438; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x44f;&#x432;&#x43b;&#x44f;&#x44e;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f;: &#x443;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x431;&#x441;&#x442;&#x432;&#x43e; &#x43d;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x441;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f;, &#x438;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43b;&#x44e;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x440;&#x438;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x430; &#x432;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x430;&#x43b;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445;, &#x438;&#x43c;&#x43c;&#x443;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x438; &#x438;&#x43d;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439;, &#x443;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x446;&#x435;&#x441;&#x441;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x440;&#x435;&#x433;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x442;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x439;.

### PMID 37636777 (2023) — Indian journal of otolaryngology and head and neck surgery : official publication of the Association of Otolaryngologists of India
TITLE: Epistaxis Treatment Options: Literature Review.
DOI: 10.1007/s12070-023-03824-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Epistaxis means bleeding from nostrils, nasal cavity or nasopharynx. To summarize the available epistaxis treatment options. Methods: 61 articles published in the last 20&#xa0;years were included. Duplicate records, irrelevant and inaccessible ones were excluded. &#xa0;Epistaxis can be treated with first aid measures such as external pressure and ice packing and applying topical agents, e.g. oxymetazoline that stops 65-75% of nosebleeds in A&amp;E. Also, with electrocautery which is more effective and has fewer recurrences (14.5% vs. 35.1%) than chemical cauterization and applying tranexamic acid that promotes hemostasis in 78% of patients, versus 35% and 31% respectively in patients treated with oxymetazoline and nasal packing. Furthermore, nasal packing can be applied with non-absorbable materials, e.g. petroleum jelly, BIPP gauze, PVA nasal tampons (Merocel), Foley catheter, balloons (Rapid-Rhino), absorbable materials, e.g. nasal tampon (Nasopore), and with newer hemostatic materials which are more effective and with fewer complications, e.g. hemostatic gauzes (Surgicel), thrombin matrix (Floseal), gelatin sponge (Spongostan) and fibrin glue. Moreover, epistaxis can be achieved with endoscopic ligation of arteries, mainly SPA, which is more effective than conventional nasal packing (97% vs. 62%), and with endoscopic cauterization&#xa0;which is more effective than ligation. Finally, for intractable cases embolization can be applied using gelatin sponge, foam, PVA and coils with 80% success rate and comparable efficacy and complications to surgical methods. Epistaxis can be dealt with various methods depending on patient's history and available resources. Newer hemostatic agents in combination with endoscopic methods have advantages over traditional methods.

### PMID 37974836 (2023) — Indian journal of otolaryngology and head and neck surgery : official publication of the Association of Otolaryngologists of India
TITLE: Our Experience in Trans Nasal Endoscopic Repair of Anterior Skull Base Defects Reinforced with Multiple Layers of Graft Materials.
DOI: 10.1007/s12070-023-03866-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Aims: To determine the best technique to repair anterior skull base defects using various grafts. Materials &amp; Methods: This Ambi-directional cohort study was carried out at a tertiary care hospital from May 2019 to October 2021. A total of 17 patients who underwent Endoscopic Repair of Anterior Skull Base Defects using various grafts were included in the study. Detailed history and clinical evaluation followed by Diagnostic Nasal Endoscopy, Biochemical and Radiological investigations were done for all patients with postoperative follow-up for at least 6 months. Results: Most common site of anterior skull base defect in our study group was the posterior wall of the sphenoid sinus. Various graft materials used in our study were fascia lata, thigh fat, Hadad flap, Septal cartilage, nasal septal bone chip, septal mucosal free flap, surgicel and fibrin glue. The most commonly used sequence of graft materials used is the fat(underlay) - fascia lata - fat(overlay). Various complications that occurred were nasal bleeding, residual CSF leak, localized collection of pus in the Septal region, cerebral oedema and Alar trauma. Conclusions: The success of Anterior skull base defect repair depends on watertight Dural closure with multiple layers of grafts to prevent postoperative CSF leak. Although dependent on the Surgeon's preference, usually the sequence of an underlay fat - fascia lata - overlay fat followed by glue/gel foam/Hadad flap works well. Even after discharging the patient, regular follow-up and evaluation ensure that the graft is in situ and there is no CSF leak or other complication.

### PMID 35575678 (2023) — Minerva surgery
TITLE: Topical hemostatic application on staple line in laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy: a single-surgeon experience.
DOI: 10.23736/S2724-5691.22.09617-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) is a common bariatric procedure with low complication rates. Several hemostatic agents have been used to reduce staple line bleeding, but its impact is unclear. The primary endpoint of this study was to compare the early (30-day) complications comparing oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) and fibrin sealant (FS) application on the staple line. The secondary endpoints were to compare the need for postoperative blood transfusion, postoperative blood work values of hemoglobin (Hb), white blood cell (WBC), C-reactive protein (CRP), drain output volume and hospital length of stay (LOS).
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of all patients who underwent LSG between January and October 2021 was performed. Subjects were divided into two groups according to the use of ORC versus FS on the staple line. Early postoperative complications, Hb level, WBC count, and drain output volume were compared between groups.
RESULTS: A total number of 77 patients were included: 27 in the ORC-group and 50 in the FS-group. No major complication was recorded in both groups. There was no significant difference in the need for blood transfusion, Hb value, and drain output volume on postoperative day (POD) 1 and 2. There was a significantly higher WBC count in the ORC-group on POD 1 and 2. There was no difference in hospital LOS between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of FS and ORC was associated with a comparable low rate of bleeding. ORC causes an increased WBC count postoperatively, but this showed no clinical relevance.

### PMID 39790668 (2023) — Annals of thoracic surgery short reports
TITLE: Simultaneous Bilateral Spontaneous Pneumothorax With Congenital Pleuro-Pleural Communication.
DOI: 10.1016/j.atssr.2023.05.025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case of bilateral spontaneous pneumothorax with critical collapse of both lungs in a previously healthy 33-year-old man. During the right-sided bullectomy, washing fluid flowed into the left thoracic cavity. Thereafter, thoracography confirmed a communication with bilateral pleural spaces. Careful thoracoscopic inspection revealed a 1.5-cm-long pleural window posterior to the inferior pulmonary ligament and located between the aorta and esophagus. Direct suturing followed by packing with a polyglycolic acid sheet and fibrin glue was performed to close the pleural window. The postoperative course was uneventful.

### PMID 37792569 (2023) — Journal of hepato-biliary-pancreatic sciences
TITLE: Hepatic artery protection using a polyglycolic acid sheet during pancreaticoduodenectomy: A multicenter study.
DOI: 10.1002/jhbp.1364 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016448">Multicenter Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postpancreatectomy hemorrhage (PPH) is the most feared complication after pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD). The most common cause is erosion of the gastroduodenal artery stump. Preventive measures have been previously reported, but a consensus is lacking. The aim of this study was to analyze the preventive effect of reinforcing the hepatic artery using a polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheet during PD.
METHODS: A multicenter retrospective study was performed, collecting data from three tertiary hospitals in Korea. Patients receiving PD from January 2016 to December 2021 were included. The primary endpoint was rate of PPH from the hepatic artery. Arterial reinforcement (AR) was performed by wrapping the artery with Neoveil (Gunze Ltd) and applying fibrin glue. The perioperative data of patients who did not receive AR were compared with data of those who received AR.
RESULTS: A total of 904 patients were analyzed. The rate of PPH from the hepatic artery was significantly lower in the AR group. (3.5% vs 0.7%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.002) In patients with CR-POPF, the 90&#x2009;day mortality rate of the AR group was less than half that of the non-AR group (7.2% vs 3.5%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.455) Risk factor analysis showed CR-POPF to be an independent risk factor for PPH. Arterial reinforcement was shown to be a strong protective factor for PPH (OR 0.20, 95% CI: 0.05-0.72, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.014).
CONCLUSIONS: AR of the hepatic artery using Neoveil and fibrin glue is a simple method that greatly reduces the rate of PPH after PD.

### PMID 37093674 (2023) — Japanese journal of clinical oncology
TITLE: Factors affecting polyglycolic acid sheet engraftment success for covering mucosal defects from head and neck surgery.
DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyad035 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheets have been used with fibrin glue to cover extensive mucosal defects in oral and pharyngeal surgery; however, the sheets can fall off before wound healing is completed. Hence, prolonged fasting is often recommended in such patients. However, there are few studies on the factors that shape PGA sheet engraftment. We studied sheet engraftment rates considering these factors.
METHODS: All consecutive cases of oral surgery in 2013-21 in which the defect was covered with fibrin glue and Neoveil&#xae; or Neoveil Nano&#xae; PGA sheets were identified. The loss of all sheets was defined as an engraftment failure. Multiple logistic regression analysis was conducted to identify whether the PGA-sheet type, application site, defect size and postoperative fasting duration predicted engraftment.
RESULTS: Overall, 137 patients were identified (mean age, 73&#xa0;years; 57% male). The surgeries were conducted with Neoveil&#xae; in 66% of the patients; the most common site was the buccal mucosa (25%), and the mean defect size and fasting duration were 709&#xa0;mm2 and 4&#xa0;days, respectively. The engraftment rate was 76%. Neoveil Nano&#xae; PGA sheets were associated with a 2.8-fold better engraftment rate than Neoveil&#xae; (univariate: 87 vs. 70%, P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.032; multivariate: 95% confidence intervals&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.067-7.410, P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.036). Other variables, including fasting duration, were not predictive of engraftment.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the largest case series of patients with head and neck cancer who underwent fibrin glue-PGA sheet defect coverage. The fasting duration did not influence engraftment. Therefore, early oral intake is not contraindicated in such patients.

### PMID 36716126 (2023) — American journal of veterinary research
TITLE: Endoscopic application of fibrin glue may be a feasible method of treatment for postintubation tracheal lacerations in cats.
DOI: 10.2460/ajvr.22.08.0137 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To determine the feasibility of endoscopic application of fibrin glue for the treatment of experimentally induced postintubation tracheal laceration (PITL) in feline cadavers. The secondary objective was to determine the optimal technique for application of the fibrin glue.
ANIMALS: 20 feline cadavers (n = 10 fresh and 10 frozen).
PROCEDURES: An experimentally induced tracheal rupture was created via overinflation of an endotracheal tube cuff. After endoscopic identification of the tracheal tear, fibrin glue was instilled into the tracheal defect in either a bridging or filling fashion. Following the procedure, the airway of each cat was examined and leak tested. Length of tear, volume of glue applied, procedural time, and glue efficacy were recorded.
RESULTS: Experimentally induced tracheal lacerations were full thickness with a mean length of 3.27 &#xb1; 0.96 cm. A complete seal was attained in 6 of the 9 fresh cadavers when filling the defect with fibrin glue. In the remaining 3 fresh cadavers, air leakage was restricted to the dorsal mediastinum. Bridging the defect with fibrin glue did not attain a seal in fresh or frozen cadavers. The median volume of glue used to fill defects in fresh cadavers was 0.5 mL (range, 0.4 to 2 mL). Procedural time for the application of fibrin glue was 10.5 &#xb1; 4.1 minutes for bridging the defect and 7.8 &#xb1; 1.5 minutes for filling the defect.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Endoscopic application of fibrin glue may be a feasible method of treatment for PITL in cats.

### PMID 36029172 (2022) — Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.)
TITLE: Sprayable Hydrogel for Instant Sealing of Vascular Anastomosis.
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202203087 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bleeding-related complications following vascular surgeries occur in up to half of the patients-500&#x2009;000 cases annually in the United States alone. This results in additional procedures, increased mortality rate, and prolonged hospitalization, posing a burden on the healthcare system. Commercially available materials rely, in large, on forming covalent bonds between the tissue and the biomaterial to achieve adhesion. Here, it is shown that a biomaterial based on oxidized alginate and oxidized dextran together with polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer amine provides simultaneous electrostatic and covalent interactions between the biomaterial and the tissue, maximizing adhesion. This study finds that the material withstands supraphysiological pressures (&#x2248;300&#xa0;mmHg) and prevents bleeding in a rabbit aortic puncture model and in a pig carotid bilateral poly(tetrafluoroethylene) graft model-achieving superior performance to commercially available materials such as Tisseel and BioGlue. Material biocompatibility is validated in comprehensive in vitro and in vivo studies in accordance with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidelines, including in vitro neutral red uptake test, subcutaneous implantation in rabbits, ames genotoxicity, and guinea pig maximization test. This material has the potential to provide with adequate seal and reduced complications following complex vascular surgeries, including hard-to-seal tissue-graft interfaces.

### PMID 35748414 (2022) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part B, Applied biomaterials
TITLE: Composition, host responses and clinical applications of bioadhesives.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.b.35113 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Bioadhesives are medical devices used to join or seal tissues that have been injured or incised. They have been classified into tissue adhesives, sealants, and hemostatic agents. Bioadhesives such as FloSeal&#xae;, CoSeal&#xae;, BioGlue&#xae;, Evicel&#xae;, Tisseel&#xae;, Progel&#x2122; PALS, and TissuGlu&#xae; have been commercialized and used in clinical setting. They can be formulated with natural or synthetic components or a combination of both including albumin, glutaraldehyde, chitosan, cyanoacrylate, fibrin and thrombin, gelatin, polyethylene glycol (PEG), along with urethanes. Each formulation has intrinsic properties and has been developed and validated for a specific application. This review article briefs the mechanisms by which bioadhesives forms adhesion to tissues and highlights the correlation between bioadhesives composition and their potential host responses. Furthermore, clinical applications of bioadhesives and their application-driven requirements are outlined.

### PMID 34284130 (2022) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: MRI appearance of adjunct surgical material used in spine surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2021.07.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Early postoperative MR images are frequently necessary after spine surgery. The appearance of commonly used adjunct hemostatic agents and dural sealants in MR images has not been systematically evaluated.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this experimental study was to systematically analyze and describe the characteristics of the most commonly applied hemostatic agents and dural sealants in spine surgery on early postoperative MR images.
STUDY DESIGN: Cadaver Study METHODS: Four commonly applied dural sealants (Duraseal, Bioglue, Tachosil, Tisseel) and five commonly used hemostatic agents (Surgiflo, Bonewax, , Spongostan, Gelfoam, Avitene) were investigated. The experimental setting involved a human cadaver where a standard left-sided laminotomy was performed on nine levels of the thoracolumbar spine, and the materials were separately applied and mixed with fresh blood or water for hemostatic and dural sealants, respectively. The cadaver model was scanned at a 3 Tesla MRI and the imaging findings for all materials were compared to the surrounding tissue and systematically reported.
RESULTS: All investigated dural sealants and hemostatic agents were distinguishable from the surrounding tissue on MR images with different appearances on the MR sequences. A detailed atlas for the identification of the materials in postoperative spine MRI was established.
CONCLUSION: Commonly used hemostatic agents and dural sealants can be successfully identified on early postoperative spine MRI.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Knowledge about MRI appearances of commonly used adjunct surgical materials helps in interpretation of postoperative imaging and supports clinical decision making.

### PMID 36087335 (2022) — Journal of neurosurgery. Pediatrics
TITLE: Association between synthetic sealants and increased complication rates in posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty for Chiari malformations regardless of graft type.
DOI: 10.3171/2022.7.PEDS22231 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Dural sealants are commonly used in posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty (PFDD) for Chiari malformation type I (CMI). Prior evidence suggests that combining certain sealants with some graft material is associated with an increased rate of complications. In 2018, the authors noted an increased rate of symptomatic pseudomeningocele and aseptic meningitis after PFDD in CMI patients. The authors utilized retrospective and prospective analyses to test the hypothesis that complication rates increase with the use or combination of certain sealants and grafts.
METHODS: The analysis was split into 2 periods. The authors retrospectively reviewed patients who underwent PFDD for CMI at their center between August 12, 2011, and December 31, 2018. The authors then eliminated use of DuraSeal on the basis of the retrospective analysis and prospectively examined complication rates from January 1, 2019, to August 4, 2021. The authors defined a complication as symptomatic pseudomeningocele, bacterial or aseptic meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid leak, subdural hygroma, hydrocephalus, surgical site infection, or wound dehiscence.
RESULTS: From 2011 to 2018, complications occurred in 24.5% of 110 patients. Sealant choice was correlated with complication rates: no sealant (0%), Tisseel (6%), and DuraSeal (15.3%) (p &lt; 0.001). No difference in complication rate was noted on the basis of choice of graft material (p = 0.844). After eliminating DuraSeal, the authors followed 40 patients who underwent PFDD after 2018. The complication rate decreased to 12.5%. All complications after 2018 were associated with Tisseel.
CONCLUSIONS: At the authors' single center, use of sealants in PFDD surgery for CMI, especially DuraSeal, was correlated with a higher complication rate. Eliminating DuraSeal led to a significant decrease in the rate of symptomatic pseudomeningocele and aseptic meningitis.

### PMID 35252844 (2022) — Matter
TITLE: Bioinspired Super-Strong Aqueous Synthetic Tissue Adhesives.
DOI: 10.1016/j.matt.2021.12.018 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Existing tissue adhesives and sealants are far from satisfactory when applied on wet and dynamic tissues. Herein, we report a strategy for designing biodegradable super-strong aqueous glue (B-Seal) for surgical uses inspired by an English ivy adhesion strategy and a cement particle packing theory. B-Seal is a fast-gelling, super-strong, and elastic adhesive sealant composed of injectable water-borne biodegradable polyurethane (WPU) nanodispersions with mismatched particle sizes and counterions in its A-B formulation. B-Seal showed 24-fold greater burst pressure than DuraSeal&#xae;, 138-fold greater T-pull adhesive strength than fibrin glue, and 16-fold greater lap shear strength than fibrin glue. In vivo evaluation on a rat cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea model and a porcine craniotomy model validated the safety and efficacy of B-Seal for effective CSF leak prevention and dura repair. The plant-inspired adhesion strategy combined with particle packing theory represents a new direction of designing the next-generation wet tissue adhesives for surgeries.

### PMID 34866336 (2022) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
TITLE: Comparative study of hydrophobically modified gelatin-based sealant with commercially available sealants.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.37339 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Air leakage is one of the major complications related to pulmonary surgeries. To reduce this complication, we developed a decyl group (C10)-modified Alaska pollock gelatin (ApGltn) (C10-ApGltn) sealant and evaluated its practical performance against commercially available sealants, Beriplast&#xae; and DuraSeal&#xae;. C10-ApGltn was synthesized by reductive amination of the amino groups in ApGltn with decanal. C10-ApGltn was crosslinked with a poly(ethylene glycol)-based crosslinker to form a tissue sealant. The crosslinking time of the C10-ApGltn sealant was fast enough for curing on tissue and application as a spray system. Although the percent swelling of C10-ApGltn and DuraSeal was significantly greater than Beriplast, C10-ApGltn and DuraSeal exhibited excellent tissue sealing properties on pleura tissue under a long-term moist condition. Additionally, C10-ApGltn and DuraSeal did not cause severe inflammatory responses in a rat subcutaneous example. Therefore, C10-ApGltn sealant had comparable tissue sealing properties to DuraSeal under a moist condition, indicating the potential of C10-ApGltn sealant for pulmonary surgeries.

### PMID 36643342 (2022) — Kardiochirurgia i torakochirurgia polska = Polish journal of cardio-thoracic surgery
TITLE: Effectiveness of fibrin sealant after pulmonary resection: a propensity score matching analysis.
DOI: 10.5114/kitp.2022.122087 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Alveolar air leak is a common and troublesome complication after pulmonary resection because it can lead to longer hospital stay and chest tube drainage time.
AIM: As fibrin sealants are useful in the management of alveolar air leaks, we evaluated their benefit in patients undergoing pulmonary resection.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This retrospective study included patients who underwent pulmonary resection in our hospital between 2016 and 2021. We grouped patients on the basis of whether fibrin sealant was used during surgery and compared outcomes between those with (fibrin sealant group) and without (control group) sealant use after propensity score matching (1 : 1).
RESULTS: During the study period, 375 patients underwent pulmonary resection; of these, fibrin sealant was applied at the staple line in 107 patients (fibrin sealant group), whereas sealant was not used in 268 patients (control group). After propensity score matching (1 : 1), there were 95 patients in both groups. There were no differences between the two groups in duration of chest tube drainage (3 days vs. 3 days; p = 0.753) or length of hospital stay (5 days vs. 4 days; p = 0.499). However, the sealant group showed higher cost of hospitalization (USD 4,360 vs. 3,614; p &lt; 0.001). Multivariate analysis for identifying risk factors of persistent air leak revealed that male sex and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease were associated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that application of fibrin sealant was not effective in reducing length of hospital stay, duration of chest drains or air leakage.

### PMID 36264129 (2022) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Alaska pollock gelatin sealant shows long-term efficacy and safety in a pulmonary air leakage rat model.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezac497 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Postoperative prolonged air leakage is a frequent complication following lung resection. We have shown the high adhesive quality of a newly developed sealant based on a hydrophobically modified Alaska pollock-derived gelatin (ApGltn) sealant in acute in vivo settings. The purpose of this study was to investigate the long-term efficacy and safety of ApGltn sealant using rats as a preclinical model.
METHODS: An air leakage rat model with a 5-mm pleural defect was created, to which ApGltn sealant or fibrin sealant was applied. In both groups, the rats were evaluated on days 1, 7, 14 and 28. In the ApGltn sealant group, days 56 and 84 were added to evaluate absorption as sealant was still present on day 28. The number of rats in each subgroup was 4 (for a total of 40). Lung specimens and blood samples were obtained for histological and haematological assessment.
RESULTS: No findings suggesting infection or air leakage were observed. ApGltn sealant was absorbed from day 56 to day 84. Histologically, although neutrophil and lymphocyte infiltrations on the lung side did not differ between groups, those on the sealant side were significantly less in the ApGltn sealant group. Blood sample tests revealed no significant findings suggesting inflammation or organ damage in either group.
CONCLUSIONS: ApGltn sealant showed long-term sealing efficacy and safety with mild inflammation in a pulmonary air leakage rat model. ApGltn sealant is expected to be a safe and effective sealant for clinical applications.

### PMID 36245576 (2022) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Causes and management of intraoperative complications in robot-assisted anatomical pulmonary resection for lung cancer.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd-22-553 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To perform safe robot-assisted anatomical lung resections, the details of intraoperative complications need to be shared among thoracic surgeons. However, only limited data are available.
METHODS: This retrospective, single-institutional study evaluated 134 patients who underwent robot-assisted anatomical lung resection. We examined the causes, management, and outcomes of all intraoperative complications.
RESULTS: Of the 134 eligible patients, 118 (88%) underwent lobectomy and 16 (12%) underwent segmentectomy. Intraoperative complications occurred in 17 (12.7%) patients. These complications included pulmonary artery (PA) injuries in seven patients, pulmonary vein (PV) injuries in three, azygos vein (AV) injury in one, superior vena cava (SVC) injury in one, bronchial injuries in three, and lung injuries in four. Most PA injuries were at a distal side and controlled by pressure, fibrin sealant, or stapling of the proximal side. In the three PV injuries, right upper PV was sandwiched by robotic instruments, V6 was punctured by the tip of the Maryland bipolar forceps, and the distal side of V2t was injured during tunneling of a minor interlobar fissure. These were controlled the same way as the PA injuries. The AV injury occurred during hilar lymph node (LN) dissection and was controlled by suturing. The SVC injury was caused by interference of the robotic forceps and the suction tube outside the field of view during upper mediastinal LN dissection. The injury was controlled by continuous pressure while layering polyglycolic acid sheets and fibrin glue. In the three bronchial injuries, B10 was injured during subcarinal LN dissection, right main bronchus was injured during upper bronchus dissection and the stapling failure of the bronchus occurred by strong traction. They were all repaired by suturing. All lung parenchymal injuries were caused by manipulation of robotic instruments outside the field of view. The lung injuries were repaired by suturing with pledgets. No cases were converted to thoracotomy. The 30-day mortality rate was 0.7%. The cause of mortality was pneumonia.
CONCLUSIONS: In robot-assisted anatomical pulmonary resection for lung cancer, most major intraoperative complications can be safely managed robotically without conversion to thoracotomy.

### PMID 35019201 (2022) — Catheterization and cardiovascular interventions : official journal of the Society for Cardiac Angiography &amp; Interventions
TITLE: Balloon-assisted injection of fibrin sealant for the treatment of postintervention access-site bleeding complications.
DOI: 10.1002/ccd.30068 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study sought to evaluate a new method that uses injection of fibrin sealant under simultaneous balloon occlusion for the treatment of postinterventional access site bleeding complications.&#xa0;With the rising complexity of interventional procedures, iatrogenic false aneurysms and active bleeding has become more common. In general, these complications are associated with increased morbidity and mortality, especially if surgical repair is required. Although high success rates are reported for ultrasound-guided compression and ultrasound-guided thrombin injection, these methods are not always feasible.&#xa0;All procedures of fibrin sealant injection under simultaneous balloon occlusion for the treatment of postinterventional access site bleeding complications or pseudoaneurysm were prospectively collected. Additional data were retrospectively obtained and analyzed for all patients treated by this new method.&#xa0;In total, 53 patients were included from 2018 to 2021. Most of the access site complications were related to transcatheter aortic valve replacement (40%) or percutaneous coronary intervention (21%), but also to a wide variety of other procedures. Of the 53 patients, 30 had to be treated for false aneurysms and 23 for active bleeding. A high primary success rate of 94% was achieved. Recurrences of false aneurysms occurred in six patients, of which only one needed open surgical repair. Regarding complications, two&#xa0;peripheral embolisms, thereof one requiring additional stent implantation occurred.&#xa0;Balloon-assisted thrombin injection seems to be feasible and safe. It provides a new alternative to prevent surgery for patients where common techniques are unavailable or have failed.

### PMID 34102175 (2022) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Efficacy of Alaska Pollock Gelatin Sealant for Pulmonary Air Leakage in Porcine Models.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2021.05.023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative prolonged air leakage is a frequent complication after lung resection. We have developed a new sealant based on a hydrophobically modified Alaska pollock-derived gelatin (ApGltn) sealant. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the adhesive strength of the ApGltn sealant in comparison with a fibrin sealant using a new spray system in ex&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vivo models.
METHODS: Pleural defects in ex&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vivo porcine models were created, to which the ApGltn sealant or the fibrin sealant was applied. The pressure resistance was assessed with a stepwise increase in airway pressure to confirm air leakage from the sealing site. Tissue samples covered with each sealant were obtained for histologic assessment.
RESULTS: In the ex&#xa0;vivo experiment, the leak pressures of the ApGltn sealant were significantly greater than those of the fibrin sealant (102.94 &#xb1; 15.6 cm H2O and 28.37 &#xb1; 5.1 cm H2O, respectively) (P &lt; .01). In the in&#xa0;vivo experiment, the leak pressures of the ApGltn sealant were also significantly greater than those of the fibrin sealant (68.82 &#xb1; 18.04 cm H2O and 43.33 &#xb1; 7.13 cm H2O, respectively) (P&#xa0;= .043). The histologic examination confirmed that the ApGltn sealant adhered tightly to both the pleura and the surface of the pleural defect.
CONCLUSIONS: The ApGltn sealant has sufficiently high adhesive quality in ex&#xa0;vivo and in&#xa0;vivo porcine lungs, which could be considered suitable and effective for use in the prevention of air leakage from the lungs.

### PMID 35484272 (2022) — Scientific reports
TITLE: The importance of pH adjustment for preventing fibrin glue dissolution in the stomach: an in vitro study.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-022-10968-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Combined use of fibrin glue and polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheets has attracted attention as a preventive measure for complications associated with endoscopic submucosal dissection. However, fibrin glue is a protein that may be dissolved by gastric acid. We evaluated the effect of artificial gastric acid on fibrin clot. The dissolution time of three layers of fibrin glue with PGA sheets was measured in five groups (pH 1.2, 2.0, 4.0, 5.5, and 6.0 with pepsin). Measurements of three samples per group were made. The mean number of the remaining layers at each measurement point was observed for 168&#xa0;h. The time to complete dissolution of the three layers of fibrin gel in the three samples was 2.5&#xa0;h at pH 1.2, 5&#xa0;h at pH 2.0, 24&#xa0;h at pH 4.0, and 48&#xa0;h and 6&#xa0;h at pH 5.5. In order to maintain fibrin glue in the stomach for a long period, there was a need to avoid pepsin activation secondary to acidification of gastric juice. The use of strong antacids is recommended.

### PMID 36088454 (2022) — Ophthalmology and therapy
TITLE: Outcomes of Sutureless Ahmed Glaucoma Valve Surgery: A Retrospective Study.
DOI: 10.1007/s40123-022-00565-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: This study compared the safety and efficacy of sutureless Ahmed glaucoma valve surgery (AGV standalone) to sutureless AGV plus cataract surgery (AGV-CEIOL) in Black or Hispanic patients.
METHODS: Records from Black or non-white Hispanic patients who received either AGV standalone or AGV-CEIOL from 2014 to 2019 at a Bronx, New York practice were reviewed. All surgeries were performed using a sutureless technique with Tisseel fibrin glue. Primary outcomes included failure (defined as intraocular pressure (IOP)&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;21&#xa0;mmHg, &#x2264;&#x2009;5&#xa0;mmHg, or reduced by &lt;&#x2009;20% after the first 3&#xa0;months; loss of light perception; or reoperation for glaucoma), hypertensive phase, IOP changes, and medication changes. Secondary outcomes included postoperative complications and interventions.
RESULTS: A total of 203 eyes that received AGV standalone (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;78) or AGV-CEIOL (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;125) were analyzed. Mean follow-up duration was 42.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;17.5&#xa0;months, with similar cohort-specific intervals (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.68). Failure among AGV-CEIOLs (44.8%, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;56) and AGV standalones (47.4%, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;37) occurred at similar frequencies; log-rank testing indicated comparable 5-year survival (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.56). Mean IOP among AGV-CEIOLs (15.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;12.1&#xa0;mmHg) was greater than standalones (8.6&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;5.1&#xa0;mmHg) at post-op day&#xa0;1 (P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). The AGV-CEIOL group had a 60% lower odds of experiencing a hypertensive phase after adjustment for baseline group differences (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01). Five-year IOP reduction was similar between groups in the multivariable model (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.45). There were no significant differences in medications (P&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;0.05 at all time points) or in total complications (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.28). More standalones required reoperation (39.7%, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;31) compared to&#xa0;AGV-CEIOLs (21.6%, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;24; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Sutureless AGV-CEIOL was noninferior to sutureless AGV standalone when performed in Black or non-white Hispanic patients. The combined group experienced the hypertensive phase less frequently despite higher day&#xa0;1 IOP.

### PMID 35647964 (2022) — Indian journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Repeated use of fibrin sealants kept at room temperature in conjunctival autografting: An animal study.
DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_2588_21 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: In this study, our aim was to investigate if fibrin adhesives used in conjunctival wound surgery with autologous conjunctival grafts could be used repeatedly at different times after surgical opening.
METHODS: 40 New Zealand rabbits were used in the study. These animals were divided into four groups, each consisting of 10 rabbits, and hence 20 eyes. In the first group (control group), Tisseel fibrin sealant was used on the day the eye was first opened surgically; in the second group, it was used on the seventh day; on the third group, it was used on the 14th day; and in the fourth group, it was used 28 days after surgical opening. The graft from the inferior bulbar conjunctiva was attached using Tisseel fibrin glue to the superior scleral bed at the location where the superior bulbar conjunctiva was excised in the same eye.
RESULTS: No microbial growth was detected in the cultures of the samples tested. There were two partial graft loss in group 2 and there was one partial graft loss in each group of the other groups, and further total graft loss was present in one rabbit in group 3. None of the rabbits had any complications like granuloma, Corneal dellen or infection.
CONCLUSION: Based on these results, fibrin sealants can be used repeatedly by storing them at room temperature. Repeated use of fibrin adhesives will reduce the cost of ophthalmologic surgeries and non-ophthalmologic surgeries.

### PMID 35225569 (2022) — Indian journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Fibrin glue assisted amniotic membrane graft reconstruction of conjunctival fornix and canthus following excision of conjunctival tumours.
DOI: 10.4103/ijo.IJO_1704_21 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Conjunctival tumors involving non-limbal locations, such as the fornix and canthus, are typically excised using a "non-touch" technique, often with a wide surgical margin. Reconstruction of these large defects can be difficult due to the contour of the ocular surface and are often complicated by shortening of the fornix, symblepharon formation, and restriction of eye movements. In our experience, the use of amniotic membrane grafts combined with the sealant properties of fibrin glue such as Tisseel&#xae; has improved our surgical outcomes during the reconstruction phase. We would like to highlight and describe our surgical technique using fibrin glue and squint hooks to aid amniotic membrane graft reconstruction for surgically challenging locations in the fornix and canthus following excision of conjunctival lesions, with excellent surgical outcomes.

### PMID 35032753 (2022) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Diagnosis and surgical repair of delayed tracheal perforation post thyroidectomy in context of previous cranio-spinal radiotherapy - A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2022.106761 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION AND IMPORTANCE: This is the first case of delayed tracheal perforation post total thyroidectomy in the context of previous radiotherapy to the neck. Such a presentation can be easily misdiagnosed and managed as a seroma at significant risk to the patient, as the latter had no precipitating factors and cardiorespiratory compromise. There are nineteen previously described cases of delayed tracheal injury post thyroidectomy of variable severity and variable intervention.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 51-year-old man presented with non-tender anterior neck surgical emphysema initially diagnosed on bedside ultrasound and plain X-ray, 22&#xa0;days following total thyroidectomy and central neck dissection. His background was significant for childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia requiring chemotherapy and cranio-spinal radiotherapy. He underwent total thyroidectomy, for multiple bilateral thyroid nodules found on cranio-spinal MRI surveillance concerning for follicular neoplasm. There were significant amount of adhesions tethering the thyroid secondary to prior radiotherapy but no tracheal injury intra-operatively.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: At presentation, no source of air leak was identified on Computer Tomography. He failed conservative management. During surgical exploration, a 2&#xa0;mm tracheal perforation at the right cricothyroid joint was closed with the right sternothyroid muscle due to the proximity of the perforation with the recurrent right laryngeal nerve. Tisseel was applied over the repair. He recovered without further complications.
CONCLUSION: Sudden onset neck swelling post thyroidectomy in the context of significant scaring from radiotherapy, should raise the suspicion of surgical emphysema in the neck patients and confirmed with plain x-ray. Such patients should have multidisciplinary tertiary care.

### PMID 34822255 (2022) — Current eye research
TITLE: Assessment of the Retinal Toxicity and Sealing Strength of Tissue Adhesives.
DOI: 10.1080/02713683.2021.2011325 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The purpose of this in vitro prospective nonrandomized study is to compare the toxicity and strength of cyanoacrylate and hydrogel adhesives on human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells and porcine retina, respectively.
METHODS: The toxicity of cyanoacrylate (histoacryl, dermabond, superglue), ReSure PEG, and Tisseel fibrin glue on human RPE cells was determined by growing RPE cells in vitro, applying the different adhesives to the cells, and monitoring for disruption of growth over 3&#xa0;days. The relative strength of these adhesives was tested by gluing a 3 mm piece of foam to a porcine retina and determining the amount of force needed to break the attachment.
RESULTS: 0.085&#xa0;N of force was required to break the porcine retinal tissue (p =&#xa0;.913). Histoacryl adhesive exhibited high strength (0.247&#xa0;N) and high RPE toxicity (0.55 mm inhibition zone after 24 hrs). The strength of Tisseel fibrin glue was 0.078&#xa0;N while that of ReSure was only 0.053&#xa0;N. Both Tisseel and ReSure were nontoxic to the RPE cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Tisseel VH fibrin sealant may provide the best option for sealing retinal breaks because of its high strength and low retinal toxicity.

### PMID 36267213 (2022) — Orthopedic reviews
TITLE: Prevention of postoperative anemia in hip hemiarthroplasty for femoral neck fractures: comparison between local haemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.52965/001c.38574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tranexamic acid and fibrin sealant have been shown to be effective in reducing the need for transfusion after hip fracture surgery.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of local haemostatic agents to reduce the need of postoperative transfusion in elederly patients after hip hemiarthroplasty.
METHODS: All patients admitted to our institution with a diagnosis of proximal femur fracture from September 2018 to March 2021 were involved. Inclusion criteria were: diagnosis of femoral neck fracture, classified as AO 31B2-3, surgical treatment with hip hemiarthroplasty, hemoglobinemia on admission &gt; 8 gr/dL. Patients were divided in four groups.
RESULTS: EVICEL was used on 25 patients, TRANEX was used on 52 patients, standard hemostatic care was used on 73 patients, while post-surgical drain was used on 21 patients. 3 patients were transfused in the EVICEL group while 26 patients were transfused in the control group (p 0,0404), there was also statistical significant difference in the need of perioperative transfusion between EVICEL group and drain group with 10 patients transfused (p 0,0102). Statistical significant differences was found about haemoglobin variation in the first post-operative day between TRANEX group and control group (p 0,000155) and between TRANEX group and drain group (p 0,013) and also between TRANEX group and control group in the third post-operative day (p 0,0004).
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that the use of both fibrin sealant or TXA can reduce total blood loss and the need of transfusions in geriatric population with intracapsular femur fracture.

### PMID 35672203 (2022) — Journal of cranio-maxillo-facial surgery : official publication of the European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery
TITLE: Drainless parotidectomy using tissue fibrin sealant - A retrospective case-control study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2022.05.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of drainless parotidectomy using fibrin sealant on length of stay, post-operative seroma and related complications. For this purpose, a retrospective matched case-control series was held in a single academic center. All patients who underwent drainless parotidectomies, including deep lobe tumors and revision surgeries, were compared to matched controls in which a suction drain was inserted. Main outcomes were length of hospital stay and post-operative seroma. A total of 123 patients (41 cases and 82 controls) were included in the study. Fibrin sealant group had higher rates of total parotidectomy compared with the control group (25.0% vs. 10.5%, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.054). Length of stay was significantly shorter in the fibrin sealant group (1.0&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.3 days vs. 1.5&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.6 days, p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001, respectively). No statistically significant difference was found between the fibrin sealant group and the control regarding post-operative seromas (9.8% vs. 14.6%, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.574, respectively), aspirations rate (7.3% vs. 14.6%, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.381), and infection rates (0% vs.3.7%, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.550). In conclusion, drainless parotidectomy does not increase post operative seroma rates and related complications, and can also be implemented for revision surgery.

### PMID 36322203 (2022) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Collagen-bound fibrin sealant (TachoSil&#xae;) for dural closure in cranial surgery: single-centre comparative cohort study and systematic review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-022-01886-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a well-known complication of craniotomies and there are several dural closure techniques. One commonly used commercial product as adjunct for dural closure is the collagen-bound fibrin sealant TachoSil&#xae;. We analysed whether the addition of TachoSil has beneficial effects on postoperative complications and outcomes. Our prospective, institutional database was retrospectively queried, and 662 patients undergoing craniotomy were included. Three hundred fifty-two were treated with dural suture alone, and in 310, TachoSil was added after primary suture. Our primary endpoint was the rate of postoperative complications associated with CSF leakage. Secondary endpoints included functional, disability and neurological outcome. Systematic review according to PRISMA guidelines was performed to identify studies comparing primary dural closure with and without additional sealants. Postoperative complications associated with CSF leakage occurred in 24 (7.74%) and 28 (7.95%) procedures with or without TachoSil, respectively (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.960). Multivariate analysis confirmed no significant differences in complication rate between the two groups (aOR 0.97, 95% CI 0.53-1.80, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.930). There were no significant disparities in postoperative functional, disability or neurological scores. The systematic review identified 661 and included 8 studies in the qualitative synthesis. None showed a significant superiority of additional sealants over standard technique regarding complications, rates of revision surgery or outcome. According to our findings, we summarize that routinary use of TachoSil and similar products as adjuncts to primary dural sutures after intracranial surgical procedures is safe but without clear advantage in complication avoidance or outcome. Future studies should investigate whether their use is beneficial in high-risk settings.

### PMID 36315924 (2022) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Arthrozheal&#xae;, a Bioactive Fibrin Scaffold for Joint Cartilage, Tendon and Soft Tissue Lesions. Latest Results and Application Perspectives.
DOI: 10.52198/22.STI.41.OS1636 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Treatment of articular cartilage, tendon and soft tissue damage remains a challenge for the practicing orthopaedic surgeon. Due to the multifactorial aetiology of these lesions, there is a narrow therapeutic window within which they can be treated successfully, thus preventing progression to other musculoskeletal tissues. Recently, a new material that combines platelet-rich fibrin with collagen and is applied as a gel scaffold (ArthroZheal&#xae;, Vivostat A/S, Aller&#xf8;d, Denmark) has been shown to provide unique results in these patients. We arthroscopically treated 210 patients (114 knees, 32 hips, 52 shoulders, 12 ankle joints) with ArthroZheal&#xae;. The basic idea was to adjust treatment to the individual patient and to repair related and/or contributing problems before or along with treatment of chondral/tendon/ligament injuries. Arthroscopy was our preferred surgical method; the goal was to restore and preserve function, alleviate pain and minimise progression to osteoarthritis. We excluded cases of inflammatory arthropathy, unstable or malaligned joint, "kissing lesions" (bipolar), infection, obesity, massive rotator cuff rupture and multiligament instability. Our results were more than promising. We observed improved mobility in 93%, reduced pain in 95% at 3 months and further improvement at 6 months, with near-normal ROM (97% ) and pain-free status (98%). The MRI at 12 months post application showed cartilage restoration/reformation in 94% of patients, improved cartilage quality (84% )-by 2nd-look arthroscopic confirmation&#xf02d;and normal tendon or ligament reconstruction (without stitching of the affected area)(95%). We were concerned about bone marrow oedema and rehab compliance among elderly patients. For successful regeneration of tissue lesions and osteochondral defects, natural gel bioscaffolds, combined with platelet rich fibrin (PRF) with chondroinductive and osteoinductive growth factor stimulators (ArthroZheal&#xae;) are required. There is no "gold standard" in the treatment of cartilage defect/tissue lesions or preferred treatment option. Many algorithms are used, which mostly rely on the surface area of the defect/site of lesion and on surgeon experience. An important issue is that rehabilitation depends on the treatment mode used and on the defect/lesion characteristics (classification and qualification). While a return to functional work and sports is possible with all procedures, different lengths of time are needed.

### PMID 36055668 (2022) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Clinical Outcomes of the Application of Platelet-Rich Fibrin during Anatomic Anterior Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction: Results of Prospective Randomised Study].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE OF THE STUDY It was a prospective, randomised, unblinded study. Effects of the application of platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) on the anatomic anterior ligament reconstruction were examined. MATERIAL AND METHODS A total of 40 patients who underwent a surgery between 2012 and 2014 were enrolled in the study. The patients were randomised into two groups: the group with PRF application (n=20) and the group without PRF application (n=20, control group). The study included 11 women and 29 men, with the mean age at the time of inclusion into the study 29.1 years. Vivostat &#xae; PRF was obtained perioperatively from the patient s blood and applied intraoperatively to the hamstring tendon graft. The ACL graft healing was assessed through magnetic resonance (MRI) at 6 and 12 months postoperatively. The clinical outcomes (the Lysholm score and the IKDC Subjective score, return to pre-injury sport levels, Pivot-shift test, graft failure) as well as standardised laxity measurements using GenouRob arthrometer were performed preoperatively and 12 months after surgery. RESULTS The study was completed by thirty-three (33) patients (17 in the PRF group and 16 in the control group). In two cases, postoperative graft failure was reported (both cases in the control group). No significant differences were found in the process of graft ligamentization evaluated through MRI (p=0.07). No significant difference between the groups was identified with respect to return to pre-injury sport levels (p=0.232), or the Lysholm score and IKDC Subjective score (p=0.259, and p=0.364 respectively). The postoperative knee laxity measurement using Genourob arthrometer did not reveal any significant differences between the PRF group and the control group. DISCUSSION Results similar to those arrived at by our study have recently been published also by other authors worldwide. We can therefore assume that the application of PRF can be of benefit, especially at the early stage of healing. The results still need to be verified on a larger study group, the study design should focus on the development in the early postoperative period. CONCLUSIONS In our study group, no significant difference was observed in the evaluated subjective and objective clinical parameters. Only the parameter regarding the ACL graft failure fell just short of statistical significance, namely to the disadvantage of the group without the PRF application. Key words: anterior cruciate ligament, arthroscopy, anatomic ACL reconstruction, magnetic resonance imaging of the graft, platelet-rich fibrin, graft healing, MRI signal intensity of the graft.

### PMID 36545677 (2022) — Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology
TITLE: Efficacy of oxidized regenerated cellulose combined with fibrin glue in reducing pulmonary air leakage after segmentectomy in a porcine lung model.
DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.1052535 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Objectives: Pulmonary air leakage is a common complication following lung resection. We have designed a new method combining oxidized regenerated cellulose and fibrin glue to cover the intersegmental plane in clinical lung segmentectomy to prevent postoperative air leakage. In this study, an excised porcine lung segmentectomy model was created to validate its adhesive strength and effect on reducing air leakage. Methods: In the pre-experiment, six different larger lung segments were separated using electrocautery on the fresh isolated porcine lungs (n = 5 in each group). The air leakage degree and operation time of the lung segments were comprehensively evaluated to select the most suitable target segment for establishing the ex vivo porcine lung segmentectomy models. In the experiment, according to the different materials covered on the intersegmental plane, these models were randomly divided into four groups: group A used fibrin glue and oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) mesh (n = 20); group B used fibrin glue and polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheet (n = 20); group C used fibrin glue (n = 20); group D was the blank control group (n = 20). The minimum air leakage pressure (MALP) of the selected target segment in each group was measured using a stepwise increase of airway pressure, and histological assessment was performed on the sealed area samples from the four groups. Results: The operation time of the a segment of the right cranial lobe (R1a) was shorter than that of other segments (p &lt; 0.05), and there was no significant difference in the air leakage pressures between the six isolated segments (p = 0.76); thus, R1a was chosen for segmentectomy. In addition, the MALP was significantly higher in group A (41.8 &#xb1; 4.5 cmH2O) than in groups C (28.1 &#xb1; 2.3 cmH2O) and D (17.3 &#xb1; 1.2 cmH2O) (both p &lt; 0.001). The MALP of group B (69.5 &#xb1; 5.2 cmH2O) was significantly higher than that of group A (p &lt; 0.001), whereas that of group C was significantly higher than that of group D (p &lt; 0.001). Histological examination confirmed that the combined use of fibrin glue and ORC or PGA patch adhered more firmly to the intersegmental plane than that of fibrin glue alone, although some gaps could be seen between the fibrin glue and the surface of the lung segments in group C. Conclusion: The application of ORC combined with fibrin glue on the intersegmental plane has a good sealing performance in the ex vivo porcine lung segmentectomy model, suggesting that ORC may be an effective alternative material to replace PGA sheet to combine with fibrin glue for preventing air leakage after segmentectomy.

### PMID 36071989 (2022) — JSLS : Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons
TITLE: Exploring Adverse Events and Utilization of Topical Hemostatic Agents in Surgery.
DOI: 10.4293/JSLS.2022.00033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: This retrospective study provides preliminary qualitative assessment of the adverse events (AEs), focusing on pelvic and abdominal AEs and patient outcomes reported for three hemostatic agents used in gynecologic surgery.
METHODS: Utilization rates for oxidized regenerated cellulose powder (ORC), polysaccharide powder (PSP), and fibrin sealant solution (FSS) were obtained from hospitals via the Premier Healthcare databases for all surgical procedures from January 1, 2018 to September 30, 2020. All reported cases were extracted from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience (MAUDE) database for ORC and PSP and from the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) database for FSS. Distributions of AEs by anatomical site (MAUDE/FAERS) and surgical procedures by specialty (Premier) were evaluated for each product. Number of cases and number and types of AEs were compared to the total utilization for each product.
RESULTS: PSP was the most used product during the period analyzed (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;126,509 uses), followed by FSS (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;80,628 uses), and ORC (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;41,583 uses). Distribution of surgical procedures by anatomical site varied significantly between hemostatic agents (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). ORC was associated with more patient cases with AEs and numbers of reported AEs compared with PSP and FSS (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). ORC was associated with higher number of infections than PSP (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) and FSS (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that ORC use in abdominal and pelvic surgery may result in more postoperative complications compared with non-ORC hemostatic agents. Further prospective randomized studies are needed to compare efficacy and safety of these products.

### PMID 36010894 (2022) — Cancers
TITLE: Effect of a Polyglycolic Acid Mesh Sheet (Neoveil&#x2122;) in Thyroid Cancer Surgery: A Prospective Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.3390/cancers14163901 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common type of thyroid cancer. Surgery for PTC involves resection of the thyroid gland and central lymph node dissection. Central lymph node dissection is associated with an increased amount of fluid from the dissection area and chyle leakage due to thoracic duct injury. There are few studies that deal with reducing fluid drainage and preventing chyle leakage after thyroid surgery with central lymph node dissection. A polyglycolic acid mesh sheet (Neoveil&#x2122;) has been demonstrated to prevent postoperative fluid leakage in other surgeries. This study aims to evaluate whether a polyglycolic acid mesh sheet can reduce postoperative drainage and chyle leakage in papillary thyroid cancer surgery, and this study was designed as a prospective, open-label, randomized controlled trial in a single university hospital. The patients were randomly assigned to having only fibrin glue used in the central node dissection area (control group) or to having a polyglycolic acid mesh sheet applied after fibrin glue (treatment group). A total of 330 patients were enrolled, of which 5 patients were excluded. A total of 161 patients were included in the treatment group, and 164 patients were included in the control group. The primary outcome was the drainage amount from the Jackson-Pratt drain, and the secondary outcome was the triglyceride level in the drained fluid on the 1st and 2nd postoperative days. The drainage amount was significantly lower in the treatment group on the 2nd postoperative day (60.9 &#xb1; 34.9 mL vs. 72.3 &#xb1; 38.0 mL, p = 0.005). The sum of drainage amount during the whole postoperative days (1st and 2nd days) was also significantly lower in the treatment group (142.7 &#xb1; 71.0 mL vs. 162.5 &#xb1; 71.5 mL, p = 0.013). The postoperative triglyceride levels were lower in the treatment group but were not statistically significant (92.1 &#xb1; 60.1 mg/dL vs. 81.3 &#xb1; 58.7 mg/dL on postoperative day 1, p = 0.104 and 67.6 &#xb1; 99.2 mg/dL vs. 53.6 &#xb1; 80.4 mg/dL on postoperative day 2, p = 0.162). No adverse effects were observed in the treatment groups during the postoperative 9-month follow-up. Our study suggests that polyglycolic acid mesh sheets can be safely applied to reduce postoperative drainage amount in thyroidectomy patients who need lymph node dissection.

### PMID 36195922 (2022) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Expanding perigraft seroma after ascending aorta replacement.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-022-02018-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Perigraft seroma is a persistent and sterile fluid confined within a fibrous pseudomembrane surrounding a graft that develops after graft replacement. Development of perigraft seroma is an uncommon complication that occurs after the surgical repair of the thoracic aorta using woven polyester grafts. mechanism underlying perigraft seroma formation remains unclear.
CASE PRESENTATION: Herein, we describe the case of 77-year-old man who underwent repeat sternotomy for the treatment of large perigraft seroma 1&#xa0;year after ascending aorta replacement for acute type A dissection. After removing a cloudy yellow fluid, we covered the prosthetic graft with fibrin glue and wrapped it with a new graft. Bacterial culture and laboratory examination of the fluid confirmed the final diagnosis of perigraft seroma, and there was no evidence of recurrence. The area in which fluid accumulated around the graft shrunk 1&#xa0;year after surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: The cause of a expanding perigraft after repair of the thoracic aorta remains unknown. Physicians should be aware that chronic expanding mediastinal seroma with Dacron grafts is one of the rare postoperative complications of thoracic aortic surgery. Applying fibrin glue to the graft surface might effectively prevent the recurrence of perigraft seroma.

### PMID 35349036 (2022) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Perigraft seroma after total aortic arch replacement using Triplex graft.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-022-01810-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 42-year-old gentleman underwent total aortic arch replacement with Triplex graft (Terumo corporation, Tokyo, Japan) for acute type A dissection. Sixteen months later, a computed tomography revealed a rapidly enlarging low-density area around the graft, with no contrast enhancement. The area was compressing the mediastinal structures, such as the superior vena cava and right pulmonary artery. Suspecting lymphorrhea or perigraft seroma (PGS), surgical drainage was performed. Although fluid accumulation around the graft was cloudy and yellowish, Gram stain was negative. A fatty preparation was administered from the nasogastric tube, demonstrating no leakage of chyle. Intraoperative lymphangiography with indocyanine green also showed no lymphatic leak. Therefore, PGS was suspected. Fibrin glue was applied to the graft and the surgery was completed. PGS drainage after arch replacement, especially with Triplex graft, is extremely rare. We discuss the strategies of diagnosis and treatment for this uncommon complication after aortic surgery.

### PMID 36000962 (2022) — Minimally invasive therapy &amp; allied technologies : MITAT : official journal of the Society for Minimally Invasive Therapy
TITLE: Efficacy of local hemostatic agents after endoscopic submucosal dissection: a meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1080/13645706.2022.2111217 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Topical hemostatic agents have been used to reduce bleeding rates after endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for gastric cancer. However, to date, no review has summarized evidence on their efficacy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: PubMed, Embase, ScienceDirect, CENTRAL, and Google Scholar were searched for studies comparing bleeding rates after ESD with and without local hemostatic agents.
RESULTS: Eleven studies were included. The studies used polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheets and fibrin glue, fibrin glue, oxidized regenerated cellulose, polysaccharide hemostatic powder, or polyethylene oxide adhesive. Meta-analysis revealed a statistically significant reduction in the risk of delayed bleeding with the use of PGA sheets &amp; fibrin glue (six studies; RR: 0.35 95% CI: 0.20, 0.63 p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0005). However, meta-analysis of two studies showed no difference in the risk of bleeding based on the use of fibrin glue (RR: 0.44 95% CI: 0.03, 7.17 p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.56). Scarce data were available for the remaining hemostatic agents.
CONCLUSION: A large number of different hemostatic agents have been used to reduce the risk of bleeding after ESD for gastric cancer. Observational studies indicate that the use of PGA with fibrin glue could reduce the risk of bleeding after ESD. However, evidence for other agents was too scarce to derive conclusions.

### PMID 34417129 (2021) — Journal of pediatric urology
TITLE: Can sealing promote healing?: A systematic review and meta-analysis highlighting the adjunctive role of tissue sealant application during urethroplasty for hypospadias.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpurol.2021.07.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A significant proportion of children require multiple surgeries for successful repair of hypospadias. This is not only a source of a financial burden to the family but also causes long-term social and psychosexual issues. Tissue sealant application can provide additional coverage to the suture line and subsequently prevents operative failure. However, a consensus statement regarding its usage during urethroplasty is lacking. This systematic review and meta-analysis aims to compare the outcomes of hypospadias surgery, in terms of its complications, in children with and without tissue sealant application.
METHOD: The authors systematically searched the databases PubMed, EMBASE, Web of Science and Scopus through September 2020. The occurrence of overall complications, and specific complications (including urethrocutaneous fistula, wound-related complications, flap-related complications, complications involving the neo-urethral tube and meatal stenosis) were the primary and secondary outcomes, respectively. Statistical analysis was performed using a random-effects model, and pooled risk ratio (RR) and heterogeneity (I2) were calculated. The methodological quality of the studies was assessed utilizing the Downs and Black scale.
RESULT: Four comparative studies were included in the meta-analysis. The different types of tissue sealants such as fibrin glue, cyanoacrylate glue, BioGlue and cryocalcium glue were used in these studies. As compared to without sealant application, hypospadias repair performed with sealant application showed no significant difference in the incidence of overall postoperative complications (RR 0.63; 95% CI 0.34-1.14, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.13). However, a significant reduction in some specific complications including urethrocutaneous fistula (RR 0.37; 95% CI 0.19-0.72, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.003), wound-related complications (RR 0.57; 95% CI 0.38-0.86, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.008) and complications involving the neo-urethra (RR 0.15; 95% CI 0.04-0.54, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.004) was observed with sealant usage. The average Downs and Black scale scores ranged from 16 to 18, with all studies having a moderate risk of bias. Kappa statistics showed a value of 0.962 (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001), highlighting an almost perfect agreement among the two observers.
CONCLUSION: The present meta-analysis revealed no additional benefit of the repair of hypospadias performed with tissue sealants as compared to without sealants in terms of reducing the overall postoperative complications. However, a significant reduction in the occurrence of some specific complications, including UCF, wound-related complications and complications involving the neourethra was observed with sealant application. The level of evidence of the published comparative studies is limited. Therefore, further studies need to be conducted for optimal comparison between the sealant and no sealant (or placebo), and different types of sealants.

### PMID 34239571 (2021) — International journal of biomaterials
TITLE: Preclinical Testing of New Hydrogel Materials for Cartilage Repair: Overcoming Fixation Issues in a Large Animal Model.
DOI: 10.1155/2021/5583815 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Reinforced hydrogels represent a promising strategy for tissue engineering of articular cartilage. They can recreate mechanical and biological characteristics of native articular cartilage and promote cartilage regeneration in combination with mesenchymal stromal cells. One of the limitations of in vivo models for testing the outcome of tissue engineering approaches is implant fixation. The high mechanical stress within the knee joint, as well as the concave and convex cartilage surfaces, makes fixation of reinforced hydrogel challenging. Methods. Different fixation methods for full-thickness chondral defects in minipigs such as fibrin glue, BioGlue&#xae;, covering, and direct suturing of nonenforced and enforced constructs were compared. Because of insufficient fixation in chondral defects, superficial osteochondral defects in the femoral trochlea, as well as the femoral condyle, were examined using press-fit fixation. Two different hydrogels (starPEG and PAGE) were compared by 3D-micro-CT (&#x3bc;CT) analysis as well as histological analysis. Results. Our results showed fixation of below 50% for all methods in chondral defects. A superficial osteochondral defect of 1&#x2009;mm depth was necessary for long-term fixation of a polycaprolactone (PCL)-reinforced hydrogel construct. Press-fit fixation seems to be adapted for a reliable fixation of 95% without confounding effects of glue or suture material. Despite the good integration of our constructs, especially in the starPEG group, visible bone lysis was detected in micro-CT analysis. There was no significant difference between the two hydrogels (starPEG and PAGE) and empty control defects regarding regeneration tissue and cell integration. However, in the starPEG group, more cell-containing hydrogel fragments were found within the defect area. Conclusion. Press-fit fixation in a superficial osteochondral defect in the medial trochlear groove of adult minipigs is a promising fixation method for reinforced hydrogels. To avoid bone lysis, future approaches should focus on multilayered constructs recreating the zonal cartilage as well as the calcified cartilage and the subchondral bone plate.

### PMID 34297226 (2021) — Journal of materials science. Materials in medicine
TITLE: Ex vivo evaluation of a multilayered sealant patch for watertight dural closure: cranial and spinal models.
DOI: 10.1007/s10856-021-06552-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid leakage is a frequent complication after cranial and spinal surgery. To prevent this complication and seal the dura watertight, we developed Liqoseal, a dural sealant patch comprising a watertight polyesterurethane layer and an adhesive layer consisting of poly(DL-lactide-co-&#x3b5;-caprolactone) copolymer and multiarmed N-hydroxylsuccinimide functionalized polyethylene glycol. We compared acute burst pressure and resistance to physiological conditions for 72&#x2009;h of Liqoseal, Adherus, Duraseal, Tachosil, and Tisseel using computer-assisted models and fresh porcine dura. The mean acute burst pressure of Liqoseal in the cranial model (145&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;39&#x2009;mmHg) was higher than that of Adherus (87&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;47&#x2009;mmHg), Duraseal (51&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;42&#x2009;mmHg) and Tachosil (71&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;16&#x2009;mmHg). Under physiological conditions, cranial model resistance test results showed that 2 of 3 Liqoseal sealants maintained dural attachment during 72 hours as opposed to 3 of 3 for Adherus and Duraseal and 0 of 3 for Tachosil. The mean burst pressure of Liqoseal in the spinal model (233&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;81&#x2009;mmHg) was higher than that of Tachosil (123&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;63&#x2009;mmHg) and Tisseel (23&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;16&#x2009;mmHg). Under physiological conditions, spinal model resistance test results showed that 2 of 3 Liqoseal sealants maintained dural attachment for 72 hours as opposed to 3 of 3 for Adherus and 0 of 3 for Duraseal and Tachosil. This novel study showed that Liqoseal is capable of achieving a strong watertight seal over a dural defect in ex vivo models.

### PMID 34103451 (2021) — Georgian medical news
TITLE: QUANTITATIVE HISTOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF SKELETAL MUSCLE HYPOTROPHY AFTER NEUROTOMY AND SCIATIC NERVE REPAIR IN RATS.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Reinnervation of skeletal muscles, wich occurs in time, is considered a factor in preventing muscle atrophy and potentially successful functional recovery. Morphometry of denervated muscles makes it possible to assess the dynamics of muscle atrophy after various methods of repairing of a damaged peripheral nerve. The aim - evaluate histological changes and morphometry of m. gastrocnemius in rats after complete neurotomy and nerve repair techniques. In rats the sciatic nerve was crossed and sutured with 4 epineural sutures, 2 sutures with DuraSeal, and 2 sutures with Tisseel. On the 14th, 30th, and 60th day histological changes of m.gastrocnemius were examined and morphometry was performed based on two parameters: muscle fiber diameter and collagen density. Skeletal muscles morphometry was performed after sciatic nerve neurotomy and subsequent microsurgical repair. Muscle fiber wasting was already detected on the 14th day after epineural suture with DuraSeal, and in the Tisseel group - on the 30th day after sciatic nerve damage. The average diameter of muscle fibers in the DuraSeal group increased significantly by the day 60 due to the appearance of hypertrophied fibers. In areas of wasting, connective tissue density increased, which did not change quantitatively during the experiment, while the use of DuraSeal and Tisseel delayed the development of fibrosis for up to the 30th day. Application of DuraSeal and Tisseel with epineural suture delays the development of fibrosis and wasting in denervated muscles during the reinnervation period.

### PMID 33640918 (2021) — The British journal of surgery
TITLE: Glue versus mechanical mesh fixation in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair: meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis of randomized clinical trials.
DOI: 10.1093/bjs/znaa002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The optimal choice for mesh fixation in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair (LIHR) has not been well established. This review compared the effects of glue versus mechanical mesh fixation in LIHR on incidence of chronic postoperative inguinal pain (CPIP) and other secondary outcomes, including acute pain, seroma, haematoma, hernia recurrence and other postoperative complications.
METHODS: A systematic review of English/non-English studies using MEDLINE, the Cochrane Library, OpenGrey, OpenThesis and Web of Science, and searching bibliographies of included studies was completed. Search terms included laparoscopic, hernia, fibrin glue, Tisseel, Tissucol, cyanoacrylate, Glubran and Liquiband. Only RCTs comparing mechanical with glue-based fixation in adult patients (aged over 18 years) that examined CPIP were included. Two authors independently completed risk-of-bias assessment and data extraction against predefined data fields. All pooled analyses were computed using a random-effects model.
RESULTS: Fifteen RCTs met the inclusion criteria; 2777 hernias among 2109 patients were assessed. The incidence of CPIP was reduced with use of glue-based fixation (risk ratio (RR) 0.36, 95 per cent c.i. 0.19 to 0.69; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.002), with moderate heterogeneity that disappeared with sensitivity analysis (8&#x2009;d.f.) for patient-blinded studies (RR 0.43, 0.27 to 0.86). Trial sequential analysis provided evidence for a relative risk reduction of at least 25 per cent. The incidence of haeamtoma was reduced by using glue-based fixation (RR 0.29, 0.10 to 0.82; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.02) with no significant effects on seroma formation or hernia recurrence (RR 1.07, 0.46 to 2.47; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.88).
CONCLUSION: Glue-based mesh fixation appears to reduce the incidence of CPIP and haematoma after LIHR compared with mechanical fixation, with comparable recurrence rates.

### PMID 34962480 (2021) — The heart surgery forum
TITLE: Fibrin Sealant Patch for the Management of Intractable Bleeding From an LVAD Apex Cannula.
DOI: 10.1532/hsf.4081 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intractable bleeding from the apical cannulation site of a left ventricular assist device (LVAD) is a dreaded complication.
CASE REPORT: A 52-year-old male suffering from dilative cardiomyopathy (DCM) with fixed pulmonary hypertension underwent reoperative LVAD implantation after previous mitral valve surgery. The patient underwent three rethoracotomies for bleeding from the apex cannulation site without achieving hemostasis. Conventional techniques and application of fibrin sealants and polymeric sealing devices did not fix the problem. The bleeding stopped after application of the EVARREST&#xae; Fibrin Sealant Patch (FSP), and he needed no further transfusions.
CONCLUSION: This patch might become a useful tool for intractable bleeding problems in LVAD surgery.

### PMID 34705777 (2021) — Plastic and reconstructive surgery
TITLE: A Novel Alaska Pollock Gelatin Sealant Shows Higher Bonding Strength and Nerve Regeneration Comparable to That of Fibrin Sealant in a Cadaveric Model and a Rat Model.
DOI: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000008489 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A novel biocompatible sealant composed of Alaska pollock-derived gelatin (ApGltn) has recently shown good burst strength and biocompatibility in a porcine aorta. The purpose of this study was to investigate the bonding strength and biocompatibility of the ApGltn sealant in transected digital nerves of fresh frozen cadavers and in the sciatic nerves of a rat model.
METHODS: Eighty human digital nerves of fresh frozen cadavers were transected for biomechanical traction testing. They were treated with four surgical interventions: (1) suture plus ApGltn sealant; (2) suture; (3) ApGltn sealant; and (4) fibrin sealant. Forty-three sciatic nerves of male Wistar rats were used for functional and histopathologic evaluation. They were treated with six surgical interventions: (1) suture plus ApGltn sealant; (2) suture; (3) ApGltn sealant; (4) fibrin sealant; (5) resection with a 5-mm gap (10 rats per group); and (6) sham operation (three rats). Macroscopic confirmation, muscle weight measurement, and histopathologic findings including G-ratio were examined 8 weeks after the procedure.
RESULTS: The maximum failure load of the ApGltn sealant was significantly higher than that of a fibrin sealant (0.22 &#xb1; 0.05 N versus 0.06 &#xb1; 0.04 N). The maximum failure load of the ApGltn sealant was significantly lower that of suture plus ApGltn sealant (1.37 N) and suture (1.27 N). Functional evaluation and histologic examination showed that sciatic nerves repaired with ApGltn sealant showed similar nerve recovery compared to repair with the suture and fibrin sealant.
CONCLUSION: The ApGltn sealant showed higher bonding strength and equal effect of nerve regeneration when compared with the fibrin sealant.

### PMID 34386047 (2021) — Kardiochirurgia i torakochirurgia polska = Polish journal of cardio-thoracic surgery
TITLE: Autologous fibrin sealant application in cardiac surgery - a single-centre observational study.
DOI: 10.5114/kitp.2021.107467 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: To minimize the risk of blood loss and post-transfusion complications in patients undergoing cardiovascular surgery, different strategies are used.
AIM: To analyse the efficacy of the intraoperative use of autologous fibrin glue to seal suture lines of cardiac and vascular structures.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The early results of 62 patients who underwent complex cardiac operations in extracorporeal circulation were analysed. In a half of them Vivostat autologous fibrin sealant in addition to the routine haemostatic agents was applied (study group), whereas in the second group (matched-pair control group) only standard haemostatics were used. Among many other factors, special attention was paid to postoperative drainage and blood products used.
RESULTS: The mean age of the patients and prevalence of comorbidities did not differ between groups. Generally, in the study group fewer haemostatic agents were used. For example, Preveleak tissue glue was applied in 3.2% of studied cases compared to one third of control patients (p = 0.008). The thoracic drainage on either day 0 or day 1 was also similar. The number of patients who received blood products did not differ between groups. More importantly, there were no significant differences in in-hospital mortality and prevalence of other postoperative complications.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study it was found that application of autologous fibrin glue was safe and might limit use of standard haemostatic agents. Taking into account the lack of potential threats related to the transmission of infections and immune responses, it may be an interesting alternative to the previously used local haemostatics.

### PMID 34099403 (2021) — Transfusion and apheresis science : official journal of the World Apheresis Association : official journal of the European Society for Haemapheresis
TITLE: Novel autologous, high concentrated fibrin as advanced hemostatic agent for coronary surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2021.103171 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Variability in transfusion outcomes and excessive postoperative bleeding represents a significant problem in cardiac surgery. The effort to reduce bleeding complications and transfusion outcomes is desirable. Our study investigated the feasibility of reducing bleeding complications and transfusion requirements by applying perioperatively prepared autologous bio-regenerative fibrin sealant.
METHODS: A prospective, case-control study enrolled 74 patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting by a single surgeon. Patients in the control group (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;43), received traditional methods of hemostasis, while patients in the experimental group (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;31) were treated additionally with autologous bio-regenerative fibrin.
RESULTS: Patients were well-matched with regard to basic demographic, laboratory and procedural data. Allogeneic blood transfusion requirement in control group was 39.5 % (17 of 43 patients), compared to 6.5 % (2 of 31 patients) in treated group (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0,001). The lower infection rate in the experimental group was also noted. No safety issues were identified during the preparation and application process.
CONCLUSION: Autologous bio-regenerative fibrin can be safely prepared, with no time consuming, and was demonstrated to be a useful tool to decrease allogeneic blood transfusion requirements following elective coronary artery bypass grafting surgery. A prospective randomized trial is needed to confirm these findings.

### PMID 33995680 (2021) — Theranostics
TITLE: TGF-&#x3b2; loaded exosome enhances ischemic wound healing in vitro and in vivo.
DOI: 10.7150/thno.57701 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Rationale: With over seven million infections and $25 billion treatment cost, chronic ischemic wounds are one of the most serious complications in the United States. The controlled release of bioactive factor enriched exosome from finbrin gel was a promising strategy to promote wound healing. Methods: To address this unsolved problem, we developed clinical-grade platelets exosome product (PEP), which was incorporate with injectable surgical fibrin sealant (TISSEEL), to promote chronic wound healing and complete skin regeneration. The PEP characterization stimulated cellular activities and in vivo rabbit ischemic wound healing capacity of TISSEEL-PEP were performed and analyzed. Results: PEP, enriched with transforming growth factor beta (TGF-&#x3b2;), possessed exosomal characteristics including exosome size, morphology, and typical markers including CD63, CD9, and ALG-2-interacting protein X (Alix). In vitro, PEP significantly promoted cell proliferation, migration, tube formation, as well as skin organoid formation. Topical treatment of ischemic wounds with TISSEEL-PEP promoted full-thickness healing with the reacquisition of hair follicles and sebaceous glands. Superior to untreated and TISSEEL-only treated controls, TISSEEL-PEP drove cutaneous healing associated with collagen synthesis and restoration of dermal architecture. Furthermore, PEP promoted epithelial and vascular cell activity enhancing angiogenesis to restore blood flow and mature skin function. Transcriptome deconvolution of TISSEEL-PEP versus TISSEEL-only treated wounds prioritized regenerative pathways encompassing neovascularization, matrix remodeling and tissue growth. Conclusion: This room-temperature stable, lyophilized exosome product is thus capable of delivering a bioactive transforming growth factor beta to drive regenerative events.

### PMID 33786677 (2021) — Annals of surgical oncology
TITLE: Evaluation of Fibrin Sealant in Prevention of Cervical Anastomotic Leakage After McKeown Esophagectomy: A Single-Center, Retrospective Study.
DOI: 10.1245/s10434-021-09877-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Anastomotic leakage remains an issue after esophagectomy for patients with esophageal or esophagogastric junction cancer. Previous studies have indicated that the intraoperative application of fibrin sealant may reduce the incidence of postoperative anastomotic leakage. This retrospective study was aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of fibrin sealant in the prevention of anastomotic leakage in patients undergoing McKeown esophagectomy.
METHODS: We designed a single-center, retrospective study. Between January 2018 and December 2019, 227 patients with esophageal or esophagogastric junction cancer undergoing McKeown esophagectomy performed by our team were retrospectively identified, of whom 86 patients were included in the FS group and 141 patients were included in the control group. Intraoperatively, 2.5 ml of porcine fibrin sealant was applied circumferentially to the cervical anastomosis after the anastomosis was created in the FS group. The primary outcome was the incidence of cervical anastomotic leakage within the first three months after surgery.
RESULTS: The differences in baseline clinical characteristics between the two groups were not significant except for a history of drinking. In the FS group, the postoperative cervical anastomotic leakage rate was lower (FS group: 4.7% [4 of 82] vs. control group: 19.9% [28 of 141], p &lt; 0.01). Multivariate logistic regression showed that the intraoperative application of fibrin sealant was an independent protective factor for anastomotic leakage (OR 0.169, 95% CI 0.055-0.515, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: The intraoperative application of fibrin sealant could possibly prevent cervical anastomotic leakage after McKeown esophagectomy with satisfactory safety. Further prospective clinical trials are warranted.

### PMID 33593536 (2021) — Carbohydrate polymers
TITLE: Vasoconstrictor and coagulation activator entrapped chitosan based composite hydrogel for rapid bleeding control.
DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2021.117634 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chitosan (Cs) as a hemostatic agent has been in use to control hemorrage. Composite hydrogel formed by entrapment of vasoconstrictor-potassium aluminium sulfate (0.25 %PA) and coagulation activator-calcium chloride (0.25 %Ca) into Cs (2 %) hydrogel would enhance the hemostatic property of Cs. In this work, the prepared composite hydrogel was injectable, shear thinning, cyto and hemocompatible. The 2 %Cs-0.25 %PA-0.25 %Ca composite hydrogel caused rapid blood clotting by accelerating RBC/platelet aggregation and activation of the coagulation cascade. Further, in vivo studies on rat liver and femoral artery hemorrage model showed the efficiency of 2 %Cs-0.25 %PA-0.25 %Ca composite hydrogel to achieve hemostasis in a shorter time (20 &#xb1; 10 s, 105 &#xb1; 31 s) than commercial hemostatic agents-Fibrin sealant (77 &#xb1; 26 s, 204 &#xb1; 58 s) and Floseal (76 &#xb1; 15 s, 218 &#xb1; 46 s). In in vivo toxicological study, composite hydrogel showed material retention even after 8 weeks post-surgery, therefore excess hydrogel should be irrigated from site of application. This prepared composite hydrogel based hemostatic agent has potential application in low pressure bleeding sites.

### PMID 33563845 (2021) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Aortic Root Reconstruction with TachoSil Fibrin Sealant Patch in Acute Type A Aortic Dissection.
DOI: 10.5761/atcs.nm.20-00198 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We propose a novel technique for reconstruction of the dissected aortic root with the use of TachoSil fibrin sealant patch.
METHODS: Patients with acute type A aortic dissection involving the aortic root were included. Appropriately prepared TachoSil fibrin sealant patch was placed between the dissected layers of the aortic root to achieve their durable fusion. Thus, the false lumen was eliminated, and the anatomical and functional structure of the aortic wall was restored.
RESULTS: In all, 13 patients mean aged 57 &#xb1; 10.3 years underwent surgery for acute type A aortic dissection with the use of TachoSil fibrin sealant patch. All patients survived the surgery. The mean follow-up time was 30.8 &#xb1; 16.4 months. Follow-up computed tomography angiography (CTA) scans confirmed no aortic root dissection in all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This technique ensures durable restoration of the aortic wall structure, eliminates the secondary aortic valve regurgitation, and allows for the preservation of patients' native aortic valve.

### PMID 33532586 (2021) — Bioengineering &amp; translational medicine
TITLE: The secretome of stressed peripheral blood mononuclear cells increases tissue survival in a rodent epigastric flap model.
DOI: 10.1002/btm2.10186 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Reconstructive surgery transfers viable tissue to cover defects and to restore aesthetic and functional properties. Failure rates after free flap surgery range from 3 to 7%. Co-morbidities such as diabetes mellitus or peripheral vascular disease increase the risk of flap failure up to 4.5-fold. Experimental therapeutic concepts commonly use a monocausal approach by applying single growth factors. The secretome of &#x3b3;-irradiated, stressed peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCsec) resembles the physiological environment necessary for tissue regeneration. Its application led to improved wound healing rates and a two-fold increase in blood vessel counts in previous animal models. We hypothesized that PBMCsec has beneficial effects on the survival of compromised flap tissue by reducing the necrosis rate and increasing angiogenesis. Surgery was performed on 39 male Sprague-Dawley rats (control, N =&#x2009;13; fibrin sealant, N =&#x2009;14; PBMCsec, N =&#x2009;12). PBMCsec was produced according to good manufacturing practices (GMP) guidelines and 2 ml were administered intraoperatively at a concentration of 2.5&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;107 cells/ml using fibrin sealant as carrier substance. Flap perfusion and necrosis (as percentage of the total flap area) were analyzed using Laser Doppler Imaging and digital image planimetry on postoperative days 3 and 7. Immunohistochemical stainings for von Willebrand factor (vWF) and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-receptor-3 (Flt-4) were performed on postoperative day 7 to evaluate formation of blood vessels and lymphatic vessels. Seroma formation was quantified using a syringe and flap adhesion and tissue edema were evaluated clinically through a cranial incision by a blinded observer according to previously described criteria on postoperative day 7. We found a significantly reduced tissue necrosis rate (control: 27.8%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.6; fibrin: 22.0%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;6.2; 20.9% reduction, p =&#x2009;.053 vs. control; PBMCsec: 19.1%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;7.2; 31.1% reduction, p =&#x2009;.012 vs. control; 12.9% reduction, 0.293 vs. fibrin) together with increased vWF+ vessel counts (control: 70.3 &#xb1;&#x2009;16.3 vessels/4 fields at 200&#xd7; magnification; fibrin: 67.8 &#xb1;&#x2009;12.1; 3.6% reduction, p =&#x2009;.651, vs. control; PBMCsec: 85.9 &#xb1;&#x2009;20.4; 22.2% increase, p =&#x2009;.045 vs. control; 26.7% increase, p =&#x2009;.010 vs. fibrin) on postoperative day 7 after treatment with PBMCsec. Seroma formation was decreased after treatment with fibrin sealant with or without the addition of PBMCsec. (control: 11.9 &#xb1;&#x2009;9.7 ml; fibrin: 1.7 &#xb1;&#x2009;5.3, 86.0% reduction, 0.004 vs. control; PBMCsec: 0.6 &#xb1;&#x2009;2.0; 94.8% reduction, p =&#x2009;.001 vs. control; 62.8% reduction, p =&#x2009;.523 vs. fibrin). We describe the beneficial effects of a secretome derived from &#x3b3;-irradiated PBMCs on tissue survival, angiogenesis, and clinical parameters after flap surgery in a rodent epigastric flap model.

### PMID 32936480 (2021) — Journal of orthopaedic research : official publication of the Orthopaedic Research Society
TITLE: A novel engineered purified exosome product patch for tendon healing: An explant in an ex vivo model.
DOI: 10.1002/jor.24859 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Reducing tendon failure after repair remains a challenge due to its poor intrinsic healing ability. The purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of a novel tissue-engineered purified exosome product (PEP) patch on tendon healing in a canine ex vivo model. Lacerated flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) tendons from three canines' paws underwent simulated repair with Tisseel patch alone or biopotentiated with PEP. For the ex vivo model, FDP tendons were randomly divided into three groups: FDP tendon repair alone group (Control), Tisseel patch alone group, and the Tisseel plus PEP (TEPEP) patch group. Following 4 weeks of tissue culture, the failure load, stiffness, histology, and gene expression of the healing tendon were evaluated. Transmission electron microscopy revealed that in exosomes of PEP the diameters ranged from 93.70 to 124.65&#x2009;nm, and the patch release test showed this TEPEP patch could stably release the extracellular vesicle over 2 weeks. The failure strength of the tendon in the TEPEP patch group was significantly higher than that of the Control group and Tisseel alone group. The results of histology showed that the TEPEP patch group had the smallest healing gap and the largest number of fibroblasts on the surface of the injured tendon. Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction showed that TEPEP patch increased the expression of collagen type III, matrix metallopeptidase 2 (MMP2), MMP3, MMP14, and reduced the expression of transforming growth factor &#x3b2;1, interleukin 6. This study shows that the TEPEP patch could promote tendon repair by reducing gap formation and inflammatory response, increasing the activity of endogenous cells, and formation of type III collagen.

### PMID 30883296 (2021) — The journal of spinal cord medicine
TITLE: Thoracoscopic intercostal to phrenic nerve transfer for diaphragmatic reanimation in a child with tetraplegia.
DOI: 10.1080/10790268.2019.1585706 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Context: To describe for the first time a novel technique of thoracoscopic intercostal nerve mobilization and intercostal to phrenic nerve transfer in the setting of tetraplegia with the goal of reanimating the diaphragm and decreasing ventilator dependence.Findings: A 5-year-old female on 24 h ventilator support secondary to traumatic tetraplegia was evaluated for possible phrenic nerve pacing. Left-sided phrenic nerve stimulation did not result in diaphragmatic contraction indicating a lower motor neuron injury. The patient underwent thoracoscopic mobilization of the left phrenic nerve and 10th intercostal nerve while positioned in the left lateral decubitus position using four 5&#x2005;mm trocars. The mobilized intercostal nerve was transected close to its distal anterior termination and coapted without tension to the cut end of the terminal phrenic nerve using fibrin sealant. Lastly, phrenic nerve pacer leads and battery were implanted in the chest wall and connected to the electrode placed on the intercostal nerve. One year following the procedure, the patient was tolerating phrenic pacing during the day while requiring ventilation overnight. Currently, the patient is 2 years post-operative from this procedure and does not require ventilator support.Conclusion/clinical relevance: We have shown for the first time a novel approach of thoracoscopic nerve mobilization and phrenic to intercostal nerve transposition to be both safe and effective for restoring innervation of the diaphragm in a child. This minimally invasive procedure is recommended as the preferred approach to reanimate the diaphragm.

### PMID 34233632 (2021) — BMC neurology
TITLE: Evaluation of the hemostatic effect of a combination of hemostatic agents and fibrin glue in a rabbit venous hemorrhage model.
DOI: 10.1186/s12883-021-02272-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: In neurosurgery, it is important to use local hemostatic agents. We have explored a more powerful method of hemostasis by the combination of commercially available hemostatic agents with fibrin glue in the hopes of synergistic effects.
METHOD: A bleeding model was constructed by puncturing the rabbit posterior vena cava with a needle. After applying the sample to the bleeding point, compression was performed for 10&#xa0;s. If temporary hemostasis was achieved after pressure release, a 30&#xa0;s wash was performed to confirm that ultimate hemostasis was achieved. Up to three hemostasis attempts were performed on the same bleeding point until hemostasis was achieved, and the number of attempts required for hemostasis was counted. If hemostasis was not achieved after three attempts, it was counted as four times. Four groups were evaluated: (1) gelatin sponge alone, (2) gelatin sponge&#x2009;+&#x2009;fibrin glue, (3) oxidized cellulose alone, and (4) oxidized cellulose&#x2009;+&#x2009;fibrin glue; each group was tested 16 times.
RESULTS: The median value (range minimum value-maximum value) of the number of hemostatic attempts in Group 1 to Group 4 was 3 (1-4), 1 (1-1), 4 (4-4), and 4 (2-4). In Group 2, there were two test exclusions owing to deviations of the test procedure.
CONCLUSIONS: The compatibility of gelatin sponge and fibrin glue was very good, with a very strong and rapid hemostatic effect compared to other methods, showed its usefulness. This combination method may be effective for a variety of venous hemorrhages in neurosurgery.

### PMID 35047295 (2021) — Cureus
TITLE: Chyloma: A Manifestation of Chyle Leak Six Months After Neck Dissection.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.20476 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chyle leaks after a neck dissection usually manifest within the immediate postoperative period. However, masked chyle leaks may present as a chyloma months later. A 54-year-old male patient with squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue underwent bilateral neck dissection, subtotal glossectomy, anterolateral thigh flap reconstruction and postoperative radiotherapy. Intraoperatively, chyle leak was encountered in level IV of the left neck. We managed it by ligation of the thoracic duct, application of Tisseel&#x2122; sealant (Baxter Inc., Illinois, USA) and one week of prophylactic fat-free feeds. Six months later, an asymptomatic chyloma of the left neck was identified on surveillance MRI. Five weeks after the diagnosis, streptococcal infection developed within the chyloma. However, initiation of fat-free diet, serial aspiration, pressure dressing and antibiotic therapy allowed the chyloma to resolve within two weeks. Further surveillance MRI over three years showed no recurrence of the chyloma. Low-volume chyle leaks may manifest as an occult chyloma. Prophylactic measures cannot replace meticulous ligation of chylous channels in left level IV neck dissection.

### PMID 34820360 (2021) — Frontiers in bioengineering and biotechnology
TITLE: Gluing Living Bone Using a Biomimetic Bioadhesive: From Initial Cut to Final Healing.
DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2021.728042 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Osteoporotic fractures are a growing issue due to the increasing incidence of osteoporosis worldwide. High reoperation rates in osteoporotic fractures call for investigation into new methods in improving fixation of osteoporotic bones. In the present study, the strength of a recently developed bone bioadhesive, OsStictm, was evaluated in vivo using a novel bone core assay in a murine animal model at 0, 3, 7, 14, 28, and 42&#xa0;days. Histology and micro-CT were obtained at all time points, and the mean peak pull-out force was assessed on days 0-28. The adhesive provided immediate fixation to the bone core. The mean peak bone core pull-out force gradually decreased from 6.09&#xa0;N (&#x3c3; 1.77&#xa0;N) at day 0 to a minimum of 3.09&#xa0;N (&#x3c3; 1.08&#xa0;N) at day 7, recovering to 6.37&#xa0;N (&#x3c3; 4.18&#xa0;N) by day 28. The corresponding fibrin (Tisseel) control mean peak bone core pull-out characteristic was 0.27&#xa0;N (&#x3c3; 0.27&#xa0;N) at day 0, with an abrupt increase from 0.37&#xa0;N (&#x3c3; 0.28) at day 3, 6.39&#xa0;N (&#x3c3; 5.09&#xa0;N) at day 7, and continuing to increase to 11.34&#xa0;N (&#x3c3; 6.5&#xa0;N) by day 28. The bone cores failed either through core pull-out or by the cancellous part of the core fracturing. Overall, the adhesive does not interrupt healing with pathological changes or rapid resorption. Initially, the adhesive bonded the bone core to the femur, and over time, the adhesive was replaced by a vascularised bone of equivalent quality and quantity to the original bone. At the 42&#xa0;day time point, 70% of the adhesive in the cancellous compartment and 50% in the cortical compartment had been replaced. The adhesive outwith the bone shell was metabolized by cells that are only removing the material excess with no ectopic bone formation. It is concluded that the adhesive is not a physical and biochemical barrier as the bone heals through the adhesive and is replaced by a normal bone tissue. This adhesive composition meets many of the clinical unmet needs expressed in the literature, and may, after further preclinical assessments, have potential in the repair of bone and osteochondral fragments.

### PMID 34400306 (2021) — Acta biomaterialia
TITLE: Hydrogels derived from acellular porcine corneal stroma enhance corneal wound healing.
DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2021.08.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Acellular cornea derived hydrogels provide significant advantages in preserving native corneal stromal keratocyte cells and endothelial cells. However, for clinical application, hydrogel physical properties need to be improved, and their role in corneal epithelial wound healing requires further investigation. In this study, an acellular porcine corneal stroma (APCS) hydrogel (APCS-gel) was successfully prepared from 20 mg/ml APCS, demonstrated optimal light transmittance and gelation kinetic properties and retained critical corneal ECM of collagens and growth factors. Compared with fibrin gel, the APCS-gel had a higher porosity ratio and faster nutrition diffusion with an accompanying improvement in the proliferation of primary rabbit corneal epithelial cells (RCECs) and stromal cells (RCSCs). These corneal cell types also displayed improved viability and cellular infiltration. Furthermore, the APCS-gel provides significant advantages in the preservation of RCECs stemness and enhancement of corneal wound healing in vitro and in vivo. After 7 days of culture, 3-4 layers of RCECs were formed on the APCS-gel in vitro, while only 1-2 layers were found on the fibrin gel. More corneal stem/progenitor cell phenotypes (K12-, p63+, ABCG2+) and proliferation phenotypes (Ki67+) were detected on the APCS-gel than fibrin gel. Using a corneal epithelial wound healing model, we also found faster reepithelization in corneas that received APCS-gel compared to fibrin gel. Additionally, our APCS-gel demonstrated better physical and biological properties when compared to Tisseel, a clinically used type of fibrin gel. In conclusion, our APCS-gel provided better corneal epithelial and stromal cell biocompatibility to fibrin gels and due to its transparency and faster gelation time could potentially be superior for clinical purposes. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Extracellular matrix (ECM) can be used to provide tissue specific physical microstructure and biochemical cues for tissue regeneration. Here, we produced an ECM hydrogel derived from acellular porcine cornea stroma (APCS-gel) that retained critical biological characteristics of the native tissue and provided significant transparency and fast gelation time. Our data demonstrated that the APCS-gel was superior to clinically used fibrin gel, as the APCS-gel showed high porosity and permeability, better corneal stromal keratocytes infiltration, increased cellular proliferation and retention of corneal epithelial cells stemness. The APCS-gel improved corneal wound healing in vitro and in vivo. This APCS-gel may have clinical utility for corneal diseases, and the more general approach used to make this hydrogel might be used in other tissues.

### PMID 34149030 (2021) — Otology &amp; neurotology : official publication of the American Otological Society, American Neurotology Society [and] European Academy of Otology and Neurotology
TITLE: The Effect of Different Round Window Sealants on Cochlear Mechanics Over Time.
DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000003217 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This project investigated the effects of round window membrane (RWM) sealants after surgical incision, with a focus on audiological thresholds, ossicular mechanics, and the impact upon cochlear function and pathology.
METHODS: Twenty-eight guinea pigs were randomly allocated to one of three sealant groups (muscle, n&#x200a;=&#x200a;7; fascia, n&#x200a;=&#x200a;7, Tisseel, n&#x200a;=&#x200a;8) or an unsealed control group (n&#x200a;=&#x200a;6). Preoperative hearing was measured using auditory brainstem responses (ABRs). The ossicular chain and RWM were exposed surgically, and Laser Doppler Vibrometry (LDV) measurements were obtained from the long process of the incus. The RWM was incised then sealed (or left unsealed) according to group. ABR testing and LDV measurements were repeated 4 and 12&#x200a;weeks after surgery. At 12&#x200a;weeks all cochleae were harvested.
RESULTS: ABR thresholds deteriorated over time in all groups. Overall, group was not statistically significant (p&#x200a;=&#x200a;0.064). There was no significant effect by group on LDV measurements (p&#x200a;=&#x200a;0.798). Histopathological analyses of the RWM showed that the fascia group had more extensive fibrosis than other groups (Independent-Samples Median Test, p&#x200a;=&#x200a;0.001). However, there were minimal differences in the outer hair cell counts between the different intervention groups.
CONCLUSIONS: All the interventions appeared to be safe while none affected the cochlear mechanics or hearing thresholds in a statistically significant manner.

### PMID 33596627 (2021) — Korean journal of ophthalmology : KJO
TITLE: Reattachment of Rhegmatogenous Retinal Detachment via Fibrin Tissue Adhesive.
DOI: 10.3341/kjo.2020.0020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To manage reattachment of rhegmatogenous retinal detachment using tissue adhesive (fibrin glue) in five patients.
METHODS: Five eyes of five patients with rhegmatogenous retinal detachment were treated with 23-gauge pars plana vitrectomy and the application of fibrin glue (Tisseel Lyo) into the break under air without laser photocoagulation or cryopexy.
RESULTS: The median age of patients was 64 (range, 46-82) years, and the median duration of symptoms was 15 (range, 7-60) days. Three eyes had inferior and two had superior rhegmatogenous retinal detachments. Successful retinal reattachment was achieved in all cases and maintained during the follow&#x131;ng 10 to 24 months. The median best-corrected visual acuity improved from 2 / 100 preoperatively to a Snellen visual acuity of 20 / 50 by 6 months postoperatively. No postoperative complications were detected during the follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: Excellent adhesive effects of fibrin glue with respect to sealing retinal tears with no side effects were seen in our study. With further prospective studies, this technique could be an alternative method to conventional retinopexy.

### PMID 33566201 (2021) — Maxillofacial plastic and reconstructive surgery
TITLE: Comparative study of bone regeneration using fibrin sealant with xenograft in rabbit sinus: pilot study.
DOI: 10.1186/s40902-021-00290-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Stability of the grafted bone volume is one of the important factors to the success of alveolar bone grafts. For this, platelet-rich plasma (PRP) or fibrin sealant is mixed with the bone graft material. Bio-Oss&#xae; is a protein-free bovine mineral commonly used in bone graft procedures. The grafting particles are commonly combined with a standard fibrin sealant (Tisseel&#xae;) to fabricate a plastic implantable product. The purpose of this experiment was to evaluate the efficacy of fibrin sealant (Tisseel&#xae;) in bone regeneration performance in a rabbit maxillary sinus model.
METHODS: A total of five 3.5&#x2009;kg weight New Zealand white rabbits were used for the study. After elevating the sinus membrane in both maxillary sinus cavities, Bio-Oss&#xae; mixed with normal saline (group 1) was filled into the right side, and Tisseel&#xae; mixed Bio-Oss&#xae; (group 2) was inserted into the other side. The bone mineral density and bone volume were analyzed with microscopic computed tomography (micro-CT) and histomorphometric 12&#x2009;weeks after application.
RESULTS: Histologically, new bone formation rate was 14.8%, and grafted bone rate was 70.5% in group 1. In group 2, they were 18.5% and 60.4%, respectively. According to micro-CT analysis, bone mineral density (mg/cm3, BMD) was 2.5% larger in group 1.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings from this study suggest that, although the difference in the bone formation between group 1 and group 2 appears to be insignificant, group 2 had an advantage in using smaller amount of bone substances to achieve the reliable bone formation.

### PMID 33552820 (2021) — Plastic and reconstructive surgery. Global open
TITLE: Recalcitrant Anaphylaxis Associated with Fibrin Sealant: Treatment with "TISSEEL-ectomy".
DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000003382 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Here, we present the case of an adolescent male who developed a severe allergic reaction 10 minutes after application of TISSEEL fibrin sealant to control bleeding during a gynecomastia revision surgery. Conventional treatments of acute hypersensitivity were ineffective. After a "tisseel-ectomy," the patient's condition improved and symptoms resolved. Besides oral tranexamic acid, and topical and local anaesthesia, no other medications besides TISSEEL were administered preceding the allergic reaction. After TISSEEL was identified as the allergen upon its removal, his clinical status improved. The patient had been exposed to TISEEL 15 months before the anaphylactic episode. This case can aid in decision-making for surgical re-exposure to fibrin sealants in the setting of acute anaphylaxis.

### PMID 33478468 (2021) — BMC surgery
TITLE: Use of human fibrin glue (Tisseel) versus suture during transvaginal natural orifice ovarian cystectomy of benign and non-endometriotic ovarian tumor: a retrospective comparative study.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-021-01061-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To evaluate the use of a human fibrin glue (Tisseel) for minor bleeding control and approximation of ovarian defect during transvaginal natural orifice ovarian cystectomy (TNOOC) of benign and non-endometriotic ovarian tumors.
METHODS: A total of 125 women with benign and non-endometriotic ovarian tumors who underwent TNOOC between May 2011 and January 2020: 54 with the aid of Tisseel and 71 with traditional suture for hemostasis and approximation of ovarian defect. Surgical outcomes such as length of surgery, operative blood loss, postoperative pain score, and postoperative hospital stay were recorded. Before and immediately (10&#xa0;days) and at 6&#xa0;months after the procedure, serum anti-M&#xfc;llerian hormone (AMH) levels were also determined.
RESULTS: Complete hemostasis and approximation of ovarian defect were achieved in all cases. No significant difference was noted in the operating time, operative blood loss, postoperative pain scores after 12, 24 and 48&#xa0;h, length of postoperative stay, and baseline AMH levels between the two groups. The operation did not have a negative effect on the immediate and 6-month postoperative AMH levels in the suture group. However, the decline in the AMH levels was significant immediately after surgery in the Tisseel group, nevertheless, no significant difference was noted in the AMH levels at 6&#xa0;months (3.3 vs. 1.7&#xa0;mg/mL; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.042, adjusted p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.210).
CONCLUSION: The use of Tisseel in TNOOC of benign and non-endometriotic ovarian tumors without suturing the ovarian tissue is clinically safe and feasible.

### PMID 33444844 (2021) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: CSF Rhinorrhoea After Endonasal Intervention to the Skull Base (CRANIAL) - Part 1: Multicenter Pilot Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.12.171 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: CRANIAL (CSF Rhinorrhoea After Endonasal Intervention to the Skull Base) is a prospective multicenter observational study seeking to determine 1) the scope of skull base repair methods used and 2) corresponding rates of postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea in the endonasal transsphenoidal approach (TSA) and the expanded endonasal approach (EEA) for skull base tumors. We sought to pilot the project, assessing the feasibility and acceptability by gathering preliminary data.
METHODS: A prospective observational cohort study was piloted at 12 tertiary neurosurgical units in the United Kingdom. Feedback regarding project positives and challenges were qualitatively analyzed.
RESULTS: A total of 187 cases were included: 159 TSA (85%) and 28 EEA (15%). The most common diseases included pituitary adenomas (n&#xa0;= 142/187), craniopharyngiomas (n&#xa0;= 13/187). and skull base meningiomas (n&#xa0;= 4/187). The most common skull base repair techniques used were tissue glues (n&#xa0;= 132/187, most commonly Tisseel), grafts (n&#xa0;= 94/187, most commonly fat autograft or Spongostan) and vascularized flaps (n&#xa0;= 51/187, most commonly nasoseptal). These repairs were most frequently supported by nasal packs (n&#xa0;= 125/187) and lumbar drains (n&#xa0;= 20/187). Biochemically confirmed CSF rhinorrhea occurred in 6/159 patients undergoing TSA (3.8%) and 2/28 patients undergoing EEA (7.1%). Four patients undergoing TSA (2.5%) and 2 patients undergoing EEA (7.1%) required operative management for CSF rhinorrhea (CSF diversion or direct repair). Qualitative feedback was largely positive (themes included user-friendly and efficient data collection and strong support from senior team members), demonstrating acceptability.
CONCLUSIONS: Our pilot experience highlights the acceptability and feasibility of CRANIAL. There is a precedent for multicenter dissemination of this project, to establish a benchmark of contemporary practice in skull base neurosurgery, particularly with respect to patients undergoing EEA.

### PMID 33425351 (2021) — Annals of medicine and surgery (2012)
TITLE: Comparison of fibrin sealants in peripheral vascular surgery: A systematic review and network meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2020.12.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Evidence comparing fibrin sealants (FSs) in surgery are limited. This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of FSs, and manual compression in peripheral vascular surgery.
METHODS: A systematic review of randomized trials was conducted in Medline, Embase, and Cochrane databases within the last 15 years. Data were available to conduct a network meta-analysis (NMA) in peripheral vascular surgery. Fibrin sealant treatment arms were further broken-down and assessed by clotting time (i.e., 2-min [2C] or 1-min [1C]). The primary efficacy outcome was the proportion of patients achieving hemostasis by 4&#xa0;min (T4). Treatment-related serious and non-serious adverse events (AEs) were qualitatively assessed.
RESULTS: Five studies (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;693), were included in the NMA. Results predicted VISTASEAL 2C, followed by EVICEL 1C, had the highest probability of achieving T4. Compared with manual compression, significant improvements in T4 were found with VISTASEAL 2C (relative risk [RR]&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.67, 95% CrI: 2.13-3.34), EVICEL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.58, 95% CrI: 2.04-3.23), VISTASEAL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.00, 95% CrI: 1.45-2.65), and TISSEEL 2C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.99, 95% CrI: 1.48-2.60). TISSEEL 1C was not significantly different than manual compression (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.40, 95% CrI: 0.70-2.33). Among FSs, VISTASEAL 2C was associated with a significant improvements in T4 compared with VISTASEAL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.33, 95% CrI: 1.02-1.82), TISSEEL 2C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.34, 95% CrI: 1.05-1.77), and TISSEEL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.90, 95% CrI: 1.18-3.74). Treatment-related serious and non-serious AE rates were typically lower than 2%.
CONCLUSIONS: In peripheral vascular surgeries, VISTASEAL 2C and EVICEL 1C were shown to have the highest probabilities for achieving rapid hemostasis among the treatments compared. Future studies should expand networks across surgery types as data become available.

### PMID 33261957 (2021) — The Journal of hand surgery
TITLE: Comparison of Nylon Suture Versus 2 Fibrin Glue Products for Delayed Nerve Coaptation in an Animal Model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2020.09.021 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare 2 different, commercially available fibrin glue products with nylon suture with regard to repair strength, muscle function, and axon regeneration after delayed nerve repair in an animal model.
METHODS: A total of 120 Lewis rats underwent transection of the sciatic nerve. On day 3 after transection, the nerves were reexposed. A primary repair was performed on 40 rats from each group using nylon suture, Tisseel fibrin glue, or Evicel fibrin glue. On days 0, 3, and 7 after repair, 10 rats from each group underwent burst strength testing. Seventy days after repair, 10 rats from each group underwent functional muscle testing and histomorphic analysis of the nerve, with the contralateral limb serving as the control.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference in burst strength among the groups on days 0 and 3. On day 7, the burst strength of the Evicel and nylon suture groups was significantly greater than that of the Tisseel group. There were 5 total coaptation failures in both fibrin glue groups and none in the suture group. Seventy days after repair, tetanic muscle strength, muscle mass, axon inner diameter, and g-ratio were equivalent among all groups. Axon counts were equivalent between the nylon suture and Evicel groups, although in the nylon group axon counts were higher than for the Tisseel group.
CONCLUSIONS: In an animal model with a 3-day delay in nerve repair, although dehiscences occurred, when the initial repair held, fibrin glue was not inferior to nylon suture with regard to repair strength and muscle recovery.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Historical concerns regarding spontaneous fibrin glue-based nerve repair dehiscences are well-founded. However, when coaptation is maintained, commercially available fibrin glues support nerve regeneration.

### PMID 34796004 (2021) — Sovremennye tekhnologii v meditsine
TITLE: Reconstruction of the Rat Sciatic Nerve by Using Biodegradable and Non-Biodegradable Conduits.
DOI: 10.17691/stm2020.12.5.05 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: The aim of the study was to compare two types of conduits made of either non-resorbable Reperen or resorbable Tissucol for their effects on the regeneration of the rat sciatic nerve under conditions of stump diastasis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The experiments were carried out using outbred white male rats of the reproductive age (n=14). The animals were divided into three groups: group 1, intact (n=5), used for studying the morphology of the sciatic nerve; group 2 (n=4) - nerve plastic surgery was performed using a conduit made of non-resorbable Reperen; group 3 (n=5) - surgery was performed using a conduit made of resorbable Tissucol. The animals were anesthetized with isoflurane. After a complete transection of the sciatic nerve in the middle third of the thigh, its stumps were inserted into a conduit of an internal diameter of 2 mm and a length of 10 mm, filled with saline. Diastasis of 5 mm in length was created by spreading the nerve ends and securing the epineurium to the tube edges with 8/0 polypropylene sutures. A total count of myelinated nerve fibers was performed in the area of repair (tubulation) and the distal part of the nerve; the formation of connective tissue sheaths was assessed 14 weeks after the operation.
RESULTS: According to the morphological assessment, both types of conduits (resorbable and non-resorbable) caused the similar number of fibers to restore in the distal part of the repaired nerve; clinical characteristics of the animals in both groups were close to each other and to the norm.
CONCLUSION: The results allow us to consider the conduit made of non-resorbable Reperen as a device promising for neuroplasty along with the resorbable conduit made of Tissucol.

### PMID 34669888 (2021) — Arquivos brasileiros de cirurgia digestiva : ABCD = Brazilian archives of digestive surgery
TITLE: ROBOTIC TRANS-ABDOMINAL PREPERITONEAL APPROACH (TAPP) APPROACH FOR LATERAL INCISIONAL HERNIAS.
DOI: 10.1590/0102-672020210002e1599 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Lateral incisional hernias arise between the linea alba and the posterior paraspinal muscles. Anatomical boundaries contain various topographic variations, such as multiple nearby bony structures and paucity of aponeurotic tissue that make it particularly challenging to repair.
AIM: To describe a robotic assisted surgical technique for incisional lumbar hernia repair.
METHODS: Retrospective data was collected from four patients who underwent robotic-assisted repair of their lumbar hernias after open nephrectomies.
RESULTS: Age ranged from 41-53 y. Two patients had right sided flank hernias while the other two on the left. One patient had a recurrent hernia on the left side. The patients were placed in lateral decubitus position contralateral to the hernia defect side. A trans-abdominal preperitoneal approach was used in all cases. Each case was accomplished with two 8 mm robotic ports, a 12 mm periumbilical port, and a 5 mm assistance port that allowed docking on the ipsilateral hernia side. The hernias were identified, a preperitoneal plane was created, and the hernia sac completely dissected allowing for complete visualization of the defect. All defects were primarily closed. Polypropylene or ProGripTM mesh was applied with at least 5 cm overlap and secured using either #0 Vicryl&#xae; transfacial sutures, Evicel&#xae; or a combination of both. The peritoneal space was closed with running suture and the ports were removed and closed. The average surgical length was 4 hr. The post-operative length of stay ranged from 0-2 days.
CONCLUSION: The robotics platform may provide unique advantages in the repair of lateral incisional hernias and represents a safe, feasible and effective minimally invasive approach for the correction of lateral incisional hernias.
RACIONAL:: As h&#xe9;rnias incisionais laterais surgem entre a linha alba e os m&#xfa;sculos paravertebrais posteriores. Os limites anat&#xf4;micos cont&#xea;m v&#xe1;rias varia&#xe7;&#xf5;es topogr&#xe1;ficas, como v&#xe1;rias estruturas &#xf3;sseas pr&#xf3;ximas e escassez de tecido aponeur&#xf3;tico que tornam o reparo particularmente dif&#xed;cil .
OBJETIVO:: Descrever uma t&#xe9;cnica assistida por rob&#xf3;tica para o reparo de h&#xe9;rnia lombar incisional.
M&#xc9;TODOS:: Dados foram coletados retrospectivamente de quatro pacientes que foram submetidos ao reparo de h&#xe9;rnia lombar ap&#xf3;s nefrectomias abertas por t&#xe9;cnica rob&#xf3;tica. Os pacientes tinham entre 41-53 anos de idade. Dois possu&#xed;am h&#xe9;rnia no flanco direito e os outros dois no flanco esquerdo.
RESULTADOS:: Os pacientes foram colocados em posi&#xe7;&#xe3;o de dec&#xfa;bito lateral contralateral ao lado do defeito. Abordagem pr&#xe9;-peritoneal transabdominal foi realizada em todos os casos. Cada procedimento foi realizado com dois troc&#xe1;rteres rob&#xf3;ticos de 8 mm, um periumbilical de 12 mm e um auxiliar de 5 mm, permitindo docking ipsilateral ao lado da h&#xe9;rnia. As h&#xe9;rnias foram identificadas, plano pr&#xe9;-peritoneal foi criado e o saco herni&#xe1;rio completamente dissecado, permitindo completa visualiza&#xe7;&#xe3;o do defeito. Todos os defeitos foram fechados primariamente com fio de sutura 0/1V-Loc. Tela de polipropileno ou ProGripTM foi usada com pelo menos 5 cm de overlap e fixada com sutura transfacial com Vicryl&#xae; 0, Evicel&#xae; ou combina&#xe7;&#xe3;o dos dois. O espa&#xe7;o pr&#xe9;-peritoneal foi fechado com sutura cont&#xed;nua e os troc&#xe1;rteres removidos. O tempo operat&#xf3;rio m&#xe9;dio foi de 4 h. O tempo de perman&#xea;ncia hospitalar variou entre 0-2 dias.
CONCLUS&#xc3;O:: A plataforma rob&#xf3;tica &#xe9; capaz de providenciar vantagens &#xfa;nicas no reparo de h&#xe9;rnias incisionais laterais e representa abordagem minimamente invasiva segura, fact&#xed;vel e eficaz para o reparo das h&#xe9;rnias laterais incisionais.

### PMID 34667700 (2021) — Plastic and reconstructive surgery. Global open
TITLE: The Use of Hemostatic Agents to Decrease Bleeding Complications in General Plastic Surgery Procedures.
DOI: 10.1097/GOX.0000000000003744 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: Within plastic surgery, hematomas and seromas are frequently reported complications that can negatively impact wound healing and result in significant morbidity in patients. As a result, there has been considerable interest in hemostatic agents to complement traditional methods of hemostasis. The purpose of this study was to evaluate postoperative bleeding complications and duration of Jackson-Pratt (JP) drain use in general plastic surgery procedures with and without hemostatic agents.
METHODS: After obtaining institutional review board approval, a retrospective chart review was performed. Patients who underwent bilateral breast reduction, panniculectomy, or abdominoplasty were included. Data collected included indication for surgery, type of operation, use of hemostatic agent, specifically fibrin sealant (FS, EVICEL, Ethicon, USA) or combination powder (CP, HEMOBLAST Bellows, Biom'up, France), length of follow-up, time to JP drain removal, postoperative complications, and specimen weight. This was a consecutive experience where initially no hemostatic agent was used, followed by use of FS, and then CP.
RESULTS: The use of a hemostatic agent resulted in reduced time duration for JP drain use and overall fewer recorded complications in the hemostatic agent groups. Although not significant, the hemostatic agent group (FS and CP) experienced fewer hematomas and seromas compared with the nonhemostatic agent group. JP drain duration was significantly less among breast reduction (3.46 versus 6.92 days, P &lt; 0.01) for CP when compared with FS.
CONCLUSION: The use of hemostatic agents in general plastic surgery procedures may result in decreased postoperative complications and significantly reduce time to JP drain removal.

### PMID 33900986 (2021) — International journal of spine surgery
TITLE: Dural Tears During Lumbar Spinal Endoscopy: Surgeon Skill, Training, Incidence, Risk Factors, and Management.
DOI: 10.14444/8038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Incidental dural tears during lumbar endoscopy can be challenging to manage. There is limited literature on their appropriate management, risk factors, and the clinical consequences of this typically uncommon complication.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To improve the statistical power of studying durotomy with lumbar endoscopy, we performed a retrospective survey study among endoscopic spine surgeons by email and chat groups on social media networks, including WhatsApp and WeChat. Descriptive and correlative statistics were done on the surgeons' recorded responses to multiple-choice questions. Surgeons were asked about their clinical experience with spinal endoscopy, training background, the types of lumbar endoscopic decompression they perform by approach, the decompression instruments they use, and incidental durotomy incidence with routine lumbar endoscopy.
RESULTS: There were 689 dural tears in 64&#x2009;470 lumbar endoscopies, resulting in an incidental durotomy incidence of 1.07%. Seventy percent of the durotomies were reported by 20.4% of the surgeons. Eliminating these 19 outlier surgeons yielded an adjusted durotomy rate of 0.32. Endoscopic stenosis decompression (54.8%; P &lt; .0001), rather than endoscopic discectomy (44.1%; 41/93), was significantly more associated with durotomy. Medium-sized dural tears (1-10 mm) were the most common (52.2%; 48/93). Small pinhole durotomies (less than 1 mm) were the second most common type (46.7%; 43/93). Rootlet herniations were seen by 46.2% (43/93) of responding surgeons. The posterior dural sac injury during the interlaminar approach (57%; 53/93) occurred more frequently than traversing nerve-root injuries (31.2%) or anterior dural sac (23.7%; 22/93). Exiting nerve-root injuries (10.8%;10/93) were less common. Over half of surgeons did not attempt any repair or closure (52.2%; 47/90). Forty percent (36/90) used sealants. Only 7.8% (7/90) of surgeons attempted an endoscopic repair or sutures (11.1%; 10/90). DuralSeal was the most commonly used brand of commercially available sealant used (42.7%; 35/82). However, other sealants such as Tisseal (15.9%; 13/82), Evicel (2.4%2/82), and additional no-brand sealants (38; 32/82) were also used. Nearly half of the patients (48.3%; 43/89) were treated with 24-48 hours of bed rest. The majority of participating surgeons (64%; 57/89) reported that the long-term outcome was unaffected. Only 18% of surgeons reported having seen the development of a postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-fistula (18%;16/89). However, the absolute incidence of CSF fistula was only 0.025% (16/64&#x2009;470). Severe radiculopathy with dysesthesia; sensory loss; and motor weakness in association with an incidental durotomy were reported by 12.4% (11/89), 3.4% (3/89), and 2.2% (2/89) of surgeons, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of dural tears with lumbar endoscopy is about 1%. The incidence of durotomy is higher with the use of power drills and the interlaminar approach. Stenosis decompression that typically requires the more aggressive use of these power instruments has a slightly higher incidence of dural tears than does endoscopic decompression for a herniated disc. Most dural tears are small and can be successfully managed with mechanical compression with Gelfoam and sealants. Two-thirds of patients with incidental dural tears had an entirely uneventful postoperative course. The remaining one-third of patients may develop a persistent CSF leak, radiculopathy with dysesthesia, sensory loss, or motor function loss. Patients should be educated preoperatively and reassured.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 3.

### PMID 33047934 (2021) — International braz j urol : official journal of the Brazilian Society of Urology
TITLE: Complex Re-do robotic pyeloplasty using cryopreserved placental tissue: an adjunct for success.
DOI: 10.1590/S1677-5538.IBJU.2020.0130 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D059040">Video-Audio Media, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES:: Management of recurrent ureteropelvic junction obstruction (UPJO) following pyeloplasty presents a challenging clinical problem. Failure of initial pyeloplasty is, in part, secondary to ureteral devascularization and subsequent fibrosis. In this video, we present a case of an anastomotic augmentation with cryopreserved placental tissue (CPT) to improve tissue healing and angiogenesis, and aid with the success of re-do robotic pyeloplasty.
MATERIALS AND METHODS:: We present a 46-year-old female with history of recurrent left-sided UPJO treated by initial endopyelotomy and then open pyeloplasty. She underwent re-do robotic pyeloplasty (DaVinci Si&#x2122;, Intuitive Surgical) with CPT. The patient was placed in the flank position; a 12mm camera port, three 8mm robotic ports, and a 12mm assistant port were used. The renal pelvis and upper ureter were mobilized to reveal a dense scar at the UPJ. A dismembered pyeloplasty was performed with barbed suture. After completion of the anastomosis, a section of CPT (Stravix&#x2122;, Osiris Therapeutics) was wrapped around the anastomosis. CPT is composed of umbilical amnion and Wharton's jelly, which contains a mixture of extracellular matrix, and growth factors. The CPT is prepared and thawed on the bedside table, and placed into the peritoneum through the 12mm port in the correct orientation. The wrap is secured to the anastomosis with a fibrin sealant (EVICEL&#x2122;, Johnson &amp; Johnson).
RESULTS:: The patient experienced resolution of flank pain. MAG3 renogram demonstrated resolution of obstruction at 6 months, with improvement of T&#xbd; time from 34 minutes to 7 minutes, with sustained improvement with repeat scan 18 months after surgery. Ureteroscopy demonstrated a patent UPJ. Strategies for successful robotic pyeloplasty after initial failed management include: (1) use of appropriate CPT agent to support the anastomosis - selection of thicker, more durable CPT to allow passage through laparoscopic port, (2) preparation on bedside table with enough time to allow thawing, (3) marking Wharton's jelly side of tissue for orientation, and (4) use of sealing agent to secure CPT to the anastomosis and prevent dislodgement.
CONCLUSIONS:: We demonstrate a novel approach to manage recurrent UPJ obstruction with robotic surgery using CPT. Placenta-derived products may have an increasing role in the performance of complex robotic urologic reconstructive surgery.

### PMID 34568229 (2021) — Plastic surgery (Oakville, Ont.)
TITLE: Fibrin Sealant Artiss Compared to Progressive Tension Sutures With Stratafix in the Management of Wound Drainage Following Post-Bariatric Body-Contouring Surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/2292550320936667 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Post-bariatric body-contouring surgery is one of the most rapidly growing areas in plastic surgery. One of the most common complications following post-bariatric body-contouring surgery is seroma. There are a number of approaches to reducing wound drainage and seroma formation. A promising strategy to reduce these complications is to develop effective methods for reducing dead space between the tissue layers.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective trial assessing the use of human fibrin sealant Artiss in comparison to progressive tension sutures (PTS) with Stratafix, a bidirectional barbed suture device in patients undergoing post-bariatric body-contouring surgery. Thirty-six patients for abdominoplasty or lower-body-lift were evaluated. Treatment patients underwent procedure with fibrin sealant applied to adapt the tissue layers. Control patients underwent an identical procedure but with PTS. Primary outcome measures included total wound drainage and time to drain removal.
RESULTS: The use of Artiss in abdominoplasty was associated with a mean drain volume that was significantly higher and more days that were needed to remove all drains compared to the PTS group. In body-lift, the mean drain volume and number of days needed to remove all drains tended to be higher when using Artiss compared to the PTS group.
CONCLUSION: The use of Artiss in post-bariatric body-contouring surgery did not decrease the rate of seromas and the length of time required for post-surgical drains when compared to PTS.
HISTORIQUE: L&#x2019;op&#xe9;ration de remodelage corporel apr&#xe8;s une op&#xe9;ration bariatrique fait partie des interventions &#xe0; la croissance la plus rapide en chirurgie plastique. Le s&#xe9;rome en est l&#x2019;une des principales complications. Il existe plusieurs m&#xe9;thodes pour r&#xe9;duire le drainage des plaies et la formation de s&#xe9;rome. Des m&#xe9;thodes efficaces pour r&#xe9;duire l&#x2019;espace mort entre les couches de tissus sont une strat&#xe9;gie prometteuse.
M&#xc9;THODOLOGIE: Les chercheurs ont r&#xe9;alis&#xe9; une &#xe9;tude r&#xe9;trospective pour comparer la colle Artiss &#xe0; base de fibrine humaine aux sutures de tension progressive (STP) &#xe0; l&#x2019;aide du Stratafix, un fil de suture crant&#xe9; bidirectionnel, pour les patients qui subissent un remodelage corporel apr&#xe8;s une op&#xe9;ration bariatrique. Ils ont &#xe9;valu&#xe9; 36 patients qui devaient subir une abdominoplastie ou un remodelage du bas du corps. Les patients trait&#xe9;s se sont fait appliquer de la colle &#xe0; base de fibrine humaine pour adapter les couches de tissus. Le groupe t&#xe9;moin a subi la m&#xea;me intervention, mais au moyen de STP. Les mesures de r&#xe9;sultats primaires incluaient le drainage total des plaies et la p&#xe9;riode jusqu&#x2019;au retrait du drain.
R&#xc9;SULTATS: En cas d&#x2019;abdominoplastie, l&#x2019;utilisation d&#x2019;Artiss entra&#xee;nait un volume de drainage moyen consid&#xe9;rablement plus &#xe9;lev&#xe9; et un plus grand nombre de jours avant de retirer tous les drains que la STP. En cas de remodelage corporel, le volume de drainage moyen et le nombre de jours n&#xe9;cessaire avant de retirer tous les drains tendaient &#xe0; &#xea;tre plus &#xe9;lev&#xe9;s apr&#xe8;s l&#x2019;utilisation d&#x2019;Artiss que de STP.
CONCLUSION: Par rapport aux STP, l&#x2019;Artiss n&#x2019;a pas r&#xe9;duit le taux de s&#xe9;rome ni la p&#xe9;riode d&#x2019;utilisation des drains apr&#xe8;s des op&#xe9;rations de remodelage corporel suivant une chirurgie bariatrique.

### PMID 34410958 (2021) — In vivo (Athens, Greece)
TITLE: The Contribution of a Collagen Patch Coated With Fibrin Glue in Sealing Upper Gastrointestinal Defects: An Experimental Study.
DOI: 10.21873/invivo.12553 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND/AIM: We aimed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of sealing primary upper gastrointestinal (GI) perforations with a collagen patch coated with fibrin glue (Tachosil&#xae;).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty New Zealand rabbits were used in this study. An iatrogenic gastric perforation was created, and primary repair was performed on the control group. Tachosil&#xae;, without suturing the deficit, was used in the intervention group.
RESULTS: Leakage was observed in 3 (20%) and 2 rabbits (13.3%) in the control and intervention group, respectively; however, the difference was not statistically significant (p=0.62). Moreover, adhesions formed in 10/15 and all rabbits in the intervention and control group, respectively (p=0.014); however, based on the Zuhlke adhesion's classification, there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: A collagen patch coated with fibrin glue is not a replacement but can be considered a safe option for the reinforcement of suturing, preventing leakages in the upper GI tract.

### PMID 33372208 (2021) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Basilar Artery Injury During Endonasal Surgery: Stepwise to Control Bleeding.
DOI: 10.1093/ons/opaa367 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intraoperative injury during endoscopic endonasal surgery of the carotid artery has been previously described in the literature. However, the accidental damage of the basilar artery in such scenario is not defined.
OBJECTIVE: To define the protocol of action for massive bleeding from an artery in the posterior fossa.
METHODS: The reported patient was diagnosed with a partially calcified clival chordoma featured by a huge intradural component. An endoscopic endonasal transpterygoid transclival approach was selected for the treatment of this tumor. During the surgical procedure, the basilar artery injury was injured, causing intense bleeding. We present and discuss the surgical maneuvers that could save a patient's life after this dramatic complication.
RESULTS: Different techniques were performed in order to control the massive bleeding, including injection of hemotastic matrix with thrombin (Floseal&#xa9;), bipolar coagulation, and vessel reconstruction by means of a vascular clip. Finally, an autologous muscle graft reinforced with an overlying fibrin sealant patch (Tachosil&#xa9;) was chosen and was an effective technique. Afterwards, the patient was treated with a flow diverter device to occlude an iatrogenic pseudoaneurysm. A monoplegia of the right upper limb was the only remarkable sequel 6 mo after surgery.
CONCLUSION: The muscle graft together with the coordinated action with interventional neuroradiology for the reconstruction of the vessel are possibly the best options to try to preserve the neurological function. In such a scenario, the assumption of potential ischemic events prevails over the intraoperative death of the patient.

### PMID 32747306 (2021) — Journal of visceral surgery
TITLE: Results of a randomised controlled trial between an ORC collagen hemostatic agent and a carrier-bound fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jviscsurg.2020.06.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Despite ongoing optimisation of surgical techniques, hemostasis continues to be a fundamental challenge in many operations today. This randomised controlled trial compared the efficacy of a new hemostatic agent made of oxidised regenerated cellulose and collagen (ORC-Coll) with that of a conventional carrier-bound fibrin sealant (CBFS).
METHODS: Hemostasis was investigated representatively in the case of post-thyroidectomy bleeding from the resection surface. To demonstrate that ORC-Coll (mediCipio&#xae;&#xa0;A) has at least the same hemostatic efficacy as CBFS (Tachosil&#xae;), the volume of drainage fluid at the time of drain removal was used as the primary endpoint in a non-inferiority test with a significance level of 5%. The secondary endpoints included number and size of hemostatic agents required, adhesion of the hemostatic agent to the bleeding surface, intraoperative hemostatic effect, duration of drainage and adverse events during a six-month follow-up period.
RESULTS: A total of 150 patients (ORC-Coll: 75; CBFS: 75) were included. After operation, total volume of drainage fluid was 68.20&#xb1;44.56mL in the ORC group and 68.21&#xb1;40.20mL in the CBFS group. The non-inferiority of ORC-Coll compared to CBFS with regard to hemostatic efficacy was shown at a significance level of 5%. The results demonstrated effectiveness in achieving hemostasis without adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: ORC-Coll is an effective hemostatic agent and barrier sealant without blood components, which ensures reliable prevention of intra- and postoperative bleeding. With use of the new technique, any risks associated with the use of human blood components are a priori eliminated.

### PMID 33978197 (2021) — Turkish neurosurgery
TITLE: Comparison of TachoComb and TissuDura in Terms of Adverse Effects and Complications in Duraplasty in Rats.
DOI: 10.5137/1019-5149.JTN.30444-20.2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: To compare two synthetic graft materials, TachoComb&#xae;, a fibrin sealant composed of collagen, fibrinogen, thrombin and aprotinin and TissuDura&#xae;, a collagen-based biomatrix.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thirty Sprague?Dawley rats were randomly divided into three groups with 10 animals in each group. A dural defect was created on the left parietal bone of each animal, and the dural defect was repaired using either TachoComb&#xae; (TachoComb group) or TissuDura&#xae; (TissuDura group). Sham animals did not receive any dural graft. After 21 days of follow-up, the brain was dissected, and inflammation, oedema, gliosis and foreign body reaction in the bone and parenchymal tissue were investigated histopathologically.
RESULTS: The TachoComb group showed significantly greater inflammation, gliosis and parenchymal foreign body reaction compared with the sham group. By contrast, the TissuDura group had significantly lower gliosis and insignificantly less inflammation in the bone and parenchymal foreign body reaction compared with the TachoComb group.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our results suggest that TissuDura&#xae; may be considered more biocompatible than TachoComb&#xae; in duraplasty.

### PMID 34736288 (2021) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Obsidian ASG&#xae; Autologous Platelet-Rich Fibrin Matrix and Colorectal Anastomotic Healing: A Preliminary Study.
DOI: 10.52198/21.STI.39.CR11508 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Anastomotic leakage (AL) following colorectal resection is a devastating complication affecting morbidity, mortality, and quality of life of patients in the long term. Different tissue sealants and biologic glues were tested showing conflicting results regarding their influence on anastomotic healing and leak prevention. Application of autologous platelet-rich fibrin (Vivostat A/S, Alleroed, Denmark), which acts as a source of angiogenic growth factors and cytokines, showed promising results in an in-vivo porcine model. Herein, we present the first human study of stapled colorectal anastomoses supplemented with an autologous-derived platelet-rich fibrin matrix (Obsidian ASG&#xae;, Rivolution GmbH, Rosenheim, Germany and Vivostat A/S, Alleroed, Denmark).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective analysis of prospectively accumulated data was performed in two colorectal centers (Linz, Vienna) on patients undergoing left-sided colorectal or coloanal stapled anastomosis between October 2018 and December 2019. The Obsidian ASG&#xae; Matrix was applied to the rectal stump, and after closure with the circular stapling device, at the circumference of anastomosis in every single case. Anastomoses were supplemented with intra- and extra-anastomotic application (IAA-intra-anastomotic application developed by Rivolution GmbH, Rosenheim, Germany) of Obsidian ASG&#xae; Matrix. The primary endpoints were incidence of perioperative complications and anastomotic leak rate.
RESULTS: Two-hundred-sixty-one (138 female) patients underwent left-sided colonic (n=177) or rectal resection (n=84). In 253 (96.9%) cases, a laparoscopic or robotic-assisted approach was used. There were no complications attributable to the intraoperative application of the Obsidian ASG&#xae; Matrix. All intraoperative leak tests were negative. Overall, anastomotic leak rate accounted for 2.3% (6/261). AL following colonic and rectal resection was seen in 2.3% (4/177) and 2.4% (2/84), respectively. Complication and leak rate was similar in the two participating centers. Postoperative fever and elevated CRP levels were significantly correlated to AL. There was no significant risk factor for AL on multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Application of an autologous-derived platelet-rich fibrin matrix (Obsidian ASG&#xae;) at anastomotic site following colorectal resection is safe and associated with a low rate of anastomotic leakage.

### PMID 34286556 (2021) — Archivio italiano di urologia, andrologia : organo ufficiale [di] Societa italiana di ecografia urologica e nefrologica
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of intravesical fibrin glue instillation for management of patients with refractory hemorrhagic cystitis: 12-months results. A promising therapy for hemorrhagic cystitis.
DOI: 10.4081/aiua.2021.2.200 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Fibrin glue (FG) endo-vesical application seems to be a promising therapy for hemorrhagic cystitis (HC). We aimed to evaluate efficacy and safety of FG instillation in patients with HC.
METHODS: Patients with HC not responsive to conventional treatments (bladder irrigation, catheterization, blood transfusions, hyperhydration and endoscopic coagulation) were treated with FG endo-vesical instillation (April 2017- December 2018). FG was prepared from 120 mL of patient blood with the Vivostat&#xae; system. After standard cystoscopy, bladder was insufflated with carbon dioxide (CO2) according to bladder compliance and autologous FG was applied to bladder wall and bleeding sites.
RESULTS: Ten patients included with grade 2 or higher HC secondary to bone marrow graft for hematological diseases (30%) or to actinic cystitis caused by prostate cancer radiotherapy (RT) (70%). The median HC onset time after RT was 4.8 (IQR 3.9- 6.3) years and 35 (IQR 27.5-62.5) days after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Five patients had a complete response after one treatment, three patients had clinical response (grade &lt; 2 hematuria, amelioration of symptoms), one of them required catheterization and bladder irrigation. One patient required a second instillation of FG achieving a clinical response. No adverse events related to the procedure were recorded, however one patient died for causes not related to the procedure. Median Interstitial Cystitis Symptoms Index was 13.0 (IQR 11.0-15.0) pre-operatively and 4.0 (IQR 2.0-5.0) post-operatively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed that, even in hematological patients, autologous FG instillation maybe a safe, repeatable and effective treatment modality in patients with refractory HC.

### PMID 34043230 (2021) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Use of Vivostat&#xae; Autologous Fibrin Sealant in Thyroid Surgery.
DOI: 10.52198/21.STI.38.SO1441 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Post-thyroidectomy hemorrhage is a rare but potentially life-threatening and unpredictable complication of thyroid surgery. Therefore, intraoperative bleeding control and hemostasis are crucial. However, the most efficient, cost-effective, and standardized way to achieve this is not clear. This study aimed to evaluate the outcome of total thyroidectomy (TT) and partial thyroidectomy (PT) performed using the Vivostat&#xae; hemostatic system (Vivostat A/S, Liller&#xf8;d, Denmark).
METHODS: Patients underwent TT and PT for benign and malignant diseases (multinodular goiter, Graves' disease, differentiated thyroid carcinoma). The primary endpoint was 1st-day postoperative drain output and bleeding that required reintervention. Secondary endpoints included surgery duration and postsurgical complications (vocal fold palsy, hypocalcemia, seroma, wound infection).
RESULTS: Between October 2020 and December 2020, 56 patients were enrolled; 69.6% female; mean age 49.5 years. The mean 24-h drain output was 40 ml. No redo surgery was needed. Seroma was present in 5.3% of cases; no permanent vocal palsy or hypocalcemia was observed.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that the Vivostat&#xae; system is both safe and effective for hemostasis during thyroid surgery.

### PMID 33654684 (2021) — Iranian journal of otorhinolaryngology
TITLE: Skull Base Csf- Leak Closure with Autologous Fibrin Sealant.
DOI: 10.22038/ijorl.2020.42520.2385 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: There are many fibrin-derived sealants used as topical haemostatic agents in many surgical procedures. Fibrin sealants are usually non-autologous derivatives or animal derivatives, with the exception of Vivostat&#xae;, an autologous fibrin sealant derived from patients own blood.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We present our experience on the use of Vivostat&#xae; in skull base closures in 20 patients operated at the Otorhinolaryngology Unit of the Hospital Ospedali Riuniti Villa Sofia - Cervello of Palermo. All postoperative patients were placed in an anti-trendeleburg position for 48 hours. After removal of the nasal swabs we did not find any rhinorrhea and we checked the tightness of the skull base defect with computed tomography.
RESULTS: On a total of the 20 patients (10 post-traumatic and 10 with iatrogenic leaks), 9 out of 10 post-traumatic cases had a leak in the border area between the anterior and posterior portion of the ethmoid, while 1 patient out of 10 post-traumatic cases had a leak at the level of the sella. In all 20 patients, we repaired skull base defects by fixing grafting materials with Vivostat&#xae;. We have not had any complications. Vivostat&#xae; is a useful product in skull base repair and safe for the patients.
CONCLUSION: Vivostat&#xae; has been used as a sealant on body tissues with greater elasticity and more resistant allowing better and safer wound repair, especially in skull base surgery. In particular, its immediate polymerisation is very useful for an evaluation of the mechanical sealants in the closure of the skull base cerebrospinal fluid leak.

### PMID 31433745 (2021) — Acta chirurgica Belgica
TITLE: Does autologous fibrin sealant (vivostat&#xa9;) reduce the incidence of postoperative pancreatic fistula after distal pancreatectomy? - a matched pairs analysis.
DOI: 10.1080/00015458.2019.1658354 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative pancreatic fistula (POPF) is the most common complication following distal pancreatectomy. This retrospective study investigated the effects of autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat&#xa9;) in reducing the incidence of POPF after distal pancreatectomy.
METHODS: A matched pairs analysis was performed to compare the incidence of clinically relevant POPF of 41 patients who underwent a distal pancreatectomy with application of autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat&#xa9;) with a historical control group.
RESULTS: Clinically relevant POPF were present in 11 patients in the study group (27%) and in 13 patients in the control group (32%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.639). No patient of the study group required emergency angiographic treatment for postoperative hemorrhage due to POPF, whereas three patients were identified in the control group (7%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.079).
CONCLUSIONS: POPF cannot be prevented under treatment with autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat&#xa9;). We observed the tendency of a lower rate of postoperative pancreatic hemorrhage due to POPF. However, prospective randomized controlled studies are required.

### PMID 33682323 (2021) — ANZ journal of surgery
TITLE: Review of topical gelatin-based haemostatic agents; an insidious culprit of intraoperative anaphylaxis?
DOI: 10.1111/ans.16716 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An under-recognized complication of gelatin-based haemostatic agents is their potential to cause anaphylactic reactions. This review aims to collate and analyse case in the literature of intraoperative anaphylaxis secondary to locally applied haemostatic agents.
METHODS: An electronic search was performed on databases Medline, Embase, Pubmed and ProQuest. A total of 7671 articles were reviewed from title and abstract. After exclusion criteria and duplicates removed, 19 articles with 21 cases were included for analysis. Data extracted from each of the articles included patient demographics, haemostatic agent used, surgery type, known allergies and any objective evidence of hypersensitivity post anaphylactic episode, that is tryptase levels, IgE levels, skin prick testing.
RESULTS: Fifty-seven percent of cases involved patients &lt;18&#x2009;years of age; 57% of cases involved spinal surgery; 100% of cases displayed objective evidence of hypersensitivity (tryptase levels, bovine or porcine IgE levels, or skin prick testing). Thirty-three percent of patients had exposure preoperatively to a known agent causing anaphylaxis or allergy which would preclude the use of a gelatin-based haemostat. These products included vaccines, spam meats, red meat, Jell-O and CollaPlug. Gelatin-based haemostat agents included Floseal, Gelfoam, Surgiflo, fibrin glue, Avitene, haemofibrine sponge, topical bovine thrombin and thrombin-soaked gelatin.
CONCLUSION: Increased awareness of allergy to gelatin-based haemostats for surgical and anaesthetic is imperative, with 33% of cases having a known contraindication to gelatin-based haemostat. This review highlights important aspects in the pre-operative patient history and post-event patient investigation that could assist anaesthetists and surgeons in the prevention of future events.

### PMID 33453137 (2021) — Clinical otolaryngology : official journal of ENT-UK ; official journal of Netherlands Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology &amp; Cervico-Facial Surgery
TITLE: Dissolvable intranasal haemostatic agents for acute epistaxis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1111/coa.13717 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Nasal packing is the mainstay of epistaxis management; however, packs cause patient discomfort and can lead to hospital admission. Absorbable haemostats provide clotting factors or act as a substrate to stimulate clotting and represent a potential treatment alternative. A systematic review was performed to evaluate the efficacy of topical haemostats in the management of epistaxis.
METHODS: A systematic literature search of 7 databases was performed. Only eligible randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies were included. The primary outcome was short-term haemostatic success (&lt;7&#xa0;days). Secondary outcomes included long-term haemostatic control (no rebleeding 7-30&#xa0;days), patient discomfort and adverse effects. Meta-analysis was performed where possible.
RESULTS: Of 2249 records identified, 12 were included in the qualitative synthesis and 4 RCTs were included in meta-analysis. The following haemostats were reported: gelatin-thrombin matrix (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;8), aerosolised/gel tranexamic acid (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;1), cellulose agents (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;2) and fibrin sealants (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;1). Studies involving tranexamic acid on removable delivery devices (eg, pledgets) were excluded. There was heterogeneity in outcome measures and inclusion criteria (coagulopathies/anticoagulants were excluded in 3 RCTs and 2 observational studies). The short-term haemostatic success varied between studies (13.9% to 100%). No significant post-procedural complications were reported. The meta-analysis favoured absorbable haemostatic agent versus packing (risk ratio 1.20; 95% confidence interval 1.05 to 1.37; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.007). The risk of bias across all studies was moderate to high.
CONCLUSIONS: The evidence suggests haemostatic agents are effective at managing acute epistaxis when compared with nasal packing. More data are required before recommendations can be made regarding management in patients on anticoagulants.

### PMID 34337728 (2021) — European review for medical and pharmacological sciences
TITLE: Endoscopic laser diverticulotomy in Zenker's diverticulum: experiences with basal wound sealing using a collagen-fibrin patch.
DOI: 10.26355/eurrev_202107_26392 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Very few reports investigated techniques of closure of the basal wound area to reduce severe complications like mediastinitis after endoscopic laser diverticulotomy. In this study, we report our experiences after routine use of a collagen-fibrin sealant patch for basal wound covering after laser diverticulotomy in consideration of postoperative complications and recurrence rates.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective study was conducted in a tertiary referral center and university hospital. Endoscopic laser diverticulotomies performed in our hospital between January 2006 and July 2018 were included. After complete transection of the laser septum of the diverticulum, we placed a collagen-fibrin patch onto the basal wound area to cover the opening to the mediastinum. Patient records were evaluated to assess the occurrence of perioperative complications, and the data were compared with those reported in the literature.
RESULTS: A total of 127 endoscopic laser diverticulotomies were performed in 109 patients (71 men, 38 women) suffering from Zenker's diverticulum. Morality rate was 0%, in particular no mediastinitis was observed. Mediastinal emphysema was observed in two patients (1.6%), and temporary or persistent recurrent nerve palsy in one patient (0.8%) each. The mean follow-up period was 71.6&#xb1;5.16&#xa0;months. Recurrent symptomatic diverticulum was observed in 19.3% of the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that use of a collagen-fibrin sealant patch in endoscopic laser diverticulotomy may contribute to the safety of endoscopic controlled laser diverticulotomy without comprising the success rates.

### PMID 34033235 (2021) — Thoracic cancer
TITLE: Suspected fibrin glue-induced acute eosinophilic pneumonia after pulmonary resection: A case report.
DOI: 10.1111/1759-7714.14040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Air leakage is a common complication after pulmonary resection, and fibrin glue is used as a sealant to reduce postoperative air leakage. It is generally recognized that fibrin glue-induced adverse events are rare. Herein, we report a rare case of suspected fibrin glue-induced acute eosinophilic pneumonia (AEP). A 72-year-old man underwent right lower lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection for right lower lung cancer. Fibrin glue was sprayed to cover the interlobar surface of the right upper and middle lobes. On postoperative day 10, computed tomography (CT) revealed ground-glass shadows around the interlobar surface of the remaining lobes of the right lung. Although antibacterial drugs were administered for suspected bacterial pneumonia, fever spike, shortness of breath, and exacerbation of ground-glass shadows were observed. Peripheral blood and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid showed increased eosinophil count, supporting the diagnosis of AEP. Pneumonia resolved after prednisolone administration. At one-year follow-up, CT showed no AEP recurrence. Drug-induced pneumonia usually develops in the bilateral lung and rarely in the hemilateral lung. In this case, pneumonia was localized around the site covered with fibrin glue, suggesting fibrin glue-induced AEP. Thus, the use of fibrin glue should be carefully considered during pulmonary resection.

### PMID 33651250 (2021) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: Negative-pressure wound therapy in combination with bronchial occlusion to treat bronchopleural fistula: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s40792-021-01144-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Bronchopleural fistula, which usually accompanies bronchial fistula and empyema, is a severe complication of lung cancer surgery. Negative-pressure wound therapy can enhance drainage and reduce the empyema cavity, potentially leading to early recovery. This therapy is not currently indicated for bronchopleural fistulas because of the risk of insufficient respiration due to air loss from the fistula.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 73-year-old man, who was malnourished because of peritoneal dialysis, was referred to our hospital for the treatment of lung cancer. Right lower lobectomy with mediastinal lymph node dissection was performed via posterolateral thoracotomy, and the bronchial stump was covered with the intercostal muscle flap. His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged. However, he was readmitted to our hospital because of respiratory failure and diagnosed as having bronchopleural fistula on the basis of the bronchoscopic finding of a 10-mm hole at the membranous portion of the inlet of the remnant lower lobe bronchus. Thus, thoracotomy debridement and open window thoracostomy were immediately performed. After achieving infection control, bronchial occlusion was performed using fibrin glue and a polyglycolic acid sheet was inserted through a fenestrated wound. Bronchial fistula closure was observed on bronchoscopy; therefore, a negative-pressure wound therapy system was applied to close the fenestrated wound. The collapsed lung was re-expanded and the granulation tissue around the wound increased; therefore, thoracic cavity size decreased and thoracoplasty using the latissimus dorsi was performed.
CONCLUSIONS: This bronchopleural fistula was treated successfully after a right lower lobectomy using an extra-pleural bronchial occlusion and negative-pressure wound therapy.

### PMID 33509880 (2021) — BMJ case reports
TITLE: Successful management of anastomotic leakage with endoscopic fibrin glue injection after primary repair of pure oesophageal atresia.
DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2020-238823 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anastomotic leakage (AL) occurs in 15% of cases of primary repair of oesophageal atresia. Urgent surgery is indicated in cases of complete anastomotic separation or severe mediastinitis. Otherwise, conservative management including keeping the patient nil per os (NPO), feeding via transanastomotic tube and prolonged parenteral nutrition, has been widely accepted as it can avoid multiple surgeries in neonates and allow oesophageal continuity to be preserved. However, complications relating to prolonged feeding tube use are common downsides to this approach and the negative impact of prolonged NPO on mastication and swallowing function cannot be ignored.In this case report, a novel approach for the treatment of AL with fibrin glue is reported, following primary repair of oesophageal atresia. It was endoscopically injected into the leakage site to enhance healing and early closure. This procedure was safely performed and achieved early establishment of oral feeding.

### PMID 32279807 (2020) — Materials science &amp; engineering. C, Materials for biological applications
TITLE: The recent progress of tissue adhesives in design strategies, adhesive mechanism and applications.
DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2020.110796 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Tissue adhesives have emerged as an effective method for wound closure and hemostasis in recent decades, due to their ability to bond tissues together, preventing separation from one tissue to another. However, existing tissue adhesives still have several limitations. Tremendous efforts have been invested into developing new tissue adhesives by improving upon existing adhesives through different strategies. Therefore, highlighting and analyzing these design strategies are essential for developing the next generation of advanced adhesives. To this end, we reviewed the available strategies for modifying traditional adhesives (including cyanoacrylate glues, fibrin sealants and BioGlue), as well as design of emerging adhesives (including gelatin sealants, methacrylated sealants and bioinspired adhesives), focusing on their structures, adhesive mechanisms, advantages, limitations, and current applications. The bioinspired adhesives have numerous advantages over traditional adhesives, which will be a wise direction for achieving tissue adhesives with superior properties.

### PMID 31731262 (2020) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Bioadhesives in neurosurgery: a review.
DOI: 10.3171/2019.8.JNS191592 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Neurosurgery presents unique surgical challenges arising from delicate neural structures, limited accessibility, and the risk of CSF leakage that can lead to CNS infections. Sutures and staples may have limited applicability in the complex anatomical constraints of cranial and spinal surgeries, especially in trauma settings when time is of the essence. Surgical bioadhesives are emerging as attractive alternatives because they avoid traumatic application methods, provide a stress-distributed fixation, and provide good cosmesis and outcomes. This article presents the history of the development of surgical bioadhesives, and is also a review of current applications of commercial surgical bioadhesives within neurosurgical procedures and the unmet clinical needs that should be addressed in bioadhesives technologies.
METHODS: A PubMed literature search was performed using the terms "(glue OR bioadhesive OR fibrin OR tisseel OR evicel OR tachosil OR cyanoacrylate OR duraseal OR bioglue) AND (neurosurgery OR spine OR spinal OR dural OR microvascular decompression OR transsphenoidal OR endovascular)." Of 2433 records screened, 168 studies were identified that described the use of bioadhesives in neurosurgical procedures.
RESULTS: The greatest number of studies describing the use of bioadhesives in neurosurgery were identified for endovascular embolization, followed by dural closure and transsphenoidal surgeries. Other common areas of application were for microvascular decompression, skin closure, peripheral nerve repair, and other novel uses. Numerous case reports were also identified describing complications associated with bioadhesive use.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the paucity of approved indications, surgical bioadhesive use in neurosurgical procedures is prevalent. However, current bioadhesives still each have their own limitations and research is intense in the development of novel solutions.

### PMID 32766138 (2020) — Frontiers in oncology
TITLE: Retrospective Evaluation of the Effectiveness of a Synthetic Glue and a Fibrin-Based Sealant for the Prevention of Seroma Following Axillary Dissection in Breast Cancer Patients.
DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2020.01061 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Introduction: Seroma formation represents one of the most frequent postoperative complications of axillary dissection in breast cancer (BC) patients. We aimed to retrospectively explore the effectiveness of the intraoperative use of a synthetic cyanoacrylate glue (specifically Glubran&#xae;2) vs. the intraoperative use of a fibrin sealant (specifically Tisseel) in reducing seroma formation compared to the use of nonsealant in BC patients who underwent breast surgery and axillary dissection. Materials and Methods: We conducted a retrospective, monocentric observational study on BC patients who underwent axillary dissection associated with breast surgery. The axillary dissection was completed with the application of a closed suction drain and was preceded by the application of either Glubran&#xae;2 glue or Tisseel sealant or nonsealant. We analyzed the quantity of serum drained in the first 3 postoperative days, length of hospitalization, days of permanence of axillary drain, seroma development, and presence of postoperative infection signs. Results: Forty-one BC patients were considered. Based on the device used during the surgical treatment, the patients were divided into three groups: group A (17 patients), to whom suction axillary drain was applied; group B (7 patients), to whom Tisseel and axillary suction drain were applied; and group C (17 patients), to whom Glubran&#xae;2 and axillary suction drain were applied. Among the three groups, we did not find significant differences in terms of amount of serum drained in the first 3 postoperative days, length of hospitalization, and incidence of seroma. Group C maintained the axillary drain in a significantly lower number of days compared to the other two groups (p = 0.02); it also had a lower incidence of postoperative infections (6%) compared to group A (23%) and group B (57%) (p = 0.02). Conclusions: We did not find any evidence that the use of surgical glues may reduce the formation of seroma following axillary dissection in BC patients. Nevertheless, the use of cyanoacrylate glue in association with closed suction axillary drain seems to contribute to the reduction in days of axillary drain permanence and of postoperative infections, which are known factors delaying the schedule of any adjuvant oncological therapies.

### PMID 32782549 (2020) — Oncology letters
TITLE: Effectiveness of fibrin sealant as a hemostatic technique in accelerating endoscopic submucosal dissection-induced ulcer healing and preventing stricture in the esophagus: A retrospective study.
DOI: 10.3892/ol.2020.11777 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The aim of the present retrospective study was to evaluate the effectiveness of conservative electrocoagulation followed by porcine fibrin sealant (FS) as a protective hemostatic technique for wounded microvessels in promoting the healing of endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD)-induced ulcer, and preventing esophageal strictures that follow ESD. A total of 203 patients with early esophageal cancer or precancerous lesions were retrospectively analyzed. The 1-month ulcer healing and stricture rates were compared between the two groups (combined hemostats and electrocautery groups). The 1-month complete healing rate was 77.0% in the combined hemostats group and 52.6% in the electrocautery group (P=0.003). The use of FS and a smaller resected range (&lt;3/4 circumference) was associated with a better 1-month healing rate. For patients with a &#x2265;3/4 circumference mucosal defect, the esophageal stricture rate was 31.6% (6/19) in the combined hemostats group and 25.0% (2/8) in the electrocautery group. There was no difference in the stricture rate (P=0.737) and dilation time (P=0.733) between the two groups. In conclusion, the application of conservative electrocoagulation followed by porcine FS as a wound-protection technique promoted ESD-induced ulcer healing in the esophagus. However, this combined hemostatic technique was not superior to the conventional hemostatic method in preventing post-ESD stricture in patients with large esophageal mucosal defects.

### PMID 32699580 (2020) — World journal of gastrointestinal oncology
TITLE: Fibrin sealant for esophageal anastomosis: A phase II study.
DOI: 10.4251/wjgo.v12.i6.651 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Esophagectomy is a pivotal curative modality for localized esophageal or esophagogastric junction cancer (EC or EJC). Postoperative anastomotic leakage (AL) remains problematic. The use of fibrin sealant (FS) may improve the strength of esophageal anastomosis and reduce the incidence of AL.
AIM: To assess the efficacy and safety of applying FS to prevent AL in patients with EC or EJC.
METHODS: In this single-arm, phase II trial (Clinicaltrial.gov identifier: NCT03529266), we recruited patients aged 18-80 years with resectable EC or EJC clinically staged as T1-4aN0-3M0. An open or minimally invasive McKeown esophagectomy was performed with a circular stapled anastomosis. After performing the anastomosis, 2.5 mL of porcine FS was applied circumferentially. The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients with AL within 3 mo.
RESULTS: From June 4, 2018, to December 29, 2018, 57 patients were enrolled. At the data cutoff date (June 30, 2019), three (5.3%) of the 57 patients had developed AL, including two (3.5%) with esophagogastric AL and one (1.8%) with gastric fistula. The incidence of anastomotic stricture and other major postoperative complications was 1.8% and 17.5%, respectively. The median time needed to resume oral feeding after operation was 8 d (Interquartile range: 7.0-9.0 d). No adverse events related to FS were recorded. No deaths occurred within 90 d after surgery.
CONCLUSION: Perioperative sealing with porcine FS appears safe and may prevent AL after esophagectomy in patients with resectable EC or EJC. Further phase III studies are warranted.

### PMID 32408886 (2020) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Endoscopic injection of human fibrin sealant in treatment of intrathoracic anastomotic leakage after esophageal cancer surgery.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-020-01127-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To investigate the application of endoscopic injection of human fibrin sealant in treatment of patients with intrathoracic anastomotic leakage after esophagectomy.
METHODS: A total of 179 patients who underwent intrathoracic anastomosis after esophageal cancer surgery in our department From December 2012 to May 2015 were retrospectively analyzed. The clinical data and treatment of 7 patients with postoperative intrathoracic anastomotic leakage were analyzed and discussed. On Day 28 after operation, the 7 patients were given endoscopic injection of human fibrin sealant to seal the anastomotic leakage, and the changes in drainage volume, body temperature, CRP, white blood cell count and other indicators were compared before and after endoscopic intervention.
RESULTS: After endoscopic injection of human fibrin sealant in all 7 patients with intrathoracic anastomotic leakage, the volume of para-anastomotic drainage, CRP, and WBC count were improved compared with those before treatment. Relevant data were analyzed, and the differences were statistically significant (P&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.019, P&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.001, P&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.014, respectively). No statistically significant difference was observed in the body temperature before and after treatment (P&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.217).
CONCLUSION: For patients with intrathoracic anastomotic leakage after esophageal cancer surgery, endoscopic injection of human fibrin sealant to seal the anastomotic leakage has positive therapeutic effects of reducing exudation around the anastomotic leakage, reducing systemic inflammatory response, and improving clinical symptoms including dysphagia, weight loss without trying, chest pain, pressure or burning, worsening indigestion or heartburn and coughing or hoarseness.

### PMID 31812011 (2020) — Medical hypotheses
TITLE: Fibrin sealants as an adequate treatment alternative to traditional suturing for confined bowel lesions: A hypothesis for future experimental research.
DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2019.109514 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bowel perforation is a rare, but serious complication of laparoscopic surgery with a mortality rate that reaches 20%. There are several risk factors that could predispose to bowel perforation, but the surgeon's experience and the difficulty of each case play the most important role. Delayed bowel injuries happen due to conduction of electrical energy through the abdominal cavity, and in the majority of cases require reoperation. Early bowel injuries are caused by thermal injury of an electrosurgical instrument or during the insertion of the laparoscopic instruments inside the peritoneal cavity. Such injuries are recognized during the operation and are usually fixed by placing sutures. TISSEEL&#x2122; is a fibrin sealant with various applications in several surgical specialties, that simulates the latter stages of the coagulation cascade, and could be used as an alternative treatment for confined bowel perforations during laparoscopy. The efficacy of fibrin sealants in closing bowel gaps has been tested in some experimental models as well as its adequacy in enhancing bowel anastomoses performed with sutures. In addition, there is scarce evidence that fibrin sealants enhance the healing process after bowel enclosure either combined to suturing or not, which is supported by an experimental pilot study, that was conducted by our study group. The present study tries to combine all the available data in order to propose an effective alternative treatment for confined bowel injuries or controversial cases, that happen during laparoscopic surgery. In that way, every surgeon could face them even without huge expertise, conversions to open surgery would diminish and the disadvantages of suturing would disappear. Future experimental studies should be designed in the terms of extensive comparison of the two methods, with the purpose of this comparison to be tested in humans in the future.

### PMID 33204354 (2020) — Journal of children's orthopaedics
TITLE: Autologous cartilage and fibrin sealant may be superior to conventional fat grafting in preventing physeal bone bridge formation - a pilot study in porcines.
DOI: 10.1302/1863-2548.14.200024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The article compares physeal recovery after insertion of autologous cartilage and a conventional fat graft in a standardized porcine physeal gap model. Presence of a bone bridge was the primary outcome.
METHODS: Ten porcines in two groups of five were included in a paired design. A standardized physeal gap in the distal femur was made in all animals. One group (n = 5) was randomized for deposition of autologous cartilage and a Tisseel&#xae; or Tisseel&#xae; alone. The autologous cartilage was harvested from the femoral articular surface. The other group was randomized for fat grafting or no grafts at all. All animals were housed for 14 weeks. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed at 14 weeks prior to euthanasia. The physis was harvested for histology.
RESULTS: MRI - Three bone bridges were seen in the fat grafted gaps. All empty gaps formed a bone bridge. No gaps filled with autologous cartilage and Tisseel&#xae; resulted in bone bridges. One gap filled with Tisseel&#xae; only caused a bone bridge. Histology - The cartilage grafted gaps recovered with physeal-like cartilaginous tissue in histological analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Fat grafts seems ineffective in preventing bone bridges. The use of autologous cartilage may be superior to the current treatment. However, donor site complications were not investigated. The study serves as a proof of concept study and requires further investigation.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: III.

### PMID 33091461 (2020) — Neuro-Chirurgie
TITLE: Tisseel&#xae; versus Hemopatch&#xae; for dural sealing in neurosurgery. A prospective study in a tertiary center.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuchi.2020.09.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Dural repair is a potential source of complications in neurosurgery. We make a comparison in pseudomeningocele and CSF leak incidence with the sealants Tisseel&#xae; and Hemopatch&#xae;.
METHODS: We collected 147 patients from September 2017 to December 2018 in a prospective observational study. Inclusion criteria were adult patients with an intradural cranial or spinal surgery whose dura was closed with a fibrin sealant. Primary endpoints were the incidence of pseudo meningocele and CSF leak. Secondary endpoints were the surgical-site infection, epidural hematoma, and the influence of previous surgery.
RESULTS: In 65 and 82 patients Tisseel&#xae; and Hemopatch&#xae; were used as sealants respectively. The incidence of CSF leak presented a significant statistical relation with the use of Tisseel&#xae; in a univariate and multivariate analysis. Infratentorial surgery presented a higher incidence of pseudomeningocele and CSF leak, but the approach used was not a significant factor in multivariate analysis. Patients who were operated previously had a higher risk present a postoperative complication.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of pseudomeningocele and CSF leak was higher with Tisseel&#xae; compared with Hemopatch&#xae; with a statistic significant relation in case of CSF fistulae. The procedure done may be a confusion factor in our study. There was no report of adverse effects or a higher incidence of complications. However, it is recommended to plan randomized trials with larger samples to get stronger evidence.

### PMID 33008551 (2020) — Journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery : official journal of the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
TITLE: Review Use of Tisseel, a Fibrin Sealant, for Particulate Graft Stabilization.
DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2020.07.022 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comment
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 32944921 (2020) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Use and Efficacy of Hemostats in Neurosurgery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Hemostasis plays a central role throughout neurosurgery. In microneurosurgery, a bloodless operating field under an operating microscope allows fast and effective surgery, thereby reducing the risk of postoperative hemorrhage. Apart from mechanical methods, such as positioning of the patient's head and body, bone plugging, suction, and metal clips, neurosurgical hemostasis is achieved mainly with bipolar coagulation, which permits optimal control of hemorrhage, allows for fine coagulation of small vessels and is safe in patients with pacemakers and defibrillators. Gelatin sponge is a non-antigenic protein that can absorb 45 times its weight in blood, and, when wet, is plastered to the irregularities of the bleeding surface. It enables the repair of torn veins, such as the superior sagittal sinus, without compromising the patency of the vessel. Surgicel&#xae; (Johnson &amp; Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ), the first oxidized cellulose to be introduced, is used to control capillary, venous, or smaller arterial bleeding because it acts as a matrix for the formation of a clot. Over the past few decades, research on the development of hemostatic agents has shifted to the use of fibrin sealants and flowable agents such as Tisseel Fibrin Sealant&#xae; (Baxter, Deerfield, IL), Evicel Fibrin Sealant&#xae; (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) and FloSeal&#xae; (Baxter). Very recently, advanced hemostats with sealant properties similar to those of fibrin sealants have been introduced, such as Tachosil&#xae; (Baxter, Deerfield, IL) and Hemopatch Sealing Hemostat&#xae; (Baxter). Due to the different properties of these products it is important that we understand the efficacy of each hemostatic agent in different neurosurgical settings, such as in the control of parenchymal, subdural and epidural bleeding in both cranial and spinal surgery. The aim of this work was to review the principal technical aspects of hemostatic agents to optimize their use in different neurosurgical procedures.

### PMID 32888886 (2020) — Journal of pediatric urology
TITLE: The histopathological effect of tissue adhesive on urethra wound healing process: An experimental animal study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpurol.2020.08.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE: The present study aimed to determine the histopathological effect of Tisseel tissue adhesive on the urethral wound healing process after urethroplasty in a rat model.
STUDY DESIGN: A total of 24 animals were randomly allocated into three groups: Group 1; control group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;6); Group 2; suture-closure group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;9); and Group 3; suture&#xa0;+&#xa0;adhesive group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;9). In group 2, an incision 4&#xa0;mm long was made on the ventral skin of the penis along the midline from the glans penis, to open the dartos muscle, corpus spongiosum, and urethra. Next, initially, the urethra alone, and then the layers up to the skin were covered in layers with 8/0 vicryl interrupted sutures. Group 3 underwent the same procedures as group 2, but after the urethra was repaired 0.1&#xa0;cc of Tisseel tissue adhesive was applied over the urethra. Penile tissue samples were obtained 21 days later, and tissue samples were sent for histopathological analysis.
RESULTS: Urethral epithelial thickness and connective tissue thickness in group 3 were higher than in group 1 and group 2. Fibrosis in group 3 was higher than in group 2. The difference in inflammation between group 3 and group 2 was not significant. There was no significant difference in microvessel density between group 2 and group 3.
DISCUSSION: Both increased fibrosis and connective tissue thickness were noted in group 3 compared to group 2 and group 1. These increases may have been caused by the hemostatic effect of the Tisseel adhesive and its triggering of fibroblast growth factors. The epithelial thickness increased significantly in group 3 and group 2 compared to group 1. This increase in tissue thickness without an increased number of epithelial cells can be explained by the development of oedema.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that while Tisseel tissue adhesive increases connective tissue thickness and fibrosis, it does not demonstrate a prolonged inflammation or increased neovascularization in the urethral wound at 3 weeks after surgery. The data obtained in our study does not support the use of Tisseel in urethroplasty surgery. The results obtained in this study demonstrate a significantly higher formation of fibrosis (scar tissue), which underlines the importance of new studies to identify new treatments for urethral wound healing after urethra trauma or surgery.

### PMID 32864435 (2020) — Laryngoscope investigative otolaryngology
TITLE: Topical fibroblast growth factor-2 for treatment of chronic tympanic membrane perforations.
DOI: 10.1002/lio2.395 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To determine the efficacy of fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) in treating chronic nonhealing tympanic membrane (TM) perforations.
METHOD: Double-blinded, randomized placebo controlled phase 2 clinical trial for patients with chronic TM perforations of more than 3&#x2009;months duration with a cross-over arm. Patients received either FGF-2 or placebo (sterile water) saturated gelatin sponge in the perforation after rimming the perforation under topical anesthesia. The perforation was then covered with Tisseel fibrin glue. The primary endpoint was complete closure of the TM perforation. Secondary end points included change in hearing and partial TM closure rates. The TM was examined every 3&#x2009;weeks with otoendoscopy for closure. The treatment was repeated if there was incomplete closure every 3&#x2009;weeks up to a total of three treatments per arm.
RESULTS: Seventy four patients were recruited for the study. Fifty seven met eligibility criteria and fifty four completed the study. Ten of 14 perforations closed completely in the placebo group (71.4%) and 23 of 40 perforations closed completely in the FGF-2 treatment group (57.5%), P value = .36. Pure tone averages and word recognition scores were not statistically significantly different between study groups post-treatment. After initial complete closure, re-perforation occurred in seven FGF-2 treated patients and two placebo patients making the effective final closure rate 40% for FGF and 57% for placebo, respectively.
CONCLUSION: No statistically significant difference in tympanic membrane perforation closure rate was found between the FGF-2 and placebo groups. There were no differences in hearing outcomes between the groups.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 1b.

### PMID 32741379 (2020) — The Journal of laryngology and otology
TITLE: Reducing the rate of fistula: does a fibrin sealant act as an adjunct in pharyngeal closure? A two-centre experience.
DOI: 10.1017/S0022215120001218 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Pharyngocutaneous fistula is a troublesome complication. Recently, synthetic materials such as fibrin sealant have been used as a secondary measure to treat fistula. This work assessed whether the primary use of fibrin sealant can reduce the rate of fistula.
METHOD: A retrospective review of 50 cases from 2 centres was completed. Tisseel was an adjunct to primary closure in all cases.
RESULTS: In the first centre, 3 out of 34 cases developed pharyngocutaneous fistula (fistula rate of 9 per cent). All three were salvage cases. In the second centre, 0 out of 16 cases developed a fistula.
CONCLUSION: The incidence of pharyngocutaneous fistula post-radiation and post-chemoradiotherapy in laryngectomy cases has been quoted as 23 per cent and 34 per cent respectively. This study represents the first patient series on the use of fibrin sealant as an adjunct in primary closure following laryngectomy. The results are promising, encouraging the use of Tisseel as an adjunct to meticulous closure.

### PMID 32737024 (2020) — BMJ case reports
TITLE: Tissue glue: a potential role in the management of intraoperative oesophageal perforation.
DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2019-232568 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 85-year-old man suffering from oropharyngeal dysphagia due to a pharyngeal pouch and cricopharyngeal spasm underwent endoscopic stapling of the pouch under general anaesthesia. During the procedure, an iatrogenic perforation of the oesophagus was noticed. After considering several options, 5&#x2009;mL of Tisseel tissue glue was used to seal the perforation intraoperatively. The patient was started on intravenous co-amoxiclav, kept nil by mouth and fed via a nasogastric tube. After 4&#x2009;days of observation mediastinal collection and any leakage was ruled out with a gastrografin contrast swallow procedure. At this point he was considered safe for oral intake.

### PMID 32599185 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: L1/2 Intradural Disc Herniation with Compression of the Proximal Cauda Equina Nerves: A Surgical Challenge.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.06.163 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intradural disc herniation (IDH) in the upper lumbar spine is rare. Preoperative radiologic diagnosis can be difficult, making operative planning challenging. We report on a 74-year-old female patient who was diagnosed with an L1-L2 IDH intraoperatively. This case report aims to highlight and discuss the radiological features of IDH and operative challenges when approaching IDH.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 74-year-old female patient presented to outpatient clinic with a 3-month history of significant intermittent neurological claudication and severe lumbar back pain. Her examination was unremarkable apart from a positive left-sided femoral stretch test. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a large central L1/L2 disc herniation causing significant compression of the thecal sac and proximal cauda equina nerve roots. She underwent an elective posterior L1/L2 lumbar exploration. Intraoperatively, identification of the disc was difficult, which led to inadvertent cerebrospinal fluid leak after incision of what was thought to be a disc bulge. Further exploration revealed an intradural disc that was removed via durotomy. The thecal sac was repaired with sutures and TISSEEL (Baxter, Deerfield, Illinois, USA). Postoperatively, the patient complained of weak left lower limb; MRI revealed residual disc remnants causing compression of the cauda equina. She successfully underwent an urgent revision decompression procedure. She was discharged to rehabilitation on postoperative day 14 with weakness in left knee flexion and extension (MRC grade 4/5) and left ankle plantar- and dorsiflexion (MRC grade 2/5).
CONCLUSIONS: Upper lumbar IDH represent a surgical challenge. Intraoperative considerations include identification of the disc, intentional or incidental durotomy, intradural discectomy, and anatomical restrictions of operating at the level proximal to the cauda equina.

### PMID 32487858 (2020) — Surgical laparoscopy, endoscopy &amp; percutaneous techniques
TITLE: Laparoscopic Transabdominal Preperitoneal (TAPP) Inguinal Hernia Repair Using Fibrin Glue for Fixation of the Mesh and Peritoneum Closure.
DOI: 10.1097/SLE.0000000000000797 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The aim of this case series is to describe our ongoing experience of laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) inguinal hernia repair using Tisseel fibrin glue for the fixation of the mesh and peritoneum closure.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From October 2018, patients who underwent laparoscopic TAPP for unilateral inguinal hernia repair using Tisseel fibrin glue to secure the mesh and the peritoneum, with a minimum of 1 year of follow-up, have been included. Patient demographics, main operative findings, and main postoperative outcomes were analyzed prospectively using a visual analgesic scale (VAS) and a modified short-form 36 (SF-36) questionnaire.
RESULTS: A total of 26 patients have been included and none have been lost during the follow-up. The mean operative time was 92.1 minutes and there was no conversion. The median hospital stay was 1.03 day (range, 1 to 2). The mean follow-up duration was 19.3 months (range, 12 to 26&#x2009;mo) and none had a recurrence. The postoperative VAS score at 1, 7, 30 days, and 6 months from surgery was 3.18, 1.52, 0, and 0, respectively. The mean SF-36 score at 1, 6, and 12 months from surgery was 90.09, 94.8, and 05.1, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of fibrin glue for TAPP inguinal hernia repair is a safe and feasible technique with favorable results. Larger comparative randomized studies are needed to confirm these early results.

### PMID 32447413 (2020) — Pediatric radiology
TITLE: Percutaneous CT-guided epidural fibrin sealant injection for refractory pediatric post-dural puncture headache.
DOI: 10.1007/s00247-020-04691-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Post-dural puncture headache is an uncommon entity in young children and adolescents. Percutaneous epidural blood patching has been classically used to manage refractory post-dural puncture headaches. Injectable fibrin sealant has been shown in a few adult cases to relieve symptoms where blood patching has either failed or was not appropriate. We report a 10-year-old boy who experienced rapid relief of post-dural puncture headache symptoms following percutaneous lumbar epidural fibrin sealant injection under computed tomography guidance. Percutaneous epidural fibrin sealant injection may be an acceptable treatment for post-dural puncture headaches refractory to epidural blood patching, or when an epidural blood patch is otherwise contraindicated. The pediatric interventional radiologist should be aware of this off-label use of fibrin sealant.

### PMID 32361085 (2020) — The ocular surface
TITLE: Comparison and application of commercially available fibrin sealants in ophthalmology.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtos.2020.04.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glues carry many advantages over traditional suture as a tissue adhesive and have been increasingly used in a variety of ophthalmic procedures over the past 15 years. Several fibrin sealants are commercially available worldwide, each of which differs slightly in its composition and mechanism of delivery. The focus of our review is to briefly discuss the reported uses of fibrin in ophthalmic surgery and provide a broad overview of the properties associated with each commercially available fibrin sealant.

### PMID 32333694 (2020) — Microsurgery
TITLE: Sutureless repair of a partially transected median nerve using Tisseel glue and Axoguard nerve protector: A case report.
DOI: 10.1002/micr.30593 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Peripheral nerve injuries in which the nerve is not completely severed often result in neuromas-in-continuity. These can cause sensory and functional deficits and must be resected and reconstructed. In defects greater than 5&#x2009;mm in length, nerve graft is indicated, and suture neurorrhaphy is typically used to secure the nerve ends. However, sutures may negatively impact nerve regeneration. Fibrin glue has recently been used to mitigate the inflammatory response associated with suture neurorrhaphy. Most of the literature regarding fibrin glue covers animal models and supports its use for nerve reconstruction. Tisseel, a fibrin sealant developed as an adjunct to hemostasis, has recently shown utility in peripheral nerve repair by increasing tensile strength without additional sutures. We present the successful use of Tisseel sealant in a neuroma resection and reconstruction. In this case, a 35-year-old female presented with persistent neuropathic pain and neurologic dysfunction related to the median nerve in her hand with a history of distal forearm laceration and prior carpal tunnel release. Upon exploration, a neuroma-in-continuity involving 75% of the nerve was identified, resected, and reconstructed using processed human nerve allograft, as well as Tisseel sealant and Axoguard nerve protector to secure the repair and offload tension. At 1-year follow-up, pain was resolved, with &#x2264;8&#x2009;mm static 2-point discrimination in the median nerve distribution, and excellent improvement in hand strength compared with preoperative conditions. The outcome of this case indicates that fibrin glue may be useful to avoid excess sutures in cases of neuroma-in-continuity not involving the entire cross-section of the nerve.

### PMID 32192927 (2020) — Journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery : official journal of the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
TITLE: Use of Tisseel, a Fibrin Sealant, for Particulate Graft Stabilization.
DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2020.02.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: One clinical problem when augmenting a narrow or vertically deficient ridge is maintenance of the graft position during the immediate healing phase and preservation of the augmentation over time. The use of Tisseel (Baxter, Deerfield, IL), a fibrin sealant product, to stabilize particulate grafts, has been reported, and we have reviewed its use. Fibrinogen is converted to fibrin and forms a fibular network that binds the particulate graft. A protease inhibitor is included, which prevents lysis of the coagulum for at least 2&#xa0;weeks and allows for fibrous ingrowth and graft stabilization. We have reviewed the reported data and included 2 case reports to demonstrate the use of Tisseel.

### PMID 32111766 (2020) — In vivo (Athens, Greece)
TITLE: The Effect of TISSEEL&#xae; on Colorectal Anastomosis Healing Process in a Diabetic Animal Experimental Model.
DOI: 10.21873/invivo.11820 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND/AIM: Diabetes mellitus is an established risk factor of colorectal anastomosis failure. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the effect of TISSEEL&#xae; in anastomotic healing.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty male, Sprague-Dawley rats were used. Diabetes was induced in half of them by intraperitoneal injection of Streptozotocin, 60 mg/kg. One week after the injection, animals were operated and a 1 cm segment was removed and an end-to-end hand sewn anastomosis was performed. TISSEEL&#xae; was applied in each group (diabetic, non-diabetic) following randomization.
RESULTS: The pathology analysis revealed improved tissue remodeling in the TISSEEL&#xae; group, both for the normoglycemic and the diabetic group. Specifically, the extent of inflammation was decreased (p&lt;0.001), whereas fibroblast and collagen formation were improved (p=0.040 and p=0.008). Neovascularization was also improved (p=0.047).
CONCLUSION: Application of TISSEEL&#xae; on colorectal anastomoses improves healing in rats that suffer from severe hyperglycemia.

### PMID 32021515 (2020) — Risk management and healthcare policy
TITLE: Costs Analysis of Fibrin Sealant for Prevention of Anastomotic Leakage in Lower Colorectal Surgery.
DOI: 10.2147/RMHP.S221008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Postoperative anastomotic leaks remain a common and serious complication of colorectal surgeries and are a major cause of mortality and morbidity of these procedures. Anastomotic leaks (AL) have been extensively studied; however, there has been no significant reduction in their prevalence over time. In addition, there is a significant economic burden from AL attributed to the need for repeat surgery, radiologic intervention and lengthened hospital stay. We conducted a comparative cost analysis of patients undergoing colorectal surgery with anastomosis, with the application of fibrin sealant (FS) to the sutured anastomosis versus not treating the sutured anastomosis with FS.
METHODS: The deterministic decision-tree model was populated with clinical data including operating room time, hospitalization days, occurrence of AL, need for revision surgery, blood products and radiologic interventions to treat the AL in lower colorectal surgery. A systematic literature review was conducted to identify appropriate studies with these variables.
RESULTS: The average cost per case treated lower colorectal surgery with fibrin sealant glue 10 mL Tisseel&#xae; and those not treated with a fibrin sealant after suturing the anastomoses was &#x20ac;3233 and &#x20ac;4130, respectively, for resource expenses paid by the healthcare system. This would suggest potential savings of &#x20ac;897 per surgery, achieved through the application of FS to the sutured anastomosis for preventing AL following colorectal surgery.
CONCLUSION: Application of FS to the sutured anastomosis in lower colorectal surgery resulted in a decrease in post-operative AL, and cost savings based on a reduction in hospitalization days, a reduction needing: revision surgery, radiologic intervention and blood products to treat AL.

### PMID 31923161 (2020) — Surgical laparoscopy, endoscopy &amp; percutaneous techniques
TITLE: A Randomized Controlled Trial Comparing Short-term Outcomes of Self-Gripping (Progrip) Mesh Versus Fibrin Sealant in Laparoscopic Total Extraperitoneal Hernioplasty.
DOI: 10.1097/SLE.0000000000000756 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: There are no data comparing the use of self-gripping mesh with standard mesh in total extraperitoneal repair (TEP). In this prospective study we aim to study the incidence of chronic pain between Progrip (PG) and standard mesh fixed by fibrin sealant (FS).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Under Institutional Review Board approval, from April 2016 to May 2017, patients with primary unilateral or bilateral inguinal hernia eligible for TEP were recruited. Before mesh insertion they were randomized into PG or FS (Tisseel). Demographics, intraoperative, and postoperative data were recorded. Patients were followed up for at least 1 year. Visual Analog Scale was used to record pain scores. Primary outcome was the incidence of chronic pain at 3 months after surgery.
RESULTS: One hundred fifty patients were randomized. Of the 150 patients (193 hernias), 76 were randomized to PG and 74 randomized to FS. Demographic data such as age, presence of comorbidities, smoking history, mean body mass index was comparable in both groups. Bilateral hernias occurred in 25 (32.9%) and 18 (24.3%) patients in PG and FS group, respectively. Mean mesh deployment time was 283.7 seconds (range, 140 to 720&#x2009;s) in PG group and 301.9 seconds (range, 67 to 1006&#x2009;s) in FS group (P=0.30). A total of 5 patients were lost at follow-up and they were excluded from subsequent data analysis. Seroma occurred in 15 (20.3%) and 16 (22.5%) patients in PG and FS group, respectively (P=0.45). Mean Visual Analog Scale at 2 weeks (cough) was highest at 1.05 and 1.02 in PG and FS group, respectively (P=0.62). Eight (12.3%) and 15 (23.4%) patients in PG and FG group, respectively, reported pain at 3-month follow-up (P=0.1). Of those who experienced pain, majority was mild pain which did not affect activities of daily living. At a mean follow-up of 13.1&#xb1;5.4 months, no recurrence was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: There was no significant difference in terms of chronic pain between PG and FS group. The use of PG is effective in TEP.

### PMID 31904661 (2020) — Journal of the Chinese Medical Association : JCMA
TITLE: One-year outcomes of a suture-less laparoscopic sacral hysteropexy using polypropylene Y-mesh grafts and fibrin sealant spray: A prospective comparative study.
DOI: 10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000253 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Laparoscopic sacral hysteropexy (SH) is a minimally invasive and effective treatment for uterovaginal prolapse in women who wish to retain the uterus. However, this procedure is limited by a steep learning curve and a long operating time. In this study, we aim to evaluate the surgical outcomes of a modified laparoscopic SH procedure using innovative methods of vaginal mesh attachment, which we hypothesized to be equally effective and time-saving.
METHODS: This was a prospective, parallel, comparative study conducted at a tertiary referral hospital. A total of 34 women with advanced (POPQ [Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification] stages &#x2267; 2) uterine prolapse, who underwent a laparoscopic SH procedure using lightweight polypropylene Y-mesh grafts (ALYTE), were studied. In half (n = 17) of the cases, fibrin sealant spray (TISSEEL) was applied to the meshes fixed at the anterior and posterior vaginal wall with fewer (six vs at least ten) sutures. A detailed comparison of one-year outcomes between groups was performed.
RESULTS: Patient characteristics and perioperative results were comparable between groups with the exception of a significantly shorter total operating time (247.0 vs 292.9 minutes, p = 0.04) noted in the fibrin group. At 1 year, anatomic success (POPQ stage &#x2266;1) rates (76.5% vs 76.5%) were not different between groups. There were eight patients, with four in each group, who had surgical failure. Notably, most (7/8; 87.5%) surgical failures were at the anterior compartment (i.e, recurrent cystocele). No vaginal mesh extrusions were noted. After statistical analysis, we found "cystocele as the dominant prolapse before operation" was a significant predisposing factor for prolapse recurrence (p = 0.019; odds ratio = 8.04).
CONCLUSION: The modified laparoscopic SH procedure using Y-mesh grafts and fibrin sealant spray with fewer vaginal sutures was equally effective as conventional methods but saved time. Laparoscopic SH using Y-mesh grafts might not be as effective in repairing a concomitant dominant cystocele.

### PMID 36343285 (2020) — Interventional medicine &amp; applied science
TITLE: Success and reliability of extrafemoral Exoseal vascular closure device: "Off-label" usage.
DOI: 10.1556/1646.11.2019.22 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: The aim of this study is to present the reliability and efficacy of Exoseal vascular closure device (EVCD) for closure of extrafemoral punctures.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All patients who were treated with EVCD following arterial endovascular treatment involving an extrafemoral puncture between April 2013 and January 2014 were examined retrospectively. This study included 11 patients (4 women and 7 men between the ages of 48 and 87 years; average age&#x2009;=&#x2009;65 years). A total of 13 procedures were performed in 11 patients involving the following access routes: brachial artery (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5), popliteal artery (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4), and polytetrafluoroethylene graft (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4).
RESULTS: Twelve out of 13 EVCD procedures achieved technical success and procedural success. One minor and one major complications occurred. Both complications were revealed to be pseudoaneurysms, both in the brachial artery. Pseudoaneurysm of the minor complication was treated by Fibrin Sealant (Tisseel) injection guided by ultrasonography and the other pseudoaneurysm was treated by covered stent placement.
CONCLUSIONS: The femoral artery is an essential access route of arterial endovascular procedures; however, in some cases, the extrafemoral arterial route is necessary. In this study, EVCD was found to be useful for closing extrafemoral arterial routes. This study had a limited number of cases and more large-scale studies are needed.

### PMID 31235074 (2020) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Reinforcement of intrathoracic oesophago-gastric anastomosis with fibrin sealant (Tisseel&#xae;) in oesophagectomy for cancer: A prospective comparative study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2019.06.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Fibrin sealant (Tisseel) is a human protein and thrombin soluble fibrinogen that has been indicated for reinforcement of gastro-intestinal anastomoses to prevent leakage. The objective of this study is to examine the impact of fibrin sealant regarding anastomotic leak, following Ivor-Lewis procedure.
METHODS: This is a prospective comparative study on 2-stage oesophagectomy for cancer of the distal oesophagus or oesophagogastric junction. N&#x202f;=&#x202f;57 individuals were randomly subjected; n&#x202f;=&#x202f;22 patients to Tisseel in combination to surgical anastomosis versus n&#x202f;=&#x202f;35 patients to surgical anastomosis alone. The test of probability was assessed through Chi-Square, independent samples paired T-Test and Log-Rank analysis.
RESULTS: Of the 57 cases included, 56 underwent hybrid and 1 open oesophagectomy. In the Tisseel group, n&#x202f;=&#x202f;5(22.7%) developed anastomotic leak comparing to n&#x202f;=&#x202f;3(8.6%) of the control group. No statistically significant difference in leak rate was shown between the two groups; the test of probability was rejected.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results are not supportive of Tisseel tissue sealing property on the intrathoracic oesophago-gastric anastomosis and fibrin sealant's use cannot be justified.

### PMID 30868183 (2020) — Urolithiasis
TITLE: Comparison of outcomes in totally tubeless percutaneous nephrolithotomy according to nephrostomy tract sealing with fibrin versus gelatin matrix: a propensity score matching study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00240-019-01126-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To investigate and compare surgical outcomes in totally tubeless percutaneous nephrolithotomy (ttPCNL) patients according to the type of sealant during nephrostomy tract closure, the records of 158 patients who underwent ttPCNL were retrospectively reviewed. Fibrin sealant [Tisseel&#xae;; n&#x2009;=&#x2009;107, fibrin-only sealant (FS)] or gelatin matrix hemostatic sealant [FloSeal&#xae;; n&#x2009;=&#x2009;51, gelatin matrix sealant (GS)] was applied during tract closure according to surgeon's preference. On the first postoperative day, computed tomography (CT) was scanned for all patients. Unsatisfactory radiological outcome (URO) was defined as any postoperative hematoma or urinoma (&#x2265;&#x2009;2&#xa0;cm) on the CT. Unsatisfactory clinical outcome (UCO) was defined as any adverse event requiring additional intervention. Both UROs and UCOs were sub-classified as either hemorrhage or drainage related. 2:1 propensity score matching was applied according to clinical parameters. Median age was 58 (19-78) years and a mean stone size was 2.1&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.1&#xa0;cm. The treatment success rate (stone free or &lt;&#x2009;4&#xa0;mm residual) among all patients was 91.1% (144/158). UROs and UCOs occurred in 35.4% (86/158) and 11.4% (18/158) of all cases, respectively. Neither of the frequency of URO nor hemorrhage-related UCO was different according to sealant type. However, drainage-related UCOs were more prevalent among the GS group, mainly due to the higher postoperative ureter stenting rate. The postoperative pain severity and the length of hospitalization were comparable between groups. In summary, using GS rather than FS during tract closure did not worsen hemorrhage-related outcomes. However, the clinical risk of ureter occlusion requiring additional temporary ureteral stenting was increased.

### PMID 32190591 (2020) — World journal of plastic surgery
TITLE: Comparison of the Never Repair with Fibrin Glue and Perineural Micro-Suture in Rat Model.
DOI: 10.29252/wjps.9.1.44 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Many different methods for nerve repair have been introduced. Nerve repair with micro-suture is the gold standard one; however, the use of fibrin glue is a promising method. This study compared the never repair with fibrin glue and perineural micro-suture in rat model.
METHODS: Ten 3-4 month old male rats, weighting between 250-300 grams were divided into two groups. Left sciatic nerves of the rats were transected and repaired with fibrin glue (TissucolR) in one group (A) and direct peri-neural micro-suture in another group (B). The time of nerve repair was compared between the two groups after 8 weeks. A biopsy from was taken from anastomosis site and the histopathological assessment was undertaken for axonal growth rate after anastomosis and compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: The time of repair in group A was significantly lower than group B. Axonal growth rate was pretty similar between the two groups, and the difference was not significant. The mean (SD) time for repair of nerves with micro-sutures was 7.1 (1.5) minutes and the mean (SD) for repair of nerves with fibrin glue was 2.5 (0.5) minutes and the difference was significant. The number of calcification such as psammoma bodies was significantly higher in fibrin glue group.
CONCLUSION: Nerve repair with fibrin glue was shown to be simpler and more time saving. The number of axons after the repair was not different in the two groups. We showed that fibrin glue may have more tissue reactions compared with micro-sutures.

### PMID 32564965 (2020) — Injury
TITLE: Fibrin sealant reduces need for transfusions after hip hemiarthroplasty for femoral neck fractures.
DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2020.05.026 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Every year more than 300,000 proximal femur fractures are diagnosed. Their number will double within 30 years. In femoral neck fractures treated with hip hemiarthroplasty 90-days mortality is 29.5-51.6%. Haemorrhage is one amongst other complications that is associated with increasing postoperative mortality. Transfusion rate in these patients ranges from 25.7% to 39%. Blood transfusions expose to complications. Fibrin sealants are useful in reducing perioperative need for transfusions, total blood loss, blood loss from drainage. The aim of this study is to assess whether the use of a fibrin sealant during hip hemiarthroplasty implant reduces the need for transfusion.
PATIENT AND METHODS: All patients admitted with a proximal femur fracture from September 2018 to May 2019 were reviewed. Inclusion criteria were: femoral neck fracture AO 31B2-3, hip hemiarthroplasty. Exclusion criteria were: previous surgery on the affected hip, coagulation disorders, hematopoietic disorders. Patients were divided in fibrin sealant group and control group. All patients underwent partial hip replacement through a posterolateral approach. 4 ml of fibrin sealant (EVICEL, Omrix Biopharmaceuticals, Diegem, Belgium) were sprayed on the soft tissues of patients included in the fibrin sealant group. Primary outcome of our study was need for perioperative transfusion. Secondary outcomes were: mean red blood cell transfused volume, variations in haematocrit and haemoglobin and total blood volume loss.
RESULTS: Eighty-one consecutive patients were enrolled. EVICEL was used on 19 patients, standard haemostatic care on 62 patients. Two patients were transfused in the fibrin sealant group, 22 in the control group (p 0,0371). Mean transfused volume was 21,05 ml in the fibrin sealant group and 116,16 ml in the control group (p 0,0017). No significant difference could be found in haematocrit and haemoglobin variation and total blood loss.
DISCUSSION: A reduction in transfusional need with the use of fibrin sealants was reported in studies on total hip arthroplasty and was confirmed by our study.
CONCLUSION: EVICEL reduces need for transfusion in patients undergoing hip hemiarthroplasty for a femoral neck fracture. It must be held among the options when a stricter control on transfusional requirement is needed.

### PMID 32205497 (2020) — Annals of plastic surgery
TITLE: Efficacy of Fibrin Sealants in Preventing Seroma Formation in Reduction Mammaplasty: A Single Surgeon's Experience.
DOI: 10.1097/SAP.0000000000002327 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealant is a controversial method for reducing seroma formation. It is comprised of human proclotting factors, fibrinogen and thrombin. Fibrin sealants have been extensively studied for their efficacy in reducing the rates of seroma by sealing the dead space; however, in most studies, the sealants are used with surgical drains. According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, fibrin sealant carries the risk of life-threatening thromboembolic complications, gas emboli, and transmission of infectious agents. Despite these concerns, many plastic surgeons use such products in ambulatory surgeries even though its effect on seroma formation has yet to be elucidated. The aim of our study is to determine the efficacy of fibrin sealants in seroma prevention in reduction mammoplasty with and without surgical drains.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review was performed of all bilateral reduction mammaplasty by a single-surgeon from 2014 to 2018. Patients had at least 90 days postoperative follow-up. Exclusion criteria consisted of patients younger than 18 years, had prior breast surgery, or had an incidental cancer diagnosis in breast reduction tissue specimen.
RESULTS: On analysis, 159 patients met inclusion criteria and were categorized into group 1, with fibrin sealant (n = 101) and group 2, no fibrin sealant (n = 58). There were no statistical differences in patient demographics. There was no significant difference in the incidence of seroma between group 1 and group 2 (21% vs 19%, P = 0.782). Group 1 incidence of seroma was further analyzed by sealant type: Tisseal, Floseal, and Evicel (12% vs 27% vs 23%, P = 0.436). In group 1, the use of sealant alone was more likely to result in seroma formation when compared with the combination of sealant and surgical drains (25% vs 8%, P = 0.069).
CONCLUSIONS: There is no difference in rate of seroma formation with the use of fibrin sealants in reduction mammaplasty. The use of fibrin sealants without surgical drains may increase the rate of seromas. Plastic surgeons could consider weighing the risk versus benefits in using fibrin sealants with or without drains in ambulatory surgeries.

### PMID 32581467 (2020) — Journal of current glaucoma practice
TITLE: Intrapalpebral Extending Dysesthetic Bleb Revision with Fibrin Glue.
DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10078-1270 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: This pilot study evaluates the safety and efficacy of a novel surgical technique using fibrin glue to treat bleb dysesthesia post-trabeculectomy due to intrapalpebral extension.
BACKGROUND: Trabeculectomy remains the gold standard for control of intraocular pressure (IOP) in refractory glaucoma. Bleb dysesthesia following antifibrotic-enhanced trabeculectomy is common, resulting in a significant decrease in quality of life. Symptoms include pain, foreign body sensation, and excessive tearing. Treatments include lubrication, topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), bandage contact lens, bleb needling, compression sutures, Nd:YAG laser treatments, autologous blood injection, and cryopexy. These procedures can be time-consuming, risk bleb function, and may be ineffective at symptom control; thus, a novel technique is required.
TECHNIQUE: This is a retrospective case series of eyes undergoing bleb dissection with scleral cutdown and conjunctival closure with ARTISS fibrin tissue glue. Reported cases have been followed up for 6 months. Outcomes assessed include complications, IOP, medication usage, subjective pain score, visual field, and cup-to-disk (C:D) ratio.
CONCLUSION: This small pilot series demonstrated that patients suffering from bleb dysesthesia due to intrapalpebral bleb extension can be successfully treated with a novel surgical approach combining conjunctival dissection to sclera with fibrin tissue glue closure. There was no significant effect on bleb function and no contribution to glaucoma progression over a 6-month period. A significant reduction in patient discomfort with no new surgical complications was noted.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: This demonstrates a safe and effective novel surgical approach to treat patients with this condition. The technique is easily learnt and can be employed in an outpatient setting. The technique is readily accepted by patients in group who are often reticent to undergo further intervention. Most importantly, it does not compromise bleb function or destabilize glaucoma control.
HOW TO CITE THIS ARTICLE: Holmes DP, Manning DK. Intrapalpebral Extending Dysesthetic Bleb Revision with Fibrin Glue. J Curr Glaucoma Pract 2020;14(1):37-42.

### PMID 32509321 (2020) — Pilot and feasibility studies
TITLE: Determining the effectiveness of fibrin sealants in reducing complications in patients undergoing lateral neck dissection (DEFeND): study protocol for a randomised external pilot trial.
DOI: 10.1186/s40814-020-00618-w | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Complications after major surgery are a significant cause of morbidity and mortality. Neck dissection is one of the most commonly performed major operations in Head and Neck Surgical Oncology. Significant surgical complications occur in approximately 10-20% of all patients, increasing to 40% in patients who have had previous treatment to the area or have multiple co-morbidities and/or polypharmacy.Current evidence suggests that fibrin sealants (FS) may have potential clinical advantages in Head and Neck Surgery through the reduction of complications, volume of wound drainage and retention time of the drains. However, a paucity of high-quality trial-based evidence means that a surgical trial to determine the effectiveness of FS in reducing the rate and severity of complications in patients undergoing lateral neck dissection is warranted. The DEFeND randomised external pilot trial will address critical questions on how well key components of the proposed study design work together as well as the feasibility of a future phase III trial.
METHODS: The study design that is being piloted is that of a two-arm, parallel group, superiority trial with block randomisation in a 1:1 allocation ratio. The interventional arm will constitute the application of FS (Artiss, Baxter Healthcare Ltd.) to the surgical wound following completion of a neck dissection procedure, in addition to standard of care (SOC). The control arm will constitute SOC alone. Eligible patients will include patients who require a lateral neck dissection with a minimum of three cervical nodal levels. Patients who require bilateral neck procedures or undergoing immediate reconstruction with free or regional flaps will be excluded. The outcomes being assessed will be recruitment rate, screened to randomisation rate, fidelity of blinding process using blinding indices, number of missing or incomplete data entries, number of protocol deviations and number of losses to follow-up. Suitability of the outcome measures proposed for the future phase III trial will also be assessed.
DISCUSSION: The anticipated challenges for this study will be recruitment, complexity of the intervention and adherence to the protocol. The outcomes will inform the design, feasibility and conduct of a future phase III surgical trial.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: First participant randomised: November 06, 2018; UKCRN Portfolio ID: 37896; ISRCTN99181100.

### PMID 32419973 (2020) — International journal of burns and trauma
TITLE: Artiss&#xae; and burn treatment: a retrospective analysis contributing to current clinical practice.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tangential excision and autologous skin graft coverage is a foundational principle in burn surgery. Fibrin sealant (Artiss&#xae;) was developed recently as alternative to staples for graft fixation. The aim of this study was to assess whether graft-fixation with Artiss shows profit in terms of postoperative pain management compared to graft fixation with staples.
METHODS: A retrospective single-center, single-surgeon frequency-matched cohort study was completed on 83 patients with thermal injury burns covering 1%-25% of total body surface area, requiring early excision and immediate coverage with split-thickness skin grafts. Grafts were fixated with Artiss only or staples only. Primary outcome parameters include complication rates (graft loss, need for regrafting and wound contamination), the requirement of pain medication for postoperative pain and the need for narcosis for postoperative procedures.
RESULTS: Graft-fixation with Artiss resulted in a decrease in administration of analgesics (P=0.005) and anesthetics (P=0.007) postoperatively. No statistically significant difference was found in complication rates (P=0.999) between both groups.
CONCLUSION: Fibrin sealant proved to be a safe and effective alternative to staples for graft fixation. It showed profit in short-term burn outcomes, reducing the need for analgesics and anesthetics postoperatively.

### PMID 31782892 (2020) — Clinical otolaryngology : official journal of ENT-UK ; official journal of Netherlands Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology &amp; Cervico-Facial Surgery
TITLE: An audit of fifty patients receiving Artiss&#x2122; fibrin sealant in lateral selective neck dissections.
DOI: 10.1111/coa.13485 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 31820617 (2020) — Minerva chirurgica
TITLE: Reduction of postoperative lymphorrhoea in patients undergoing radical lymphadenectomy for stage III melanoma: prospective study using collagen-fibrin patches.
DOI: 10.23736/S0026-4733.19.08114-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Radical lymph nodes dissection (RLND) is the standard procedure for regional control of disease in patients with metastatic melanoma (stage III). Because of its aggressiveness, lymphorrhoea is a constant problem in postoperative.
METHODS: In this prospective nonrandomized study with a retrospective analysis of data, patients undergoing surgical treatment of axillary or iliac-inguinal RLND received standard treatment plus a collagen-fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil) (N.=50) or standard treatment alone (N.=50). The first endpoint was the comparison between the treated population and the control group, in terms of persistence of drainage and average daily volume of lymphorrhoea. The second aim was to relate patients' BMI, volume of lymphorrhoea and time of drainage in the two groups.
RESULTS: In the comparison between the two groups receiving or not the treatment with collagen-fibrin patch, we found an average difference both in the volume of daily lymphorrhoea (42.91&#xb1;6.61 cc) and in the persistence of drainage (9.292&#xb1;1.644 days) with P value &lt;0.0001. Besides, the collagen-fibrin patch was actually effective in reducing lymphorrhoea and time of drainage, regardless of patients' BMI.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study confirm and support the starting thesis: TachoSil is an effective tissue sealant able to reduce lymphorrhoea and drainage removal times following a radical lymphadenectomy, independently from the BMI.

### PMID 32781647 (2020) — Biomedicines
TITLE: Vivostat Platelet-Rich Fibrin&#xae; for Complicated or Chronic Wounds-A Pilot Study.
DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines8080276 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Vivostat Platelet-Rich Fibrin&#xae; (PRF) is an autologous platelet concentrate used for the local treatment of chronic or complicated wounds. Still, its application for this indication is not evidence-based. Therefore, we performed this monocentric retrospective pilot study investigating the clinical outcome of a local treatment of chronic or complicated wounds in 35 patients (23 male, 12 female, mean age 68.7 years) treated with Vivostat PRF&#xae;. This study population is the largest among published studies analyzing the clinical efficacy of Vivostat PRF&#xae; on chronic wounds so far. Using the perpendicular method we divided the wounds into three sizes (&lt;10, 10-30, and &gt;30 cm2). The clinical efficacy of the Vivostat PRF treatment was the primary endpoint and was divided into three groups of increasing degrees of wound improvement: (1) no improvement of the wound (wound area was not reduced &gt; 10% under Vivostat PRF&#xae; treatment), (2) improvement of the wound (reduced area &gt; 10% under Vivostat PRF&#xae; treatment) and (3) complete epithelialization (wounds that were completely re-epithelialized after Vivostat PRF&#xae; treatment). We included patients' diagnosis and concomitant diseases (peripheral arterial occlusive disease (PAOD)), chronic venous insufficiency (CVI)), diabetic foot syndrome (DFS)) in our data analysis in order to investigate their potential impact on the wound healing capacity of Vivostat PRF&#xae;. Our results show that in the entire study population, 13 out of 35 (37.1%) patients experienced wound improvement and 14 out of 35 (40%) patients showed complete epithelialization of their wound under Vivostat PRF&#xae; treatment. In summary, 77.1% of the treated patients benefited from the Vivostat PRF&#xae; therapy. These positive wound healing effects were all observed within the first three to six Vivostat PRF&#xae; applications. Subgroup analyses showed that Vivostat PRF&#xae; appeared to be more efficient in patients without CVI in comparison to patients with CVI (p = 0.02). Moreover, Vivostat PRF&#xae; treatment seems to be particularly efficient in PAOD-related wounds with a reduced crural arterial blood supply (p = 0.01). Additionally, we performed an experimental human in vivo study on ten male students where we artificially generated bilateral gluteal wounds and analyzed the influence of the Vivostat PRF&#xae; treatment on the expression of two genes (human beta Defensin-2, ((hBD-2) and human beta-Defensin-3 (hBD-3)) in keratinocytes of resected wound specimens that are induced during wound healing. Interestingly, this analysis revealed that only seven of out ten individuals showed a relevant hBD-2 and hBD-3 gene induction after Vivostat PRF&#xae; treatment. This led to the novel "key-lock-hypothesis". With the goal of an individualized precision medicine approach with optimized wound treatment strategies in the future, this is an important observation that demands further experimental and clinical studies.

### PMID 32685791 (2020) — Romanian journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Use of Vivostat PRF&#xae; in Acanthamoeba keratitis.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present a case of a 27-year-old contact lens male user who was diagnosed with Acanthamoeba keratitis. Given the inefficiency of medical treatment and high risk of corneal perforation, we decided to use Vivostat PRF&#xae;, with satisfactory results. To our knowledge, this is the first described case in medical literature in which Vivostat PRF&#xae; is used as part of Acanthamoeba keratitis treatment.

### PMID 32575800 (2020) — International journal of molecular sciences
TITLE: Platelet-Released Growth Factors and Platelet-Rich Fibrin Induce Expression of Factors Involved in Extracellular Matrix Organization in Human Keratinocytes.
DOI: 10.3390/ijms21124404 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Platelet-released growth factor (PRGF) is a thrombocyte concentrate lysate which, like its clinically equivalent variations (e.g., Vivostat PRF&#xae; (platelet-rich fibrin)), is known to support the healing of chronic and hard-to-heal wounds. However, studies on the effect of PRGF on keratinocytes remain scarce. This study aims to identify genes in keratinocytes that are significantly influenced by PRGF. Therefore, we performed a whole transcriptome and gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of PRGF-stimulated human primary keratinocytes. This revealed an increased expression of genes involved in extracellular matrix (ECM) organization. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) analysis confirmed the PRGF-mediated induction of selected ECM-related factors such as transforming growth factor beta-induced protein, fibronectin 1, matrix metalloproteinase-9, transglutaminase 2, fermitin family member 1, collagen type I alpha 1 and collagen type XXII alpha 1. PRGF-induced expression of the above factors was influenced by blockade of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a receptor playing a crucial role in wound healing. A differential induction of the investigated factors was also detected in skin explants exposed to PRGF and in experimentally generated in vivo wounds treated with Vivostat PRF&#xae;. Together, our study indicates that the induction of ECM-related factors may contribute to the beneficial wound-healing effects of PRGF-based formulations.

### PMID 32303135 (2020) — Klinicka onkologie : casopis Ceske a Slovenske onkologicke spolecnosti
TITLE: The Use of Indocyanin Green for Peroperative Diagnostic of Chylous Ascites and Autologous Tissue Glue (Vivostat) for the Treatment.
DOI: 10.14735/amko2020145 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Chylous ascites or chyloperitoneum can be caused by peroperative injury of the lymphatic pathways; the lymph is accumulated in the abdominal cavity. The incidence of chylous ascites varies according to the type of surgery and the extent of the lymphadenectomy. The first choice of treatment is a conservative procedure - total parenteral nutrition or a strict low-fat diet. If this fails, a surgical revision is indicated. However, this is often difficult due to postoperatively altered terrain and the chronic presence of pathological secretion in the abdominal cavity. The application of a fat emulsion or indocyanine green (ICG) to the lymphatic drainage area may help identify the lymph source. Nowadays, ICG is used in various clinical indications, e.g. evaluation of liver function, angiography in ophthalmology, assessment of blood supply to the tissues, search for lymph nodes in oncological surgeries. The advantage of ICG lymphography is the possibility of observing the source of the leak in real time directly during surgical revision.
CASE REPORT: A polymorbid 66-year-old patient after radical oncogynaecological surgery with aortopelvic lymphadenectomy was postoperatively complicated by persistent, high-volume chylous ascites, not responding to conservative treatment. Therefore, we performed surgical revision of the abdominal cavity and successful treatment of the leak source using ICG peroperative lymphography and subsequent application of Vivostat autologous tissue glue to this area.
CONCLUSION: High-volume consistent chylous ascites is not a frequent postoperative complication but it has a significant impact on the quality of life, nutritional status of the patient and further patient prognosis. The treatment is strictly individual. The first choice should be a conservative approach. Where that fails, a difficult surgical revision is indicated. Today, however, the surgeon can be helped by modern technologies such as fluorescent navigated surgery or treatment of the source with autologous tissue adhesives. The authors declare they have no potential conflicts of interest concerning drugs, products, or services used in the study. The Editorial Board declares that the manuscript met the ICMJE recommendation for biomedice papers.

### PMID 33070884 (2020) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue as a dural sealant in cranial and spinal surgery. A technical note with a review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2020.07.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: A major complication in cranial and spinal surgery is the post-operative occurrence of a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak. Here we reported a technical note firstly describing the use of Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue as a dural sealant in cranial and spinal neurosurgical procedures. Moreover we carried out a review of the literature. Further to the best of our knowledge this was the first series including patients submitted to different spinal surgeries in whom Hemopatch&#xae; was used as dural sealant. We prospectively collected the data of 22 patients. In all procedures, fibrin glue was applied after Hemopatch&#xae;. The mean age was 59.68&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;10.79&#xa0;years and the mean follow-up (FU) was 3.63&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;1.46&#xa0;months, respectively. Overall, Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue was used in 8 cranial procedures (36.36%; all were retrosigmoid craniotomies) and 14 spinal procedures (63.64%). 9/14 spinal cases (64.28%) were incidental durotomies during a spinal decompression procedure. No CSF leak, no postoperative infection, no adverse reaction were observed during the FU in all cases. The literature search revealed only two retrospective series, reporting only patients submitted to cranial surgery for a total of 56 patients and a CSF leak occurring in 3 patients (5.35%). In conclusion, we firstly reported the feasibility and the safety of using Hemopatch&#xae; with fibrin glue as dural sealant in cranial surgery and different spinal procedures. Further larger comparative studies are needed to confirm our initial encouraging results.

### PMID 32201390 (2020) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Two Cases of Late-onset Brain Edema after Craniotomy for Unruptured Intracranial Aneurysms Suspected to be due to an Allergic Reaction to Arachnoid Plasty Material].
DOI: 10.11477/mf.1436204165 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report two rare cases of late-onset brain edema after craniotomy for clipping or coating of unruptured intracranial aneurysms, possibly due to an allergic reaction to topically applied fibrin glue or gelatin sponge used for arachnoid plasty to cover the opened sylvian cistern. Both patients were women in their 60s with an allergic predisposition and both followed a similar clinical course. A slight fever and headache persisted during the postoperative period. Five to six weeks after surgery without complications, MR images showed an extensive T2 prolongated region in the white matter around the operative field, indicative of vasogenic edema, with mass effect and meningeal enhancement around the sylvian fissure that had been covered with gelatin sponge and sprayed fibrin glue. Swelling of the cerebral cortex around the sylvian fissure subjected to arachnoid plasty was also observed. Blood tests showed the absence of an inflammatory reaction and cerebrospinal fluid examination showed lymphocytosis that was considered to be due to an aseptic meningeal reaction or meningitis. Clinical symptoms and imaging findings steadily improved with the administration of steroids and antiallergic agents. Delayed brain edema may occur around the arachnoid plasty area despite an uneventful chronic postoperative period, which could be due to an allergic reaction to locally administered fibrin glue or gelatin sponge. Thus, the application of arachnoid plasty using fibrin glue and gelatin sponge in patients with a predisposition to allergies needs to be carefully considered.

### PMID 30883775 (2019) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Investigation of surgical adhesives for vocal fold wound closure.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.27769 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Surgical adhesives are increasingly used for vocal fold microsurgery to assist wound closure and reduce the risks of scar formation. Currently used vocal fold adhesives such as fibrin glue, however, have thus far not been found to promote wound closure or reduce scarring. The objectives of this study were to investigate the mechanical strength and the cytotoxicity of three commercially available adhesives (Glubran 2, GEM, Viareggio, Italy; BioGlue, CryoLife, Kennesaw, GA; and Tisseel, Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, IL) for vocal fold wound closure.
METHODS: Shear and tension tests were performed on 150 porcine larynges. The cytotoxicity of the adhesives to immortalized human vocal fold fibroblasts was investigated using neutral red uptake assays.
RESULTS: The average shear adhesive strength for Tisseel, BioGlue, and Glubran 2 was 13.86 &#xb1; 5.03 kilopascal (kPa), 40.92 &#xb1; 17.94 kPa, and 68.79 &#xb1; 13.29 kPa, respectively. The tensile adhesive strength for Tisseel, BioGlue, and Glubran 2 was 10.70 &#xb1; 6.42 kPa, 34.27 &#xb1; 12.59 kPa, and 46.67 &#xb1; 12.13 kPa, respectively. The vocal fold cell viabilities in extracts of Tisseel, BioGlue, and Glubran 2 were 99.27%, 43.05%, and 1.79%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: There was a clear tradeoff between adhesive strength and toxicity. The maximum failure strength in shear or tension of the three surgical adhesives ranked from strongest to the weakest was: 1) Glubran 2, 2) BioGlue, and 3) Tisseel. Tisseel was found to be the least toxic of the three adhesives, whereas Glubran 2 was the most toxic.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: NA Laryngoscope, 129:2139-2146, 2019.

### PMID 30600147 (2019) — Asian journal of surgery
TITLE: Mechanical strength of biliary defect closure after topical sealing: Comparison of four sealants in a porcine model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.asjsur.2018.11.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Biliary leakage is a potential complication of liver resection and is still a concern. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of four routinely used sealants in preventing bile leakage under pressure from an induced perforation of the gallbladder in a porcine model.
METHODS: Forty Landrace pigs were randomly assigned to one of five groups. These included a control group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;8) and one group each for the sealants TachoSil&#xae;, TissuCol Duo&#xae;, Coseal&#xae;, and FloSeal&#xae; (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;8 per group). In the control group, the perforation was left unsealed. To evaluate the biliostatic potential of the sealants, we measured the pressure that was needed to induce leakage (mmHg) and the gallbladder volume (cc) at the time of leakage in each group.
RESULTS: A significantly higher mean pressure was required to induce leakage in the sealant groups compared with the control group. However, the biliostatic effects were heterogeneous among the sealant groups. Sealants with the highest to lowest effectiveness were TachoSil, Coseal, TissuCol, and FloSeal. The mean gallbladder volume at the time of leakage also varied between sealant groups.
CONCLUSION: Biliostatic properties are markedly improved by the use of modern sealants compared with using no sealant. However, the advantages and disadvantages of using sealants should be carefully considered in each clinical situation. The effectiveness of the sealants should be evaluated in chronic and clinical studies.

### PMID 31327584 (2019) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Fibrin glue as an adjuvant dural sealant reduces the rate of perioperative complications in posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty: A single center experience in 165 adult Chiari I patients.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2019.07.036 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 31360155 (2019) — Jornal vascular brasileiro
TITLE: Treatment of type 1A endoleak using coil embolization: a case report.
DOI: 10.1590/1677-5449.180130 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In a type 1A endoleak, the endograft is unable to fully seal the proximal aneurysm neck and blood flow leaks between the wall of the aortic neck and the graft material. This article reports a case in which coil embolization was used and presents a literature review (PubMed, LILACS, and SciELO). Searches were run for articles published in the past 5 years using the descriptors "endoleak 1A", "coil embolization," and "treatment". Type 1A endoleak occurs in 1.1% of patients within 30 days of graft placement. Treatment of an endoleak is obligatory and usually consists of sealing the proximal graft neck using stents and balloons to expand the landing zone or to increase the radial force of the graft. Some studies have suggested using embolization techniques with cyanoacrylate, fibrin glue, and Onyx, demonstrating success rates that exceed 97%. However, correction of type 1A endoleak using coil embolization has seldom been described. No endoleak tipo 1A, a endopr&#xf3;tese n&#xe3;o sela completamente o colo do aneurisma proximal, e o fluxo arterial est&#xe1; presente entre a parede do colo a&#xf3;rtico e o material do implante. Este &#xe9; um relato de um caso no qual foi utilizada emboliza&#xe7;&#xe3;o com molas, associado a uma revis&#xe3;o de literatura (PubMed, LILACS e SciELO). Foram pesquisados artigos publicados nos &#xfa;ltimos 5 anos com os descritores &#x201c;endoleak 1A&#x201d;, &#x201c;coil embolization&#x201d; e &#x201c;treatment&#x201d;, combinados de formas aleat&#xf3;rias, sendo encontrados 25 artigos. O tipo 1A ocorre em 1,1% dos pacientes ap&#xf3;s 30 dias do implante. O tratamento consiste em aumentar a veda&#xe7;&#xe3;o do implante proximal, principalmente com o uso de stents e bal&#xf5;es para alargar a zona de aterragem ou aumentar a for&#xe7;a radial do implante. Alguns trabalhos sugerem t&#xe9;cnicas de emboliza&#xe7;&#xe3;o com cianoacrilato, cola de fibrina e uso de Onyx, mostrando taxas de sucesso superiores a 97%. Contudo, a corre&#xe7;&#xe3;o de endoleaks tipo 1A mediante emboliza&#xe7;&#xe3;o com molas &#xe9; pouco descrita.

### PMID 31484004 (2019) — Il Giornale di chirurgia
TITLE: Routinary use of fibrin sealants to prevent prolonged air leak in thoracic surgery: our experience.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Prolonged air leak (PAL) is one of the most common postoperative complications after lung surgery. It is associated with increased significant morbidity, lower quality of life, longer hospital stay and higher hospital costs. Since its great clinical and economic burden, it is important to establish the feasibility and the effectiveness of the routinary preventive use of a fibrin sealant in order to reduce the incidence of prolonged air leaks.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a randomized study on 189 adult patients - 118 men (62.4%) and 71 women (37.6%) aged from 39 to 87 y.o. (mean age 68.3 y.o.) - who underwent lung surgery (lobectomy or bilobectomy) with intraoperatory detection of air leakage, from January 2013 to December 2017, at Department of Thoracic Surgery in "Ospedale Maggiore Carlo Alberto Pizzardi" (Bologna, Italy) and Department of Thoracic Surgery in "Paolo Giaccone" Teaching Hospital (Palermo, Italy). Patients were randomly assigned to the "Glue" arm (90 patients) or the "Control" group (99 patients). We only used stapler or manual suture to achieve aerostasis. In addition, we used a fibrin sealant ("glue") to cover the suture line on patients in the "Glue" arm. The primary endpoints were incidence of prolonged air leaks, days with chest tube and mean hospital stay.
RESULTS: In the "Glue" arm we experienced only 1 prolonged air leak (1.1%), while in the "Control" group there were 8 leaks (8.1%). Patients kept chest tube for average 4.15 days in the "Glue" arm and 4.45 days in the "Control" group. The mean hospital stay was average 7.4 days for the "Glue" arm, while 9.1 days in the "Control" group.
CONCLUSIONS: According to our experience it seems that the routinary preventive use of a fibrin sealant results in a lower incidence of prolonged air leaks, a shorter hospital stay with lower hospital costs, representing a cost-effective, feasible and effective system to decrease morbility and mortality among surgical patients.

### PMID 31143261 (2019) — Asian journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Analysis of the Surgical Technique and Outcome of the Thoracic and Lumbar Intradural Spinal Tumor Excision Using Minimally Invasive Tubular Retractor System.
DOI: 10.4103/ajns.AJNS_254_18 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Conventionally, intradural spinal tumor excision requires longer skin incision, bilateral subperiosteal muscle stripping, and total laminectomy, thereby decreasing the stability of the spine and increasing the morbidity. Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) for intradural spinal tumor excision preserves the posterior supporting structures of the spine in the midline and on the contralateral side and decreases morbidity and achieves the resection of the tumor.
AIMS: The aim is to analyze the surgical technique and outcome of the thoracic and lumbar intradural spinal tumor excision using minimally invasive tubular retractor system.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted in patients admitted with thoracic and lumbar intradural spinal tumors who had undergone tumor excision using minimally invasive tubular retractor system and satisfied the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Intradural tumors involving one or two vertebral levels were included in the study. Intramedullary spinal tumor, intradural tumor extending into intervertebral foramen, and intradural tumor involving more than two vertebral levels were excluded from the study. The study included the data of the 13 patients, who were operated between January 2017 and October 2018. The age and sex of the patients were noted. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging scan and X-ray of the spine were taken in all the patients. The pre- and postoperative data analyzed include pain using visual analog scale (VAS), power using Medical Research Council (MRC) grading, myelopathy using Nurick's grade, sensory changes, and bowel and bladder symptoms. The steps involved in the surgical technique, extent of resection, intraoperative blood loss, duration of surgery, postoperative complications, duration of stay after the surgery, and postoperative X-ray were analyzed.
RESULTS: Out of 13 patients, one case of dorsally placed meningioma was converted to open laminectomy and excision due to nonvisualization of the spinal cord and increased bleeding from the tumor. Hence, data of the remaining 12 patients were analyzed. The histopathology of these cases was meningioma (6), schwannoma (5), and neurenteric cyst (1). There were 5 men and 7 women with age group of 27-70 years (mean: 48 years). There were 8 thoracic and 4 lumbar tumors. The duration of symptoms was 2 days to 72 months (mean: 35 months). Eight cases were predominantly occupying on the right side and 4 cases on the left side within the spinal canal. The skin incision length was 25 mm to 35 mm (mean: 28 mm). We used tubular retractors with diameter ranging from 22 mm to 30 mm (mean: 24 mm). Expandable retractors were used in 9 cases (75%) and nonexpandable in 3 cases (25%). Tubular retractor of company Jayon (India) was used in 5 cases and PITKAR (India) in 7 cases. We have not found any significant difference in the usage of both the systems. The tumor size (craniocaudal) was ranging from 9.5 mm to 38 mm (mean: 19 mm). Intraoperative blood loss was 75-200 ml (mean: 115 ml). Gross total resection was achieved in 8 cases and near-total resection in 4 cases. Dura was sutured primarily in all the cases. The dural closure was done with continuous sutures in 6 (50%) cases and interrupted in 6 (50%) cases. Polypropylene suture was used in 10 cases and polyglactin suture in 2 cases of dural closure. The authors found it easy to suture the dura using 7-0 polypropylene. Fibrin sealant was used in 9 (75%) cases. The duration of the surgery was ranging from 160 min to 390 min (mean: 260 min). Cerebrospinal fluid leak and pseudomeningocele were noted in one case. One patient developed suture site infection. VAS for pain, sensory symptoms, Nurick's grade for myelopathy, and MRC grading for power were improved in all the affected patients. Out of two patients with constipation, one patient improved and the other developed incontinence, which was recovered on follow-up after 2 weeks. Out of the 4 patients with urinary symptoms, 3 were improved. Another patient of preoperative normal micturition developed urinary retention due to exacerbation of benign prostatic hypertrophy. Postoperative X-ray showed preserved spinous process and facet joints in all cases. The duration of the hospital stay was ranging from 2 days to 11 days (mean: 6 days).
CONCLUSION: Anteriorly or laterally placed intradural spinal tumors confined to the spinal canal can be excised safely and effectively using tubular retractor system, with adding the advantages of the MIS surgery. When in doubt, always convert the MIS to open surgery to avoid injury to vital structures.

### PMID 30802563 (2019) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Surgery for a Late Type IIIb Endoleak From a Fabric Tear of an Excluder Stent Graft.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2018.12.101 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 85-year-old male patient, who had undergone endovascular abdominal aortic aneurysm repair (EVAR) using the Gore Excluder stent graft 10 years ago, was referred for intermittent abdominal pain. He also received coil embolization of the lumbar arteries for a persistent type II endoleak, resulting in continued aneurysmal dilation at 4, 6, and 8&#xa0;years after the EVAR. The maximum size of the aneurysm sac was dilated from the initial size of 49&#xa0;mm&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;55&#xa0;mm to 78&#xa0;mm&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;90&#xa0;mm, and the contrast medium was observed around the proximal portion of the stent graft, suggesting the presence of a type Ia or II endoleak. Because the definite cause of the dilation was unclear and adequate proximal landing zone was not available to deploy an aortic cuff, emergent laparotomy was indicated to treat this symptomatic aneurysm dilation. A type IIIb endoleak due to fabric disruption of the main body was diagnosed, and the bleeding was controlled using a fibrin sealant patch. To reinforce the hemostasis site from the inside of the stent graft, a 28&#xa0;mm&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;3-cm Excluder aortic cuff was deployed inside the main trunk next day. At 1-year follow-up, his condition was stable without evidence of reexpansion of the aneurysmal sac.

### PMID 30777688 (2019) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Long-term outcome of sac filling with fibrin sealant after endovascular aneurysm repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm with challenging aortic neck anatomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2018.10.113 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: A retrospective single-center study is reported here to assess the safety and long-term effectiveness of applying a fibrin sealant (FS) sac-filling strategy to eliminate type IA endoleak (TIAE) after endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) of abdominal aortic aneurysm.
METHODS: Characteristics of abdominal aortic aneurysm patients who had challenging proximal aortic neck anatomy (short or angulated) and underwent FS sac filling to resolve TIAE after traditional EVAR in Changhai Hospital between December 2006 and July 2010 were collected and reviewed. Intrasac pressure was measured with a preloaded catheter before and after FS filling to observe the immediate curative effect. The 7- to 10-year long-term effect was evaluated on the basis of the occurrence of endoleak, maximum aneurysm diameter, all-cause mortality, and other severe complications by annual aortic computed tomography angiography check.
RESULTS: There were 107 patients with short (&#x2264;15&#xa0;mm; 83/107 [77.6%]) or angulated (&gt;60 degrees; 27/107 [25.2%]) aneurysm neck who underwent FS sac filling. The mean age of the patients was 71.1&#xa0;&#xb1; 12.1&#xa0;years (68 male patients). Of the 107 endoleaks, 106 (106/107 [99.1%]) were resolved, and 3 (3/107 [2.8%]) patients died in the perioperative period. Intrasac systolic, diastolic, mean, and pulse pressures decreased significantly in the treated cases (systolic pressure, 114.1&#xa0;&#xb1; 16.7&#xa0;mm Hg vs 59.5&#xa0;&#xb1; 20.4&#xa0;mm Hg; diastolic pressure, 65.0&#xa0;&#xb1; 10.4&#xa0;mm Hg vs 51.4&#xa0;&#xb1; 18.2&#xa0;mm Hg; mean pressure, 81.3&#xa0;&#xb1; 11.4&#xa0;mm Hg vs 54.1&#xa0;&#xb1; 18.8&#xa0;mm Hg; pulse pressure, 49.1&#xa0;&#xb1; 12.8&#xa0;mm Hg vs 8.2&#xa0;&#xb1; 5.2&#xa0;mm Hg; P&#xa0;&lt; .01). During a median follow-up period of 89.1&#xa0;months, the mean maximum aneurysm diameter became significantly smaller than that observed before the operation (53.23&#xa0;&#xb1; 10.9&#xa0;mm vs 59.86&#xa0;&#xb1; 11.77&#xa0;mm). The postoperative maximum aneurysm diameter decreased in 76 patients and was stable in 22 patients. One patient with aneurysm enlargement was transferred to open surgery because of a type IV endoleak, and another patient with no blood flow into the aneurysm sac observed by computed tomography angiography was closely followed up. Four patients received repeated endovascular treatment after the occurrence of type IB endoleak and aneurysm enlargement. After a median follow-up of 89.1&#xa0;months, the cumulative survival rate was 90.7%, 80.4%, 72.0%, 58.9%, and 51.4% after 1&#xa0;year, 3&#xa0;years, 6&#xa0;years, 8&#xa0;years, and 10&#xa0;years after the operation, respectively. There was no recurrent type I endoleak, distal embolization, migration, kinking, or malfunction after FS injections during the perioperative period and follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: FS sac filling combined with intrasac pressure measurement is a simple and effective treatment method to eliminate TIAE after EVAR, especially for patients with challenging proximal neck anatomy. This method could expand the current indications of EVAR.

### PMID 30733866 (2019) — Respirology case reports
TITLE: Management of recurrent haemoptysis in malignancy with combined TISSEEL and intrabronchial valves.
DOI: 10.1002/rcr2.406 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Management of recurrent haemoptysis poses a difficult clinical scenario. TISSEEL (Baxter Healthcare Corporation Deerfield, IL, USA) is a fibrin sealant often used in surgery to aid control of bleeding. However, when endoscopic TISSEEL is used independently, migration, dislodgement, or even expectoration of the fibrin clot is a common complication that may lead to recurrence of haemoptysis. Here we describe two patients with recurrent haemoptysis in the context of malignancy who underwent bronchoscopy, during which they were managed with application of topical TISSEEL to the bleeding area, followed by deployment of an intrabronchial valve, followed by a further application of TISSEEL over the valve. The combination of TISSEEL and intrabronchial valve appeared to control haemoptysis and was resistant to expectoration or migration in these two cases. Thus, this combination may provide a safe and effective therapeutic option for the control of bronchial bleeding secondary to malignancy.

### PMID 30660344 (2019) — Gynecologic oncology
TITLE: The application of fibrin sealant for the prevention of lymphocele after lymphadenectomy in patients with gynecological malignancies: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2019.01.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The aim of the present study was to evaluate the correlation between the use of fibrin-collagen sealants on lymph node dissection areas and formation of lymphocele after lymphadenectomy in patients with gynecological malignancies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic search of 5 electronic databases for articles published up to November 2018 was performed. All randomized controlled clinical trials (RCTs) which reported outcomes after application of fibrin collagen agents in patients who underwent lymphadenectomy for gynecological malignancies, were finally included in the present meta-analysis. Statistical meta-analysis was performed using the RevMan 5.3 software.
RESULTS: A total of 6 RCTs which recruited 481 patients were included in the present study. Meta-analysis revealed significantly decreased total amount of drained fluid and of mean duration of drainage in fibrin sealant group when compared to control, (187 patients MD -86.40&#x202f;ml 95% CI -100.2 to -72.60 p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.00001 and 113 patients MD -1.00&#x202f;days 95% CI -1.13 to -0,87 p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.00001, respectively). No difference in overall incidence of lymphocele and in the incidence of symptomatic ones among the two groups was observed (592 cases OR 0.61 95% CI 0.36 to 1.05 p&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.08, and 444 cases OR 0.59 95% CI 0.26 to 1.35 p&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.22, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The present meta-analysis supports the safety of the use of fibrin sealants in women undergoing pelvic and/or para-aortic lymphadenectomy due to gynecologic cancer but its benefit remains uncertain. It was found effective in reducing the duration and volume of drainage, but it was not associated with difference in the incidence of lymphocele. Further studies are required to confirm our conclusion and broaden our knowledge about its impact on other parameters.

### PMID 30648542 (2019) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Novel Alaska Pollock Gelatin Sealant Shows High Adhesive Quality and Conformability.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.11.074 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Air leakage still remains a major problem in lung resection despite the introduction of surgical sealants. We have developed a novel sealant based on hydrophobically modified Alaska pollock-derived gelatin (ApGltn), which showed high adhesive quality in&#xa0;vitro. In this study, we evaluated the adhesive quality and conformability of our ApGltn sealant compared with a fibrin sealant.
METHODS: The adhesive quality of the sealants was evaluated using excised porcine lungs with ventilation. Pleural defects were created, to which the ApGltn sealant or fibrin sealant was applied. Pressure resistance was assessed using a stepwise increase of airway pressure. Conformability was evaluated by measuring the area of the sealant for its maximum conformity on the gradually inflated lung surface.
RESULTS: Leak and burst pressures of the ApGltn sealant were significantly higher than those of the fibrin sealant (47.1 &#xb1; 10.5 cm H2O and 52.3 &#xb1; 9.4 cm H2O versus 33.9 &#xb1; 6.0 cm H2O and 37.5 &#xb1; 5.9 cm H2O, respectively). Maximum expansion areas of the ApGltn sealant and fibrin sealant were 2652.4 &#xb1; 324.6 mm2 and 1276.6 &#xb1; 323.5 mm2, respectively. The ApGltn sealant also showed higher adhesive quality and conformability compared with the fibrin sealant. Histological examination confirmed that the ApGltn sealant showed tight adhesion to the pleural surface, while a gap was observed with the fibrin sealant.
CONCLUSIONS: The ApGltn sealant showed higher adhesive quality and conformability than the fibrin sealant in an excised porcine lung model. We expect that, in the future, the ApGltn sealant will be used for lung resections in clinical settings.

### PMID 30644000 (2019) — Surgical case reports
TITLE: A successful surgical repair of intraoperative pneumothorax and the diffuse dissection of visceral pleura during liver transplantation surgery via trans-diaphragmatic approach.
DOI: 10.1186/s40792-019-0568-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Pneumothorax during surgery under general anesthesia is a life-threatening situation for the patient because it can progress easily to the tension pneumothorax due to positive pressure ventilation unless appropriate treatments such as inserting a drainage tube in the thoracic cavity are initiated. The authors experienced a case of intraoperative pneumothorax and the diffuse dissection of visceral pleura during liver transplantation surgery, and achieved successful repair by a trans-diaphragmatic approach without changing patient's body position.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 66-year-old male with multiple liver and renal cysts caused by autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) was admitted to the authors' hospital for treating the infection of the liver cysts. The infection was unable to be controlled by conservative treatments. Therefore, the patient was planned to undergo living-donor liver transplantation. Intraoperatively, the liver was found to swell markedly and to firmly adhere to the right diaphragm. After the extraction of the liver, because the right diaphragm swelled markedly, pneumothorax was suspected. Chest tube was inserted immediately, and the small incision was made in the right diaphragm. Thoracoscopic observation revealed that (1) the visceral pleura of the bottom of the right lung widely expanded like a giant cyst due to the dissection from the lung parenchyma and (2) a large air leakage from a pin hole appeared in the dissected pleura. After the completion of the liver transplantation, the thoracoscopic leakage-closing operation was performed through the right diaphragm incision. Because the dissection of visceral pleura was too wide to perform plication or cystectomy by a stapler or sutures, the dissected pleura was opened, and absorbable fibrin sealant patches and fibrin glue were put or injected between the lung parenchyma and the pleura. Although, after being observed postoperatively, prolonged minor air leakage disappeared by a conservative drainage treatment, and the cyst on the bottom of the right lung disappeared on chest computed tomography (CT).
CONCLUSIONS: Although intraoperative pneumothorax and broad dissection of visceral pleura during laparotomy is a complicated situation, the authors successfully repaired air leakage via a trans-diaphragmatic approach without changing the patient's body position.

### PMID 30527497 (2019) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Autologous Activated Fibrin Sealant for the Esophageal Anastomosis: A Feasibility Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2018.08.049 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Esophageal cancer is surgically treated by means of an esophagectomy. However, esophagectomies are associated with high morbidity rates with dehiscence of the anastomosis occurring in 19% of these procedures in the Netherlands. Application of a fibrin sealant may improve mechanical strength of the anastomosis. The aim of this study was to determine the technical feasibility of the application of an autologous fibrin sealant by aerosolized spraying on esophageal anastomoses.
METHODS: This study was designed as a single-center feasibility study. Patients undergoing elective minimal invasive esophageal surgery with the creation of a thoracic or a cervical anastomosis were eligible. Fibrin sealant (Vivostat) was applied to the anastomosis intraoperatively. Feasibility was measured using a nine-item checklist, designed for intraoperative application.
RESULTS: In total, fifteen patients, between the ages of 43-79&#xa0;y, were included in this study. One procedure scored eight out of nine points on the feasibility checklist, so application was considered as unsuccessful. The other fourteen procedures obtained a 100% score and were documented as successful procedures. Together, this led to a success rate of 93%. Grade III anastomotic leakage occurred in one of the fifteen patients (6.7%).
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that application of fibrin sealant on esophageal anastomoses is technically feasible and safe. Future studies may investigate the possible protective effects of fibrin sealant application on the development of anastomotic leakage. NCT03251040.

### PMID 30296475 (2019) — Journal of minimally invasive gynecology
TITLE: Efficacy of a Fibrin Sealant (Tissucol Duo) for the Preventionof Lymphocele after Laparoscopic Pelvic Lymphadenectomy:A Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2018.10.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: STUDY OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of Tissucol Duo (Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria) fibrin sealant in decreasing the incidence of lymphocele (LC) after pelvic laparoscopic lymph node dissection using harmonic shears.
DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial (Canadian Task Force classification level I).
SETTING: Tertiary referral and educational center.
PATIENTS: Seventy-four patients randomized to the use of sealant per hemipelvis.
INTERVENTION: Fibrin sealant.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: After bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy a fibrin sealant was used in 1 hemipelvis but not the other, applied in 41 patients (55.4%) to the left and 33 patients (44.6%) to the right hemipelvis. The primary outcome was the incidence of LC after surgery in symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. Imaging (ultrasound, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance) was performed to detect LC at 3, 6, and 12 months after surgery. Overall, 26 patients (35.1%) developed LC, and 4 were symptomatic (5.4%). Allowing patients to serve as their own treatment group and control, the hemipelvis treated with Tissucol Duo corresponding to the treatment group and that not treated to the control group, LCs were found in 17 (23%) and 14 (19%) cases, respectively, but the difference was not significant. The mean initial LC maximum diameter was 27.1 mm (standard deviaiotn, 35.2), and LCs tended to decrease in size during the first year to a mean of 8.7 mm.
CONCLUSION: Application of Tissucol Duo fibrin sealant after laparoscopic pelvic lymphadenectomy using ultrasonic shears does not decrease the occurrence of symptomatic or asymptomatic LC.

### PMID 29260920 (2019) — Journal of investigative surgery : the official journal of the Academy of Surgical Research
TITLE: Potent Hemostatic Efficacy of a Novel Recombinant Fibrin Sealant Patch (KTF-374) in Rabbit Bleeding Models.
DOI: 10.1080/08941939.2017.1398789 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comment
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Fibrin sealants are used for hemostasis during surgery. Commercially available fibrin sealants are made of materials of human or animal origin. We developed a novel recombinant fibrin sealant patch (KTF-374) that has thin and flexible properties. This study evaluated the hemostatic efficacy of KTF-374 for various patterns of bleeding in rabbits, as compared with that of the existing fibrin-coated collagen fleece (FCCF).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Test hemostats used were KTF-374 and FCCF. Laparotomy was performed under general anesthesia in rabbits. We created wounds in the liver, caudal vena cava, and ventral aorta under anticoagulating conditions with heparin. Test hemostats were then applied to the wound site and compressed manually for 3&#xa0;min. Hemostatic efficacy was evaluated with the success rate of hemostasis at 3&#xa0;min.
RESULTS: In all bleeding models, the success rate of hemostasis was significantly higher with KTF-374 than FCCF. The hemostatic success rate of KTF-374 and FCCF was 100% vs. 25% (p = .007) in the partial hepatectomy model (n = 8); 100% vs. 12.5% (p = .001) in the caudal vena cava resection model (n = 8); and 100% vs. 25% (p = .004) in the ventral aortic puncture model (n = 8). The wound site could clearly be recognized through the patch after the application of KTF-374 but not FCCF.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that KTF-374 possesses more potent hemostatic properties than FCCF for various patterns of bleeding. KTF-374 is a promising hemostat due to its potent efficacy and good visibility of the wound site through the patch.

### PMID 31703078 (2019) — PloS one
TITLE: The clot thickens: Autologous and allogeneic fibrin sealants are mechanically equivalent in an ex vivo model of cartilage repair.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224756 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: Fibrin sealants are commonly used in cartilage repair surgeries to adhere cells or grafts into a cartilage defect. Both autologous and commercial allogeneic fibrin sealants are used in cartilage repair surgeries, yet there are no studies characterizing and comparing the mechanical properties of fibrin sealants from all-autologous sources. The objectives of this study were to investigate (i) the effect of fibrinogen and thrombin sources on failure mechanics of sealants, and (ii) how sealants affect the adhesion of particulated cartilage graft material (BioCartilage) to surrounding cartilage under physiological loading. Allogeneic thrombin and fibrinogen were purchased (Tisseel), and autologous sources were prepared from platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and platelet-poor plasma (PPP) generated from human blood. To compare failure characteristics, sealants were sandwiched between cartilage explants and pulled to failure. The effect of sealant on the adhesion of BioCartilage graft to cartilage was determined by quantifying microscale strains at the graft-cartilage interface using an in vitro cartilage defect model subjected to shear loading at physiological strains well below failure thresholds. Fibrinogen sources were not equivalent; PRP fibrinogen created sealants that were more brittle, failed at lower strains, and resulted in sustained higher strains through the graft-cartilage interface depth compared to PPP and allogeneic sources. PPP clotted slower compared to PRP, suggesting PPP may percolate deeper into the repair to provide more stability through the tissue depth. There was no difference in bulk failure properties or microscale strains at the graft-cartilage interface between the purely autologous sealant (autologous thrombin + PPP fibrinogen) and the commercial allogeneic sealant. Clinical Significance: All-autologous fibrin sealants fabricated with PPP have comparable adhesion strength as commercial allogeneic sealants in vitro, whereas PRP creates an inferior all-autologous sealant that sustains higher strains through the graft-cartilage interface depth.

### PMID 31565606 (2019) — Cureus
TITLE: Repair of Postoperative Cervical Pseudomeningocele with the Use of Bone Morphogenetic Protein.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.5200 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Recurrent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak carries significant morbidity and mortality. A 25-year-old Caucasian male developed a symptomatic pseudomeningocele eight days after surgical resection of a cervical schwannoma. With no improvement after lumbar drain placement, the dural sleeve defect over the left C3 nerve root was repaired with suturable DuraGen&#xae; (Integra LifeSciences, Plainsboro, NJ, USA). Muscle and fat graft were then laid over the repair site and covered by Tisseel&#xae; (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, IL, USA). Recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2) was applied via extra-small sponge laid over the graft. At 15-month clinical and 16-month radiographic follow-up, the patient had complete resolution of symptoms without any evidence of infection, ectopic bone formation, excessive inflammation, neoplasm, or recurrent CSF leak. This case demonstrates the successful use of BMP in the treatment of recurrent symptomatic cervical pseudomeningocele after tumor resection. We believe that the pro-inflammatory effects of rhBMP-2 lead to early scarring of dural defect and resolution of CSF leak.

### PMID 31555363 (2019) — Experimental and therapeutic medicine
TITLE: The potential effects of Ankaferd blood stopper and fibrin sealent on sleeve gastrectomy staple-line healing: An experimental study.
DOI: 10.3892/etm.2019.7842 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Staple-line bleeding and leakage is a life-threatening complication in obese patients following laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy. The aim of this study was to examine the potential effects of Ankaferd blood stopper (ABS) and Fibrin Sealant (FS; Tisseel&#xae;) on sleeve gastrectomy staple-line healing in an experimental animal model. A total of 30 Wistar albino female rats were divided into three groups and were subjected to sleeve gastrectomy with linear stapling. Group A (control group) had nothing administered, Group B was administered FS on the staple-line, and Group C was administered ABS on the staple-line following sleeve gastrectomy. After sacrifice on postoperative day 5, anastomotic burst pressure, tissue hydroxyproline levels and histopathological parameters were measured. The results revealed that group C had the highest mean bursting pressure level. However, the values of this parameter were not found to differ significantly between the groups (P&gt;0.05). Group B and C had a similar hydroxyproline levels but increased compared with group A (P&lt;0.001). Histopathological parameters were similar between the groups, except macrophage scores in group C. In the present experimental study, ABS was demonstrated to improve gastric-sleeved staple-line healing compared with FS. ABS may be used as a novel reinforcement agent in bariatric surgery.

### PMID 31097944 (2019) — Case reports in ophthalmology
TITLE: Intracameral Air and Fibrin Glue for the Management of Late Bleb Leak following Glaucoma Surgery.
DOI: 10.1159/000496383 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To report a case of delayed-onset bleb-associated endophthalmitis (BAE) with bleb leak successfully managed with pars plana vitrectomy, intravitreal antibiotics, intracameral air, and fibrin glue.
PATIENT AND METHODS: A 66-year-old pseudophakic female presented with BAE and bleb leak. A 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy, cultures, and intravitreal antibiotics and steroid injections were performed. The infusion was switched to air filling the anterior chamber and bleb with air. Fibrin glue (Tisseel&#xae;) was applied over the leaking bleb.
RESULTS: BAE and bleb leak resolved with return of visual acuity to 20/25 and a functioning bleb with no recurrence of bleb leak after 1 year of follow-up.
CONCLUSION: The combination of intracameral air and fibrin glue may have a role in the management of bleb leaks.

### PMID 32903290 (2019) — BMC biomedical engineering
TITLE: A biomechanical test model for evaluating osseous and osteochondral tissue adhesives.
DOI: 10.1186/s42490-019-0011-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Currently there are no standard models with which to evaluate the biomechanical performance of calcified tissue adhesives, in vivo. We present, herein, a pre-clinical murine distal femoral bone model for evaluating tissue adhesives intended for use in both osseous and osteochondral tissue reconstruction.
RESULTS: Cylindrical cores (diameter (&#xd8;) 2&#x2009;mm (mm) &#xd7;&#x2009;2&#x2009;mm depth), containing both cancellous and cortical bone, were fractured out from the distal femur and then reattached using one of two tissue adhesives. The adhesiveness of fibrin glue (Tisseeltm), and a novel, biocompatible, calcium phosphate-based tissue adhesive (OsStictm) were evaluated by pullout testing, in which glued cores were extracted and the peak force at failure recorded. The results show that Tisseel weakly bonded the metaphyseal bone cores, while OsStic produced &gt;&#x2009;30-fold higher mean peak forces at failure (7.64 Newtons (N) vs. 0.21&#x2009;N). The failure modes were consistently disparate, with Tisseel failing gradually, while OsStic failed abruptly, as would be expected with a calcium-based material. Imaging of the bone/adhesive interface with microcomputed tomography revealed that, for OsStic, failure occurred more often within cancellous bone (75% of tested samples) rather than at the adhesive interface.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the challenges associated with biomechanical testing in small rodent models the preclinical ex-vivo test model presented herein is both sensitive and accurate. It enabled differences in tissue adhesive strength to be quantified even for very small osseous fragments (&lt;&#xd8;4mm). Importantly, this model can easily be scaled to larger animals and adapted to fracture fragment fixation in human bone. The present model is also compatible with other long-term in vivo evaluation methods (i.e. in vivo imaging, histological analysis, etc.).

### PMID 31005285 (2019) — Gynecologic oncology
TITLE: Obturator nerve regeneration using a genito-femoral graft placed only by fibrin sealant (Tisseel&#xae;).
DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2019.03.248 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 30907976 (2019) — Turkish neurosurgery
TITLE: Identification of Risk Factors for Postoperative Cerebrospinal Fluid Leakage and Comparison of Two Alternative Dural Augmentation Techniques in Posterior Fossa and Spinal Surgeries.
DOI: 10.5137/1019-5149.JTN.24432-18.0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: To investigate comparative efficacy of a novel absorbable adhesive membrane (TissuePatchDuralTM "TPD") and a fibrin glue (Tisseel "T") in reducing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks after posterior fossa and spinal procedures, and also to identify potential risk factors for CSF leakage.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This is a single-center, retrospective cohort study of 123 consecutive posterior fossa (n=77) and spinal (n=46) surgeries. Patients were grouped based on dural sealants used 2-group comparison: TPD (n=56) vs. no-TPD (n=67) and 3-group comparison: T only (n=43), TPD only (n=32) vs TPD+T (n=35).
RESULTS: Mean age was 38.9 &#xb1; 22.2 years (62 males, 61 females). Baseline characteristics were similar between groups. Neither 2-group (TPD: 10.4% vs no-TPD: 8.9%; p=0.778) nor 3-group (T: 9.3% vs TPD: 6.3% vs TPD+T: 14.3%; p=0.539) comparisons revealed a significant difference in postoperative CSF leakage rates. Multivariate analysis showed that diagnosis (non-tumoral vs. tumor) (OR: 5.487; 95% CI: 1.118-26.937; p=0.036); previous surgery (OR: 9.268; 95% CI: 1.911-44.958; p=0.006), postoperative hydrocephalus (OR: 5.456; 95% CI: 1.250-23.821; p=0.024) were independent predictors of postoperative CSF leakage.
CONCLUSION: TissuePatchDural &lt; sup &gt; TM &lt; /sup &gt; is a novel dural sealant patch which can be safely used to reinforce dural closure in posterior fossa and spinal surgeries, and its efficacy is comparable to widely used fibrin glue (Tisseel). Non-tumoral pathologies, previous surgery, and postoperative hydrocephalus appear to be independent risk factors for postoperative CSF leakage.

### PMID 30884383 (2019) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Expanding Hydrophobically Modified Chitosan Foam for Internal Surgical Hemostasis: Safety Evaluation in a Murine Model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2019.01.060 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A novel injectable expanding foam based on hydrophobically modified chitosan (HM-CS) was developed to improve hemostasis during surgeries. HM-CS is an amphiphilic derivative of the natural biopolymer chitosan (CS); HM-CS has been shown to improve the natural hemostatic characteristics of CS, but its internal safety has not been systematically evaluated. The goal of this study was to compare the long-term in&#xa0;vivo safety of HM-CS relative to a commonly used fibrin sealant (FS), TISSEEL (Baxter).
METHODS: Sixty-four Sprague-Dawley rats (275-325 g obtained from Charles River Laboratories) were randomly assigned to control (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;16) or experimental (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;48) groups. Samples of the test materials (HM-CS [n&#xa0;=&#xa0;16], CS [n&#xa0;=&#xa0;16], and FS [n&#xa0;=&#xa0;16]) applied to a nonlethal liver excision (0.4&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;0.3&#xa0;g of the medial lobe) in rats were left inside the abdomen to degrade. Animals were observed daily for signs of morbidity and mortality. Surviving animals were sacrificed at 1 and 6&#xa0;wk; the explanted injury sites were microscopically assessed.
RESULTS: All animals (64/64) survived both the 1- and 6-wk time points without signs of morbidity. Histological examination showed a comparable pattern of degradation for the various test materials. FS remnants and significant adhesions to neighboring tissues were observed at 6&#xa0;wk. Residual CS and HM-CS were observed at the 6&#xa0;wk with fatty deposits at the site of injury. Minimal adhesions were observed for CS and HM-CS.
CONCLUSIONS: The internal safety observed in the HM-CS test group after abdominal implantation indicates that injectable HM-CS expanding foam may be an appropriate internal use hemostatic candidate.

### PMID 30854358 (2019) — Plastic surgery (Oakville, Ont.)
TITLE: A Prospective Randomized Controlled Trial of Aspiration and Fibrin Sealant Use Versus Aspiration Alone in the Treatment of Dorsal Wrist Ganglia.
DOI: 10.1177/2292550318800325 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Multiple treatments for dorsal wrist ganglia (DWG) exist but have high recurrence rates. We investigated whether aspiration followed by injection of Tisseel is more effective at reducing the DWG recurrence rate than aspiration alone.
METHODS: Adults with untreated DWG were randomly assigned to aspiration alone (A) or aspiration followed by Tisseel injection (AT). Patients were measured at baseline, 1, 6, and 12 months. Primary outcome was the rate of recurrence. Secondary outcomes included recurrent ganglion size and maximum pain experienced from the ganglion. Continuous data were compared with Student t tests and Mann-Whitney U tests. Categorical data were compared with &#x3c7;2 tests and Fisher exact tests. Treatment effect was reported as relative risk or mean differences (MD) with 95% confidence intervals.
RESULTS: Seventy-nine patients were randomized to the A (n = 39) or AT (n = 40) group. Twenty-five patients were lost to follow-up. There were no differences in recurrence risk between groups at 1, 6, or 12 months (P &gt; .05). Ganglia were significantly smaller for both groups at 1 month versus baseline (P &lt; .001). The A group demonstrated a significantly larger decrease in size at 1 month versus the AT group (MD = 0.75 cm2, 95% confidence interval: 0.07-1.43, P = .03). Both groups experienced significantly less pain at 1, 6, and 12 months (P &lt; .03), but this was not significantly different between groups.
CONCLUSION: Aspiration and Tisseel injection does not decrease DWG recurrence versus aspiration alone. Both interventions produced a significant decrease in pain. Although aspiration alone carries a high recurrence risk, it may provide sufficient symptomatic relief for patients with DWG.
OBJECTIF: Malgr&#xe9; les nombreux traitements des ganglions de la face dorsale du poignet (GFDP), les taux de r&#xe9;currence sont &#xe9;lev&#xe9;s. Les auteurs ont &#xe9;valu&#xe9; si la ponction suivie d&#x2019;une injection de Tisseel r&#xe9;duisait le taux de r&#xe9;currence de GFDP avec plus d&#x2019;efficacit&#xe9; que la ponction seule.
M&#xc9;THODOLOGIE: Les adultes pr&#xe9;sentant un GFDP non trait&#xe9; ont &#xe9;t&#xe9; r&#xe9;partis au hasard entre la ponction seule (P) et la ponction suivie par une injection de Tisseel (PT). Les chercheurs les ont mesur&#xe9;s au d&#xe9;part, puis au bout de un, six et 12 mois. Le taux de r&#xe9;currence repr&#xe9;sentait le r&#xe9;sultat clinique primaire, et la taille des ganglions r&#xe9;currents et la douleur maximale provoqu&#xe9;e par le ganglion, les r&#xe9;sultats cliniques secondaires. Les chercheurs ont compar&#xe9; les donn&#xe9;es continues avec les tests de Student et les tests Mann-Whitney et les donn&#xe9;es cat&#xe9;gorielles avec les tests du chi carr&#xe9; et les tests exacts de Fisher. Ils ont d&#xe9;clar&#xe9; l&#x2019;effet du traitement sous forme de risque relatif (RR) ou de diff&#xe9;rences moyennes (DM), selon des intervalles de confiance &#xe0; 95 %.
R&#xc9;SULTATS: Au total, les chercheurs ont r&#xe9;parti 79 patients au hasard entre le groupe P (n = 39) ou PT (n = 40). Ils ont perdu 25 patients au suivi. Ils n&#x2019;ont constat&#xe9; aucune diff&#xe9;rence quant au risque de r&#xe9;currence entre les groupes au bout de un, six ou 12 mois (P &gt; .05). Les ganglions &#xe9;taient beaucoup plus petits dans les deux groupes au bout d&#x2019;un mois qu&#x2019;au d&#xe9;part (P &lt; .001). La taille du ganglion avait diminu&#xe9; davantage dans le groupe P que dans le groupe PT au bout d&#x2019;un mois (DM = 0.75 cm2, IC &#xe0; 95 %: 0,07 &#xe0; 1,43, P = .03). Les deux groupes ressentaient beaucoup moins de douleur au bout de un, six et 12 mois (P &lt; .03), mais cette diff&#xe9;rence n&#x2019;&#xe9;tait pas significative entre les groupes.
CONCLUSIONS: La ponction et l&#x2019;injection de Tisseel ne r&#xe9;duisent pas la r&#xe9;currence de GFDP par rapport &#xe0; la ponction seule. Les deux interventions entra&#xee;naient une diminution significative de la douleur. M&#xea;me si la ponction seule s&#x2019;associe &#xe0; un fort risque de r&#xe9;currence, elle peut apporter un soulagement symptomatique suffisant pour les patients ayant un GFDP.

### PMID 30797901 (2019) — Journal of stomatology, oral and maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Intraoperative injection of combined fibrin sealant and methylene blue dye for surgery of branchial cleft cysts: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jormas.2019.02.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Differential diagnosis of a lateral neck mass, especially in paediatric patients, should include branchial cleft cysts (BrCC). It is often difficult to identify and completely resect all cystic components, especially when the lesion becomes infected and/or gigantic. Incomplete excision increases the likelihood of recurrences. We reported a simple technique to facilitate the BrCC resection. Tisseel fibrin glue (FG: Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria) was mixed with methylene blue dye in inverse portion to the cyst size and/or the FG volume before injecting into the cystic lumen. After polymerisation of the dyed glue, the lesion was better visualised and extirpated in toto with the aid of the dye colour and gelatinisation by FG. An up-to-date diagnostic and therapeutic algorithm for BrCC was also presented.

### PMID 30792616 (2019) — Case reports in gastroenterology
TITLE: Successful Endoscopic Management of Double Iatrogenic Perforations Induced by Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography and Computed Tomography-Guided Colon Drainage.
DOI: 10.1159/000495245 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is a high-risk procedure with a significantly high rate of complications, such as pancreatitis, bleeding, perforation, and infection. Pancreatitis is the most common post-ERCP complication with an incidence of approximately 3.5%. Although perforation is a rare complication with an incidence of 0.1-0.6%, it may be associated with a high rate of mortality of 1.0-1.5%. Here, we report a rare case of ERCP-induced double iatrogenic perforations in the duodenum and colon complicated by an intra-abdominal abscess. The post-ERCP perforation was successfully sealed using fibrin glue (Tisseel). The intra-abdominal abscess was treated with a computed tomography-guided pigtail drainage; however, the pigtail spontaneously migrated and perforated the ascending colon. The pigtail was removed, and closure of the colon perforation was successfully achieved with endoscopic clipping. Tisseel spray can be a treatment option for post-ERCP perforations. Careful consideration of procedural complications, early detection of perforations, and prompt treatment can be life-saving.

### PMID 29890349 (2019) — Journal of minimally invasive gynecology
TITLE: Healing after Resection of Colonic Endometriosis and Growth Factor-enriched Agents: An Experimental Rat Model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2018.04.025 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY OBJECTIVE: To examine the potential beneficial effect of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and fibrin sealant (TISSEEL; Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Deerfield, IL) on bowel wound healing after shaving of an experimentally induced endometriotic lesion.
DESIGN: A single-blind, randomized study (Canadian Task Force classification I).
SETTING: A certified animal research facility.
ANIMALS: Thirty female Sprague-Dawley rats.
INTERVENTIONS: Experimental colonic endometriosis was induced by transplanting endometrial tissue to all animals (first surgery). Thirty rats were then randomized to 1 of 3 groups according to treatment; PRP (group 1, n&#x202f;=&#x202f;10), fibrin sealant (group 2, n&#x202f;=&#x202f;10), or no agent (group 3, n&#x202f;=&#x202f;10) was applied after shaving of the endometriotic nodule (second surgery).
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Colonic endometriosis was successfully induced in all subjects. Four days after the second surgery, the animals were euthanized, and microscopic evaluation was performed. The pathologist was blinded to the treatment method. Histopathologic analysis revealed that compared with the control group, collagen disposition was found in a significantly higher expression in both the PRP and fibrin sealant groups (p&#x202f;=&#x202f;.011 and p&#x202f;=&#x202f;.011, respectively). Distortion of the integrity of the colon layers was statistically more pronounced in the control group compared with the fibrin sealant group (p&#x202f;=&#x202f;.033), whereas greater new blood vessel formation was observed in the fibrin sealant group compared with the control (p&#x202f;=&#x202f;.023). No histologic evidence of residual or recurrent disease was detected.
CONCLUSION: Both PRP and fibrin sealant appear to be safe and associated with improved tissue healing during shaving for the excision of colonic endometriosis, attributed to the enhanced collagen disposition, neovascularization, and protection of the integrity of colon layers. Clinical trials are warranted to confirm the feasibility of PRP and fibrin sealant in the clinical setting.

### PMID 31096916 (2019) — BMC cardiovascular disorders
TITLE: Contribution of fibrin glue in the surgery of cyanogenic and non-cyanogenic congenital cardiopathies: retrospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.1186/s12872-019-1102-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative bleeding in cardiovascular surgery is a frequent and complicated situation for the surgical team, and may also be responsible for significant hospital expenditures. Fibrin glue are indicated in surgery to improve hemostasis when conventional techniques such as compression, sutures or electrocoagulation are insufficient. Through this study, we tried to study the contribution of fibrin glue to the improvement of the clinical parameters (volume of postoperative bleeding, length of stay in intensive care, volume of blood transfusion ...) in two populations having undergone cardiac surgery, one in which we used the fibrin glue and one without fibrin glue.
METHODS: This was a retrospective cohort study conducted in the cardiovascular surgery department of our Hospital in Rabat between June 2012 and June 2015. Fibrin glue (Tissucol&#xae; of BAXTER) was used in one group with an haemostatic aim. The pre and post-operative clinical data of the patients were analyzed and compared with data from patients who were operated without the use of fibrin glue because it was not yet available in the hospital. The clinical parameters were collected analyzed using the SPSS 13.0 software.
RESULTS: One hundred ten patients were included in this study. The fibrin glue was used intraoperatively in 55 patients and not used in 55 patients. 43 (39.1%) had cyanogenic diseases and 67 (60.9%) had non-cyanogenic pathologies. The volume of transfused red blood cells was lower in patients in whom we used biological glue (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.005), as well as the number of days spent in intensive care (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.02). However, the difference was not significant between the two groups for other parameters such as bleeding volume per kg, the number of units of fresh frozen plasma and the platelet units count transfused.
CONCLUSIONS: The results we found show that fibrin glue reduces the duration of hospitalization in resuscitation and reduces the number of units of transfused red blood cells to patients after surgery. However, it does not reduce significantly the total postoperative bleeding volume per weight, the number of fresh frozen plasma units or platelets units transfused. The fibrin glue could therefore be of moderate benefit in pediatric cardiac surgery.

### PMID 30931318 (2019) — Frontiers in veterinary science
TITLE: Use of Biologically Active 3D Matrix for Extensive Skin Defect Treatment in Veterinary Practice: Case Report.
DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2019.00076 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Objectives: Large full-thickness skin defects represent a serious veterinary problem. Methods: We have developed novel bioactive 3D-matrixes based on fibrin glue Tissucol (Baxter), containing the combination of the adenoviral constructs with genes vascular endothelial growth factor 165 (VEGF165) and fibroblast growth factor two (FGF2; construct Ad5-VEGF165 + Ad5-FGF2) or multipotent mesenchymal stem cells, genetically modified with these constructs. Results: In vitro studies confirmed the biosynthesis of VEGF165 and FGF2 mRNA in the transduced cells. Ad5-VEGF165 + Ad5-FGF2- transduced multipotent mesenchymal stem cells showed an enhanced capacity to form capillary-like tubes in vitro. Bioactive 3D-matrix application enhanced granulation tissue formation and epithelialization of non-healing, large bite wounds in a dog. Successful wound healing was observed with a positive clinical outcome for the canine patient. This research and application of regenerative gene therapy alongside a novel bioactive 3D-matrix shows promising clinical applications for the future in both dogs and other mammals including humans.

### PMID 31275825 (2019) — Indian journal of otolaryngology and head and neck surgery : official publication of the Association of Otolaryngologists of India
TITLE: Human Fibrin Sealant: Effective Hemostasis in Otolaryngologic Surgeries.
DOI: 10.1007/s12070-017-1055-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In otolaryngologic surgeries, achieving hemostasis is of paramount importance for reducing associated morbidities. Topical hemostatic agents have been studied mainly in endonasal operations. Its use in other surgeries has been minimally reported. In this "real world data" study, we retrospectively evaluated the surgeries between June 2014 and December 2014, where topical hemostatic agent-Evicel&#xae; (Ethicon BioSurgery, US) was used to achieve hemostasis. All the patients were followed till 15&#xa0;day post operation. The data on Evicel&#xae; preparation time, intraoperative blood loss, hemostasis time, length of hospital stay, blood transfusion given, and complications were evaluated. The quality of life was assessed by using discomfort score and it was statistically analyzed for patients underwent surgery for chronic rhinosinusitis and chronic otitis media. The surgical clinical data of 103 patients (63 males and 40 females) were considered for the analysis. In all patients, hemostasis was achieved in less than 1&#xa0;min. The intraoperative blood loss was between 23 and 99&#xa0;ml for all surgeries. No postoperative bleeding was reported and blood transfusion was not required for any patients. The hospital stay was 1-2&#xa0;days. In endonasal surgeries, nasal packing was not required in 36.9% of patients. The discomfort score was statistically improved in patients underwent surgery for chronic rhinosinusits and chronic otitis media (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001). No complications were reported till day 15 postoperatively. Evicel&#xae;, a topical human fibrin sealant found to be effective in achieving hemostasis and for better clinical outcome in various otolaryngologic surgical procedures.

### PMID 30671601 (2019) — International orthopaedics
TITLE: Use of a fibrin sealant within a blood-saving protocol in patients undergoing revision hip arthroplasty: effects on post-operative blood transfusion and healthcare-related cost analysis.
DOI: 10.1007/s00264-019-04291-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Blood transfusion and blood management are important aspects in orthopaedic surgery. Strategies include intra-operative and post-operative blood salvage and even the use of fibrin sealant in selected case. Objectives of the study were (1) to compare the total number of transfusions and the length of hospital stay in patients undergoing complete revision hip arthroplasty (RHA) with and without the use of a fibrin sealant (EVICEL&#xae;) and (2) to evaluate the possible role in cost savings of EVICEL&#xae; in association with the blood-saving protocol.
METHODS: Retrospective observational study evaluating patients undergoing complete RHA (stem&#x2009;+&#x2009;cup) with a blood-saving protocol with (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;50) and without EVICEL&#xae; (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;60). The outcome measures were: number of patients transfused (allogeneic red blood cells-RBC-and plasma), amount of blood/plasma transfusions, quantity of re-infused recycled blood, and length of hospital stay. An economic model was developed to assess the differences in costs between the two groups.
RESULTS: EVICEL&#xae; reduced the number of transfused red blood cells and plasma (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001), and the hospital stay (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01) compared to control group. EVICEL&#xae; can induce a reduction in resource consumption with an average cost-savings of &#x20ac;1.676 per patient.
CONCLUSION: EVICEL&#xae; may be effective in reducing red blood cells and plasma transfusion as well as hospital stay. The inclusion of EVICEL&#xae; in a blood-saving protocol seems to produce clinical efficacy and cost savings.

### PMID 31338929 (2019) — The breast journal
TITLE: Increasing the incidence of drain-free day-case mastectomies with the use of a fibrin tissue sealant; data from a single surgical center in the United Kingdom.
DOI: 10.1111/tbj.13419 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Day-case mastectomy surgery provides benefits to both patients and hospitals. Key barriers are the use of a drain and the risk of postoperative seroma formation. We introduced the use of a tissue sealant (Artiss) into the surgical site (post-mastectomy without immediate reconstruction and postaxillary clearance) and evaluated its effect on our practice, particularly day-case rates. A prospective audit of 177 patients who underwent a simple mastectomy with or without axillary surgery, or axillary node clearance with or without breast-conserving surgery was conducted at a single surgical center in the UK between November&#xa0;2015 and November&#xa0;2016. Artiss was used in all operations and, where appropriate, the drain was omitted to facilitate day-case surgery. The clinical outcomes were compared between patients undergoing different operations and duration of hospital stay. There was no statistically significant difference between day-case patients and inpatients in seroma aspiration rates (24.5% and 21.7%, respectively; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.381) or other complications (22.4% and 16.1%, respectively; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.106). The day-case mastectomy rate increased from 3.9% in the first quarter to 45.5% in the final quarter, which was a significant increase reaching well beyond the national target. The use of Artiss enabled us to increase the drain-free day-case surgery rates over a 1-year period, exceeding the 30% target recommended by the British Association of Day Surgery. We did not observe any increase in patient morbidity, and the change was cost-effective. We have now implemented the routine use of Artiss in women undergoing simple mastectomy with or without axillary surgery and stand-alone axillary node clearances as part of enhanced recovery clinical pathways.

### PMID 31166072 (2019) — Clinical otolaryngology : official journal of ENT-UK ; official journal of Netherlands Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology &amp; Cervico-Facial Surgery
TITLE: The use of ARTISS&#x2122; in performing parotidectomies as day case surgery: A single-centre review of 31 cases.
DOI: 10.1111/coa.13386 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 31139923 (2019) — European archives of oto-rhino-laryngology : official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS) : affiliated with the German Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
TITLE: Drain-free parotidectomy: a pilot study using ARTISS fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1007/s00405-019-05449-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Parotidectomy is the definitive procedure for diagnosis and treatment of most parotid masses but, due to the risk of haematoma and seroma formation, has traditionally included a drain. The drain itself comes with its own risks and, in most hospitals, the need for overnight admission, which has significant cost implications (Mallon et al. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 95(4):258-262; 2013). Fibrin glue, with its haemostatic and adhesive properties, reduces the risk of collection or haematoma and therefore may negate the need for a drain. This is the first study to look at the use of ARTISS as an alternative to drains in parotidectomy.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective study of all the patients who underwent a partial parotidectomy over a 4-year period from 2014 until 2018 under the same senior surgeon. Patients were divided into those that had a drain and those that had ARTISS. Their operative record, inpatient notes and clinic letters were reviewed to record information regarding length of stay, histology, complications and recurrence.
RESULTS: A total of 34 patients were identified; 17 ARTISS and 17 drain patients. We showed that the mean length of stay improved significantly from 1.6&#xa0;days with the drain to 0.5&#xa0;days with ARTISS (Fig.&#xa0;1) but without a difference in complication rate (Fig.&#xa0;2), which was 5/17 (29%) in each group.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, parotidectomy can be undertaken safely as a day-case procedure with the application of ARTISS. This new approach to parotid surgery not only offers less morbidity for patients but also positive financial revenue for public health institutions.

### PMID 30834105 (2019) — Journal of surgical case reports
TITLE: Low thrombin tissue sealant ARTISS (Baxter), in complex primary closure after Fournier's gangrene.
DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjy344 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The following case report describes the reconstruction of Fournier's gangrene (FG) which failed initial conventional primary closure due to issues with wound edge friability, large dead spaces, and significant tension and shearing forces created by excess adipose tissue in the patient's groin. In the first reported case that could be found in the literature ARTISS (Baxter), a low thrombin concentration fibrin sealant was used as a tissue adhesive to close the large post FG debridement wound flaps and ensure enough working time to allow for precise wound edge approximation. Employing Artiss in the closure of the large wound allowed for successful healing where simple primary closure had failed, aided an expedient recovery and reduced post reconstructive morbidity.

### PMID 30515986 (2019) — Journal of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine
TITLE: Fibrin glue displays promising in vitro characteristics as a potential carrier of adipose progenitor cells for tissue regeneration.
DOI: 10.1002/term.2778 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Adipose-derived multipotent stem/progenitor cells (ASPCs) were shown to be ideal candidates for cell-based regenerative therapies. Yet, despite their huge potential, successful clinical applications are still rare. It was suggested that the efficacy of ASPCs at the recipient site depends on the vehicle of cell delivery. In this study, for preparation of a murine critical-size nerve defect model, we assessed the commercially available fibrin gel (ARTISS) as a potential cell carrier. In a thorough in vitro analysis, we investigated cell-fibrin interactions and analyzed the distribution and the long-term behavior of ASPCs cultivated in fibrin gel under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. ASPCs attached to the surface of a thin fibrin layer (two-dimensional condition) and spread with the abundant formation of actin stress fibers. Cells cultured within a fibrin matrix (three-dimensional condition) displayed a uniform distribution and formed interconnected networks while exhibiting strong cell-matrix interactions. Using time-lapse analysis, cells were found to migrate out of the gel and subsequently proliferated robustly both under hypoxic and normoxic conditions. During 14&#xa0;days of culture in fibrin gel, ASPCs showed high viability, metabolic, and remodeling activities. At the end of the culture period, the fibrin matrix was degraded entirely accompanied by an upregulation of matrix metalloproteinases. In conclusion, fibrin gel stands out as a valuable biomaterial for delivering vital and active cells to damaged tissues. As a direct proof, ASPCs carried in a fibrin matrix will be evaluated in a murine critically sized peripheral nerve repair model.

### PMID 31658792 (2019) — Archives of craniofacial surgery
TITLE: Wound healing effect of regenerated oxidized cellulose versus fibrin sealant patch: An in vivo study.
DOI: 10.7181/acfs.2019.00472 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical hemostatic agents are used when ligation, electrocauterization, or other conventional hemostatic methods are impractical. Because a hemostatic agent is a foreign body, it can cause foreign body reactions, inflammation, and infections that can interfere with the wound healing process. Therefore, we should select hemostatic agents after considering their effects on wound healing. Here, we compared the effects of hemostatic agents on wound healing in a rectus abdominis muscle defect in rats.
METHODS: Twelve Sprague Dawley rats were subjected to creation of a 6 &#xd7; 6 mm defect in the rectus abdominis muscle and divided into four groups: control group; group A, Tachosil fibrin sealant patch; group B, Surgicel Fibrillar oxidized regenerated cellulose; and group C, Surgicel Snow oxidized regenerated cellulose. For the histologic analysis, biopsies were performed on the 3rd, 7th, and 27th days.
RESULTS: The foreign body reaction was the weakest in group A and most significant in group C. The inflammatory cell infiltration was the weakest in group A and similar in groups B and C. Muscle regeneration differed among periods. The rats in group A were the most active initially, while those in group C showed prolonged activity.
CONCLUSION: Tachosil and Surgicel administration increased inflammation via foreign body reactions, but the overall wound healing process was not significantly affected. The increased inflammation in the Surgicel groups was due to a low pH. We recommend using Tachosil, because it results in less intense foreign body reactions than Surgicel and faster wound healing due to the fibrin action.

### PMID 31502003 (2019) — World journal of surgery
TITLE: The Effect of Fibrinogen/Thrombin-Coated Collagen Patch (TachoSil&#xae;) Application in Pancreaticojejunostomy for Prevention of Pancreatic Fistula After Pancreaticoduodenectomy: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s00268-019-05172-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017429">Clinical Trial, Phase IV, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants and topical glue have been studied to reduce the incidence of postoperative pancreatic fistulas (POPF) after pancreatico-enteric anastomosis, but a definitive innovation is still needed. We aim to evaluate the effectiveness of fibrin sealant patch applied to pancreatico-enteric anastomosis to reduce postoperative complications, including POPF.
METHODS: This study was a single-center, prospective, randomized, phase IV trial involving three pancreaticobiliary surgeons. The primary outcome was POPF; secondary outcomes included complications, drain removal days, hospital stay, readmission rate, and cost. Risk factors for POPF were identified by logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 124 patients were enrolled. Biochemical leakage (BL) or POPF occurred in 16 patients (25.8%) in the intervention group and 23 patients (37.1%) in the control group (no statistical significance). Clinically relevant POPF occurred in 4 patients (6.5%) in both the intervention and control groups (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;1.000). Hospital stay (11.6&#xa0;days vs. 12.1&#xa0;days, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.585) and drain removal days (5.7&#xa0;days vs. 5.3&#xa0;days, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.281) were not statistically different between two groups. Complication rates were not different between the two groups (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.506); nor were readmission rates (12.9% vs. 11.3%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;1.000) or cost ($13,549 vs. $15,038, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.103). In multivariable analysis, age and soft pancreas texture were independent risk factors for BL or POPF in this study. Applying fibrin sealant patch is not a negative risk factor, but the p value may indicate a likelihood of reducing the incidence of BL (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.084).
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant patches after pancreaticojejunostomy did not reduce the incidence of POPF or other postoperative complications. This study was registered at clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03269955).

### PMID 31427638 (2019) — Scientific reports
TITLE: Postoperative bleeding and biliary leak after liver resection: A cohort study between two different fibrin sealant patches.
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-019-48529-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Different topical products have been tested in liver resection to get a control of bleeding. This study compares the effectiveness and complications between two haemostatic agents Tachosil versus Hemopatch. A cohort study including patients who underwent liver resection since November 2014 to April 2016 was conducted. The study was performed in a single institution. Demographic variables, intraoperative characteristics and postoperative complications were analysed. A total of 92 patients (50 in Tachosil group and 42 in Hemopatch group) were included. No differences were found in patients who required intraoperative (Tachosil 6 (12%) vs Hemopatch 2 (4.8%); p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.28) and postoperative (Tachosil 4 (8%) vs Hemopatch 3 (7.1%); p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.87) blood transfusion. There were no differences in length of hospital stay (Tachosil 7.02&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;4.1 days vs Hemopatch 7.63&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.1; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.67). Overall postoperative complications were similar between both patches (Tachosil 21 (42%) vs Hemopatch 14 (33%); p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.48). No differences were found in specific complications, however Hemopatch showed a higher incidence of intraabdominal abscess 5 (11.9%) and vs 0 (0%) p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01.In this study no differences have been found between Hemopatch and Tachosil in the effectiveness and overall postoperative complication after liver resection, although Hemopatch shows a higher incidence of intraabdominal abscess. Further studies are necessary to confirm these findings.

### PMID 31118780 (2019) — Cancer management and research
TITLE: Fibrin-thrombin sealant does not reduce lymphocele formation in patients with inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy for vulvar cancer.
DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S197143 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Purpose: Inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy (IFLD) is associated with very high morbidity. Fibrin sealant patches are used in various surgical procedures to prevent hematomas and lymphoceles. Here, we report a single-institution experience of fibrin sealants after IFLD in vulvar cancer and give an overview of the current literature. Patients and methods: We retrospectively analyzed outcome data on vulvar cancer patients who underwent bilateral IFLD between November 2014 and June 2016 at the University Hospital Basel. A fibrin sealant patch (Tachosil&#xae;) was placed in one groin only. Postsurgical fluid collection and complications were compared between both groins; time courses of lymphocele formation were analyzed using a linear mixed-effects regression model. Results: Postsurgical outcome of 11 consecutive patients with bilateral IFLD for vulvar cancer was assessed for a median follow-up of 32 days (range 12-77). Significantly larger lymphoceles were detected over time in the groin with the fibrin sealant patch (median 20 mL vs 5 mL without patch, p=0.002), and more punctures for symptomatic lymphocele were required on this side. The infection rate did not differ between sides. Conclusion: Fibrin sealant patches should not routinely be used for prevention of lymphoceles after IFLD for vulvar cancer. They do not seem to reduce lymph collection, the need for puncture or the infection risk after lymphadenectomy in our experience and according to a general literature review.

### PMID 30859297 (2019) — Archives of gynecology and obstetrics
TITLE: Efficacy of a collagen-fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil&#xae;) as adjuvant treatment in the inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy for vulvar cancer: a double-blind randomized-controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s00404-019-05113-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the effect of a collagen-fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil&#xae;) in preventing postoperative complications after inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy for vulvar cancer.
METHODS: Double-blind randomized-controlled trial on consecutive patients undergoing bilateral inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy for vulvar cancer. Intraoperatively, inguinofemoral areas were randomized: one was treated with TachoSil&#xae;, while the contralateral had standard closure without collagen-fibrin sealant patch. Surgical outcomes, amount of drainage volume, duration of drain placement, and any postoperative complication (vulvar wound dehiscence, inguinal wound dehiscence, cellulitis, lymphangitis, lymphoceles, and hematoma) were recorded. Leg measurements were taken preoperatively and during postoperative follow-up until 6&#xa0;months to evaluate lymphedema.
RESULTS: A total of 19 patients were enrolled and 38 inguinofemoral dissections were performed. There was no significant difference between the investigational and control arm in the amount of drainage volume (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.976), and duration of drain placement (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.793). The postoperative complications, excluding lymphedema, were 10/19 (53%) in investigational arm and 9/19 (47%) in control arm (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.74). At the end of follow-up, the prevalence of grade 1 lymphedema was 44.4% and 50% in investigational and control arm, respectively (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.744); grade 2 and 3 lymphedema had a prevalence of 33.3% in both arms (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;1).
CONCLUSION: Application of TachoSil&#xae; does not seem to improve postoperative lymphorrhagia nor to reduce the incidence of postoperative complications in patients undergoing inguinofemoral lymphadenectomy for vulvar cancer. Considering this point, it would be useful to identify additional strategies in inguinofemoral dissection for the prevention of these complications.

### PMID 30414810 (2019) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Results of TachoSil&#xae; associated with fibrin glue as dural sealant in a series of patients with spinal intradural tumors surgery. Technical note with a review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2018.10.138 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: A major problem of surgery for intradural spinal tumors (IST) is the occurrence in the post-operative period of a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak. To the best of our knowledge, here we report on the largest series of IST patients in whom the TachoSil&#xae; associated to fibrin glue was used as dural sealant in this kind of surgery. Moreover, we extensively reviewed the literature reporting the results of TachoSil&#xae; in spine surgery. The data of 35 consecutive surgically treated IST patients were reviewed. In all cases TachoSil&#xae; associated with fibrin glue was used as dural sealant. Mean age was 58.14&#x202f;&#xb1;&#x202f;15.56&#x202f;years and mean follow-up (FU) was 23.20&#x202f;&#xb1;&#x202f;9.76&#x202f;months. The Modified McCormick Scale (MMS) was used to assess the functional status of patients pre-operatively and at latest FU. All article dealing with the use of TachoSil&#xae; in spine surgery were included in the literature review. A CSF collection (treated conservatively with needle aspiration and bed rest with no consequence) was observed only in 1 out of 35 cases. No wound infection nor adverse reaction to the TachoSil&#xae; occurred during the FU. At latest FU we observed an improvement of MMS grade in 23 patients (65.71%) and a stable functional status in 12 cases (34.28%). According to our experience and the literature review using the TachoSil&#xae; after dural closure is safe and effective in IST surgery. Better standardized studies are needed to establish the usefulness of TachoSil&#xae; for incidental dural tear in degenerative spine surgery.

### PMID 31143266 (2019) — Asian journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Bespoke GelFoam Wafers: A Practical and Inexpensive Alternative to Oxycel for Hemostasis during Neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.4103/ajns.AJNS_275_18 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Since the beginning of neurosurgery, intraoperative parenchymal bleeding has been a major problem. Achievement of hemostasis is the endpoint of any cranial or spinal neurosurgical exercise and is mandatory to avoid postoperative hematomas which mar the ultimate outcome of the surgery. Several biosurgical agents are used to achieve this goal. Agents such as oxidized cellulose, gelatin foam, fibrillar collagen, fibrin sealants, and antifibrinolytic agents are used, each having a different mechanism of action.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The authors describe a simple technique for substituting oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel) for lining the surgical cavities after excising brain lesions, with customized gelfoam wafers fashioned on the surgical trolley. This has been used in over 8000 cases with excellent hemostatic results over the last 25 years. No complications are noted with use of these wafers.
RESULTS: In a randomized trial done by us, similar hemostatic effect was found between oxycel and the gelfoam wafers described by us with satisfactory outcomes of surgeries. No previous use of such custom-fashioned wafers has been described for neurosurgical hemostasis in the literature.

### PMID 32042763 (2019) — Annals of translational medicine
TITLE: Endoscope-assisted mediastinal drainage therapy for anastomosis leakage after esophagectomy: a retrospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.21037/atm.2019.11.103 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Anastomosis leakage after esophagectomy is a major threat which leads to many subsequent complications even mortality. But current diagnosis and treatment methods are inefficient. This retrospective study aims to evaluate the utilization of endoscope-assisted mediastinal drainage therapy in treatment for anastomosis leakage after esophagectomy.
METHODS: Between January 2014 and June 2018, 51 patients were confirmed anastomosis leakage using gastroscopy. Of them, 23 patients were treated with endoscope-assisted mediastinal drainage therapy (drainage group); and the other 28 patients received endoscope-assisted biomedical fibrin glue occlusion (occlusion group). Short-term clinical outcomes were examined. Factors related to length of postoperative hospitalization (LPH) was analyzed.
RESULTS: Endoscope provided highly accurate information on the condition of anastomosis leakage. And there was no evidence that early endoscopy could cause damage to the anastomosis or gastric conduit. One patient from drainage group and two from occlusion group discharged against medical advice. Other 48 patients were completely cured without reoperation or mortality. The median LPH was 32 days in drainage group (range from 17 to 80 days) and 81 days in occlusion group (range from 32 to 190 days), respectively (P&lt;0.05). Linear regression indicated statistically significant correlation between LPH and length from diagnosis to drainage or occlusion (R=0.688, P&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Endoscope-assisted mediastinal drainage therapy is a satisfactory treatment for anastomosis leakage. Early diagnosis and treatment may facilitate the recovery of anastomosis leakage and reduce LPH.

### PMID 31689633 (2019) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Transcatheter embolization of the esophagomediastinal fistula with N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue: A case report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2019.10.054 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Acute mediastinitis with esophageal perforation is a very fatal condition and must be treated promptly. Esophagomediastinal fistula is a rare complication of acute mediastinitis with esophageal perforation. There are many treatment options such as surgery or endoscopic treatment, but it is most important to start treatment immediately.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 69-year-old female presented with chest pain and fever. Contrast enhanced chest computed tomography was compatible with acute mediastinitis and esophageal perforation. Esophagography revealed esophagomediastinal fistula in the upper esophagus. Endoscopic clipping with fibrin was failed and endoscopic vacuum therapy (EVT) was not effective for esophagomediastinal fistula. We performed the successful transcatheter embolization of the esophagomediastinal fistula with N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) glue.
DISCUSSION: There are many considerations in the treatment of acute mediastinitis with esophageal perforation, but surgery is the mainstay of treatment. Recently non operative management is appropriate in certain well-defined situations. Like our case patients, non-operative management may be considered if the diagnosis is delayed and the surgical treatment period is missed. Currently, endoscopic treatment such as covered stenting, clipping and application of fibrin glue are useful and a less invasive rather than surgical treatment. However, if endoscopic or surgical procedure are not possible, we considered transcatheter NBCA glue embolization.
CONCLUSION: Transcatheter embolization with NBCA glue was proven to its effectiveness as an alternative therapeutic option in the treatment of esophagomediastinal fistula which endoscopic or surgical treatment are impossible or fails.

### PMID 28644516 (2018) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part B, Applied biomaterials
TITLE: Hemostatic efficiency of modern topical sealants: Comparative evaluation after liver resection and splenic laceration in a swine model.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.b.33937 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Parenchymal transection during hepatobiliary surgery can disrupt small vasculature or bile ducts, which could be managed difficultly. Sealants are helpful tools to achieve better hemostasis. The aim of this study is to analyze the hemostatic efficiency of four modern sealants in a porcine model. In this study, 40 landrace pigs were assigned equally to the control (without sealant) and four sealant groups. Standardized liver resection and splenic lesions were performed and left without using sealant (control) or treated with one of the following sealants: TachoSil&#xae; , Tissucol Duo&#xae; , Coseal&#xae; , and FloSeal&#xae; . We measured relative and absolute bleeding times (seconds) as well as total blood loss (g) in a maximum observation time of 300 s. Sealants could show a significantly improved hemostasis comparing to the control group. However, hemostasis was heterogeneous among the sealant groups (liver resection: 60%-100%, spleen injury: 70%-100%). The mean blood loss decreased significantly using sealants comparing to control group (liver resection: 6-120 fold, spleen injury: 2.5-36 fold). The hemostatic time in groups that achieved complete hemostasis was different in each sealant group (liver resection: 30-166 s, spleen injury: 60-180 s). We conclude that the hemostatic efficacy of modern sealants is impressive but heterogeneous in liver resection or splenic lesion. To maximize the effectiveness of these tools, the indication of each sealant should be carefully considered in individual settings by the surgeons. &#xa9; 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res Part B: Appl Biomater, 106B: 1307-1316, 2018.

### PMID 29999435 (2018) — Journal of medical economics
TITLE: Length of stay and hospitalization costs for patients undergoing lung surgery with Progel pleural air leak sealant.
DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2018.1499519 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: AIM: Progel Pleural Air Leak Sealant (Progel) is currently the only sealant approved by the FDA for the treatment of air leaks during lung surgery. This study was performed to determine whether Progel use improves hospital length of stay (LOS) and hospitalization costs compared with other synthetic/fibrin sealants in patients undergoing lung surgery.
METHODS: The US Premier hospital database was used to identify lung surgery discharges from January 1, 2010 to June 30, 2015. Eligible discharges were categorized as "Progel Sealant" or "other sealants" using hospital billing data. Propensity score matching (PSM) was performed to control for hospital and patient differences between study groups. Primary outcomes were hospital LOS and all-cause hospitalization costs. Clinical outcomes, hospital re-admissions, and sealant product use were also described.
RESULTS: After PSM, a total of 2,670 discharges were included in each study group; baseline characteristics were balanced between groups. The hospital LOS (mean days&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;standard deviation, median) was significantly shorter for the Progel group (9.9&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.6, 7.0) compared with the other sealants group (11.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;12.8, 8.0; p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.001). Patients receiving Progel incurred significantly lower all-cause hospitalization costs ($31,954&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;$29,696, $23,904) compared with patients receiving other sealants ($36,147&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;$42,888, $24,702; p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.001).
LIMITATIONS: It is not possible to say that sealant type alone was responsible for the findings of this study, and analysis was restricted to the data available in the Premier database.
CONCLUSIONS: Among hospital discharges for lung surgery, Progel use was associated with significantly shorter hospital LOS and lower hospitalization costs compared with other synthetic/fibrin sealants, without compromising clinical outcomes.

### PMID 30057825 (2018) — Case reports in anesthesiology
TITLE: Percutaneous Epidural Hydrogel Sealant for the Treatment of Spontaneous Intracranial Hypotension: A Case Report of Chronic Thoracic Neuralgia and Technical Lessons Learned.
DOI: 10.1155/2018/4189518 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case in which a 34-year-old female with refractory intracranial hypotension headaches due to a spontaneous dural tear was ultimately treated with CT-guided transforaminal epidural placement of a synthetic absorbable sealant (DuraSeal&#xae;). The procedure successfully resolved her headaches; however she subsequently developed thoracic neuralgia presumably due to mass effect of the sealant material on the lower thoracic spinal cord and nerve roots. This case report describes the potential for significant spinal cord and nerve root compression as well as the development of chronic neuralgia with the placement of epidural hydrogel and fibrin glue sealants. Careful consideration should be taken into the needle gauge, needle position, injectate volumes, and injection velocity when delivering the sealant to the epidural space. Use of an 18-gauge Tuohy needle with a slow but steady injection pressure, constant patient feedback, and a conservative injectate volume (less than 2&#x2009;ml per level) may best optimize sealant delivery to minimize the risk of spinal cord compression and neurologic injury.

### PMID 29281065 (2018) — Operative neurosurgery (Hagerstown, Md.)
TITLE: Usefulness of Sealants for Dural Closure: Evaluation in an In Vitro Model.
DOI: 10.1093/ons/opx260 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage occurs in 4% to 32% of cranial surgeries and is associated with significant patient burden and expense. The use of sealant as an adjunct to primary dural closure is assumed to help prevent CSF leakage.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the utility of different sealants for dural closure using an in Vitro model.
METHODS: We evaluated 9 commonly used dural sealants, including Tachosil (Takeda Inc, Osaka, Japan), Adherus (Hyperbranch Inc, Durham, North Carolina), Duraform (Codman, Raynham, Massachusetts), Tissudura (Baxter, Deerfield, Illinois), Hemopatch (Baxter), TissuePatchDural (Tissuemed, Leeds, United Kingdom), Tisseel (Baxter), Duragen Secure (Integra, Plainsboro, New Jersey), and Duraseal, (Integra). Sealants were tested in 2 novel in Vitro setups using fresh porcine dura: the first tested the acute burst pressure of a sealed 3-mm gap, while the second examined resistance to a pressure wave mimicking intracranial pressure for 72 h.
RESULTS: Adherus showed the highest mean burst pressure (87 &#xb1; 47 mmHg) followed by Tachosil (71 &#xb1; 16 mmHg) and Duraseal (51 &#xb1; 42 mmHg); these were the only 3 sealants showing burst pressures above normal physiological intracranial pressure. In the 72-h setup, only Adherus and Duraseal maintained appropriate sealing for the duration of the experiment. Tachosil released from the dura after 1.4 h (95% confidence interval, -1.8-4.7).
CONCLUSION: Given the high cost of sealants and the results of this study, we advocate a critical attitude toward sealant application as an adjunct to classic dural closure.

### PMID 35620775 (2018) — Journal of health economics and outcomes research
TITLE: A Cost-benefit Analysis of Using Polyethylene Glycol Hydrogel Sealant versus Fibrin Glue as a Dural Sealant for Posterior Fossa Surgery in the United States.
DOI: 10.36469/001c.35589 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks are a well-known complication of posterior fossa neurosurgery. The use of dural repair adjuncts has been associated with fewer CSF leaks and subsequently, lower medical costs. Objectives: To determine if the use of polyethylene glycol hydrogel sealant (DuraSeal dural sealant system [DuraSeal]), resulted in cost savings in the United States compared to use of fibrin glue in posterior fossa neurosurgery based on a published study of these two products. Methods: Primary analysis was based on a published cohort study (100 patients per cohort). Adjustments were made to account for the longer follow-up time of the fibrin glue cohort to better capture the incidence of CSF leaks, pseudomeningocele, wound infection, and meningitis using additional data from the literature. Resource utilization was calculated from literature studies and confirmed with consultations from two practicing neurosurgeons. The effective time horizon was 19 months. Undiscounted Medicare payments were used to calculate unit costs from a payer's perspective based on hospital stay, cost of sealant application, and cost of complications. One-way sensitivity analysis was used to examine changes in costs as a result of model input changes. Results: In the base case, the cost of the hospital stay for the original surgery, which excludes the cost of complications, dominated costs for both cohorts. On a per patient basis, the use of fibrin glue cost $1666 more than the use of DuraSeal. Sensitivity analysis showed that using lumbar drainage instead of operative repair for a CSF leak reduced cost savings to $680. Holding the incidence of CSF leaks constant for the fibrin glue cohort while increasing the incidence for the DuraSeal cohort by 50% or 300% resulted in cost savings of $1438 and $755, respectively. Conclusions: The results of this study demonstrate a positive, consistent cost-benefit of DuraSeal compared to fibrin glue based on a cohort study of real world patients who underwent posterior fossa neurosurgery.

### PMID 29738754 (2018) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Closure of a Post-Transplant Bronchial Dehiscence With Endobronchial Fibrin Sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2018.03.077 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Airway complications after lung transplantation are well described and can lead to significant morbidity and&#xa0;mortality. Treatment options for anastomotic dehiscence include expectant management, placement of endobronchial stents, or surgical repair. The use of fibrin sealant instilled by bronchoscopy to seal a dehiscence has not been well described. Our patient is a&#xa0;57-year-old man who underwent orthotropic bilateral lung transplantation for end-stage chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He was found to have a partial bronchial anastomosis dehiscence and was subsequently treated with endobronchial fibrin sealant glue instillation. This case illustrates the successful use of endobronchial fibrin sealant for bronchial anastomosis dehiscence.

### PMID 29681965 (2018) — Kardiochirurgia i torakochirurgia polska = Polish journal of cardio-thoracic surgery
TITLE: The use of an autologous fibrin sealant during a complex cardiac surgical procedure.
DOI: 10.5114/kitp.2018.74680 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 29375206 (2018) — World journal of gastroenterology
TITLE: Novel concept of endoscopic device delivery station system for rapid and tight attachment of polyglycolic acid sheet.
DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v24.i2.211 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: AIM: To evaluate appropriate and rapid polyglycolic acid sheet (PGAs) covering time using device delivery station system (DDSS).
METHODS: This pilot basic study was conducted to evaluate the potential of accurate and rapid PGAs delivery using DDSS. Three 11-mo-old female Beagle dogs were used in this study. Two endoscopic submucosal dissections (ESDs) 4cm in diameter were performed in lesser curvature of middle gastric body and greater curvature of antrum (total 6 ESDs performed). DDSS (3 cm length, 12 mm in outer diameter) has 2 chambers which 16 cm2 large 2 PGAs were stored, and DDSS was attached post ESD ulcers, respectively. Beriplast P&#xae; (CSL Behring K.K., Tokyo, Japan) (combination of fibrin glue and thrombin) was applied equally to the artificial ulcer, and tight attachment of 2 PGAs with DDSS were completed. The evaluation items were covering times, post ESD bleeding and perforation during ESD.
RESULTS: The covering time of PGAs (defined as the duration from the beginning of endoscope insertion into the mouth to the end of the fibrin glue coating process) was 6.07 (4.86-8.29) min. There was no post-ESD bleeding (1-7 d after ESD), and there was no perforation during ESD.
CONCLUSION: DDSS was very useful for rapid delivering and tight attachment of PGAs, and has potentials of multi-purpose delivery station system.

### PMID 29289627 (2018) — Journal of minimally invasive gynecology
TITLE: Management, Prevention, and Sequelae of Adhesions in Women Undergoing Laparoscopic Gynecologic Surgery: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2017.12.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: Surgical adhesions can lead to significant consequences including abdominopelvic pain, bowel obstruction, subfertility, and subsequent surgery. Although laparoscopic surgery is associated with a decreased risk of adhesion formation, methods to further decrease adhesions are warranted. We systematically reviewed literature addressing the management, prevention, and sequelae of adhesions in women undergoing laparoscopic gynecologic surgery. We searched PubMed, EMBASE, EBSCOhost, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and found 6566 records. The primary outcome was adhesion formation. The secondary outcomes were abdominopelvic pain, quality of life, subfertility, pregnancy, bowel obstruction, urinary symptoms, and subsequent surgery. After applying inclusion and exclusion criteria, 52 studies remained for qualitative synthesis. Risk of bias assessments were applied independently by 2 authors. There was evidence that Hyalobarrier Gel (Anika Therapeutics, Bedford, MA), HyaRegen NCH Gel (Bilar Medikal, Istanbul, Turkey), Oxiplex/AP Gel (Fziomed, Inc., San Luis Obispo, CA), SprayGel (Confluent Surgical Inc., Waltham, MA), and Beriplast (CSL Behring, LLCm King of Prussia, PA) all decrease the incidence of adhesions. Adept (Baxter, Deerfield, IL) significantly decreased de novo adhesion scores of the posterior uterus. Using an integrated treatment approach to pelvic pain significantly improved pain and quality of life compared with standard laparoscopic treatment. Lastly, Hyalobarrier Gel Endo (Anika Therapeutics, Bedford, MA) placement led to a higher pregnancy rate than no barrier usage. Our findings underscore the need for high-quality trials to evaluate the efficacy of surgical techniques, adhesion barriers, and other treatment modalities on the management and prevention of adhesions and their clinical sequelae. This review was registered on PROSPERO (ID&#x2009;=&#x2009;CRD42017068053).

### PMID 30587907 (2018) — Clinical ophthalmology (Auckland, N.Z.)
TITLE: Surgical outcomes associated with a sutureless drainage valve implantation procedure in patients with refractory glaucoma.
DOI: 10.2147/OPTH.S186369 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the safety and efficacy profile of a sutureless procedure for drainage valve implantation with combined cataract removal and/or endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation (ECP).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective case series study of consecutive surgeries for Ahmed glaucoma valve (AGV; New World Medical) implantation in a 1-year period was analyzed. The surgery was performed using a Tisseel fibrin sealant (Baxter Healthcare Corporation) in place of sutures. Some subsets within the case series also included a cataract extraction with intraocular lens (CEIOL) insertion and/or ECP (Endo Optiks) within the same procedure. Primary outcomes for this study including efficacy (IOP change, reduction in medications) and safety (complications and reoperations) were measured out to 3 years. Comparisons between subsets were made using ANOVA with post hoc Tukey's pairwise tests.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-two eyes of 99 patients underwent sutureless AGV implantation surgery. Of the 122, 18 had an AGV implantation only, 46 had an AGV + CEIOL, 35 had an AGV + ECP, and 23 had an AGV + CEIOL + ECP. In total, there was a significant decrease in IOP (P&lt;0.0001) and number of glaucoma medications (P&#x2264;0.0054) at each postoperative visit. In a one-way ANOVA, there were no significant differences in mean IOP between the different subsets of surgeries (P&gt;0.05); 10.7% and 14.8% of eyes required a reoperation either for a complication or for uncontrolled glaucoma, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Sutureless valve implantation is associated with a significant reduction in IOP percentage and medication use after the procedure with a safety profile comparable with other glaucoma surgeries.

### PMID 30566713 (2018) — Ophthalmic surgery, lasers &amp; imaging retina
TITLE: Fibrin Glue and Internal Limiting Membrane Abrasion for Optic Disc Pit Maculopathy.
DOI: 10.3928/23258160-20181203-18 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: To describe a novel surgical technique using pars plana vitrectomy (PPV), internal limiting membrane (ILM) abrasion, and intravitreal fibrin glue for the treatment of optic disc pit maculopathy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Surgical case series technique with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of human post-mortem eyes.
RESULTS: Using SEM, the authors demonstrate the persistent adherence of vitreous fragments to the optic disc following induction of posterior vitreous detachment in human postmortem eyes. The authors describe a surgical technique using PPV, Tano Diamond Dusted Membrane Scraper for an ILM abrasion, intravitreal fibrin glue (Tisseel), and gas-air exchange to seal optic disc pits. The authors report successful long-term visual and anatomical outcomes in three patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Intravitreal fibrin glue, when combined with ILM abrasion, may be a viable treatment option for optic disc pit maculopathy with good short- and long-term visual acuity outcomes. SEM shows that ILM abrasion removes vitreous fragments, which are persistently adherent and may lead to failure with other interventional techniques. [Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging Retina. 2018;49:e271-e277.].

### PMID 30505112 (2018) — Oman journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Outcomes of pterygium surgery-glue versus autologous blood versus sutures for graft fixation-an analysis.
DOI: 10.4103/ojo.OJO_4_2017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: The aim of this study is to compare the surgical outcomes of pterygium excision with conjunctival autograft using sutures, fibrin glue (tisseel), and autologous blood for the management of primary pterygium.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective study done in 681 eyes with primary nasal pterygium. Excision of the pterygium was performed followed by closure of the bare sclera with conjunctival autograft using interrupted 10-0 monofilament nylon sutures in 173 eyes (Group 1), fibrin glue (tisseel-baxter healthcare corporation, westlake village, ca-91362 USA) in 351 eyes (Group 2), and autologous blood in 157 eyes (Group 3). Patients were followed up for a period of 5-52 months. During follow-up, graft-related complications such as recurrence, graft loss, graft retraction, granuloma if any were noted and compared among the three groups.
RESULTS: A total of 681 eyes who had primary nasal pterygium were included in this study. Pterygium excision with conjunctival autograft was performed using 10-0 monofilament nylon interrupted sutures in 173 eyes (25.4%), tisseel fibrin glue in 351 eyes (51.54%), and autologous blood in 157 (23.05%) eyes. The mean duration of follow-up was 5-52 months. The overall recurrence rate was 2.9% (20 eyes). In Group 1, recurrence was seen in 5 eyes (2.89%), in Group 2, it was seen in 7 eyes (1.99%) and in Group 3, 8 eyes (5.10%). However, the recurrence rate was not significant (P = 0.160). The rate of graft retraction in the 3 study groups were 12 eyes (6.94%), 10 eyes (2.85%), and 56 eyes (35.67%) with a significant P &lt; 0.001. Granuloma was seen in 2 eyes (1.16%), in Group 1, and in 1 eye (0.64%) in Group 3. Graft loss was seen in 3 eyes (1.73%), 4 eyes (1.14%), 6 eyes (3.82%) in Group 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The outcomes of the three most commonly performed surgical technique of conjunctival autograft fixation has shown us that all three techniques are equally comparable and can be offered to our patients with equally good results.

### PMID 30510888 (2018) — Journal of neurological surgery reports
TITLE: Tension Pneumocephalus after Cervical Spine Surgery: A Case Report with Review of the Literature.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0038-1676298 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This is the case of a 66-year-old male with cervical myelopathy secondary to severe cervical stenosis manifesting as worsening dexterity and numbness in his right hand. The patient underwent C3-C6 laminoplasty with bilateral foraminotomies. During the procedure an incidental durotomy occurred which was patched intraoperatively with Duragen and Tisseel. At 1&#x2009;month follow-up, the patient reported that he was doing well and skin sutures were removed. Two days later, the patient presented to the emergency department with postoperative wound dehiscence, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage, altered mental status and lethargy. At that time, a computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed a tension pneumocephalus which was treated with a cranial burr hole and revision durotomy repair. The patient improved and was discharged to a rehabilitation facility with intact motor and cognitive function. At the 1-year follow-up appointment, he continued to do well without sequelae.

### PMID 30001669 (2018) — Hospital practice (1995)
TITLE: Cost comparison of fibrin sealant versus tack screws for mesh fixation in laparoscopic repair of inguinal hernia.
DOI: 10.1080/21548331.2018.1500369 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Inguinal hernias of the abdominal wall are common accounting for 75% of all hernia defects. They can be treated with laparoscopic surgery using a transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) approach. However, in surgery there is some contention on how to conclude the hernia repair, as there are alternatives of using fibrin sealant (FS) or tack screws for fixation of a mesh implant over the defect in the abdominal wall. In this study, we evaluate the economic consequences of using FS vs. tacks for mesh fixation in TAPP inguinal hernia repair for the UK from a hospital perspective.
METHODS: The model was populated with clinical inputs (theater time, hospitalization days, occurrence of seroma, and neuralgia) from a previously conducted study comparing FS and tack screws in patients who had undergone TAPP hernia repair, and cost inputs from official government sources. One-way sensitivity analyses were also conducted to evaluate key drivers of cost analyses.
RESULTS: The average cost per case treated with FS 2&#xa0;mL Tisseel&#xae; and tack screws (ProTackTM) was &#xa3;1,098 and &#xa3;1,348, respectively, for resource expenses paid by the healthcare system. This would suggest a potential savings achieved of &#xa3;249 per surgery using FS for mesh fixation. The sensitivity analysis showed that the key drivers for the cost difference were a variation in time to complete the surgery, followed by hospitalization days, and lower adverse outcomes such as seroma and neuralgia in the two cohorts.
CONCLUSION: Using FS resulted in cost savings in hospitals based on reduced time to complete surgery, hospitalization time post-op, and lower adverse outcomes. Indirect cost savings were also found in favor of FS when comparing the two alternatives from a societal perspective, as patients were able to return to work more promptly in the FS group versus the tack screws group.

### PMID 29966561 (2018) — The American surgeon
TITLE: Biomechanical Comparison of Fibrin Sealants for Mesh Fixation.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Adhesive use for fixation in hernia repair allows for complete and immediate mesh surface area adherence. Little is known about the fixation strengths of the products and application methods available. The purpose of this study was to compare the immediate and early strength of fixation of Tisseel&#x2122; and Evicel&#x2122; using hand and spray application techniques. Sixteen Mongrel swine underwent implantation of large-pore, mid-weight polypropylene mesh fixated with either Tisseel&#x2122; or Evicel&#x2122;, applied by hand or with a spray apparatus. Time points studied were zero and four days. All samples underwent lap shear testing to quantify the strength of the mesh-tissue interface as an indicator of mesh fixation strength. Thirty Day 4 and 16 Day 0 samples were tested. Manually applied Tisseel&#x2122; mean fixation strength was 2.05 N/cm at Day 0 and 6.02 N/cm at Day 4. Sprayed Tisseel&#x2122; had mean fixation strength of 1.22 N/cm at Day 0 and 7.21 N/cm at Day 4. Manually applied Evicel&#x2122; showed mean fixation strength of 0.92 N/cm at Day 0 and 6.73 N/cm at Day 4. Mean fixation strength of sprayed Evicel&#x2122; was 0.72 N/cm at Day 0 and 6.70 N/cm at Day 4. Analysis of variance showed no difference between groups at Day 0 or Day 4. Immediate strength of mesh fixation could have significant implications for early recurrence and mesh contraction. This study demonstrates that no difference exists in immediate or early fixation strength between these two brands of sealants or their method of application.

### PMID 29868410 (2018) — Arthroscopy techniques
TITLE: Bone Marrow Aspirate Concentrate and Microfracture Technique for Talar Osteochondral Lesions of the Ankle.
DOI: 10.1016/j.eats.2017.10.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Osteochondral lesions of the talus refer to a chondral or subchondral defect of the articular cartilage and potentially the underlying bone. Ankle sprains are an extremely common injury; approximately 27,000 ankle sprains occur per day in America. Fifty percent of these can lead to a cartilage injury to the ankle. There has been a high quoted rate of failure with conservative measures of up to 45% in some series. Surgical options are largely broken down into 2 groups, namely, reparative or regenerative treatments. The reparative techniques include debridement and bone marrow stimulation techniques such as microdrilling and microfracture. Regenerative techniques include autologous osteochondral transplants. However, there are disadvantages in terms of donor site morbidity and the development of subchondral bone cysts over time. The aim of this video is to demonstrate a technique for microfracture and augmentation with bone marrow aspirate concentration and Tisseel fibrin glue. This video details the indications for performing microfracture, the indications for using bone marrow stimulation techniques, and the contraindications. Patient positioning, setup, preparation of the lesion, harvesting of the bone marrow aspirate concentrate, and application of the bone marrow aspirate are detailed.

### PMID 29768536 (2018) — Acta cirurgica brasileira
TITLE: Comparison of platelet rich plasma versus fibrin glue on colonic anastomoses in rats.
DOI: 10.1590/s0102-865020180040000005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare platelet rich plasma (PRP) and fibrin glue about the effect of anastomotic healing.
METHODS: Thirty six Wistar-Albino male rats diveded into 3 groups according to control(Group1), PRP (Group 2) and fibrin glue(Tisseel VH) (Group 3). The colon was transected with scissor and subsequently an end to end anastomosis was performed using continuous one layer 6/0 vicryl sutures. Postoperative 7th day effect of anastomotic healing measuring with tissue hydroxyproline(TH) level and anastomotic bursting pressure(ABP); moreover comparison of cytokine (IL-6 and IL-10) and procalcitonin levels on 1st,3rd and 7th days.
RESULTS: There was no statistically significant difference of the ABP and hydroxyproline levels between PRP and fibrin glue on the 7th day. There was no statistically significant difference between levels of proinflammatory cytokine (IL-6) (P=0.41), anti-inflammatory cytokine (IL-10) (P=0.35), and procalcitonin levels (P=0.63) on 1, 3 and 7 days.
CONCLUSION: Fibrin glue and platelet rich plasma are shown to be effective in healing intestinal anastomoses without superior to each other.

### PMID 29460978 (2018) — Clinical and experimental dermatology
TITLE: Use of Tisseel fibrin glue for a recurrent cheek haematoma after Mohs micrographic surgery.
DOI: 10.1111/ced.13419 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 29058505 (2018) — Orbit (Amsterdam, Netherlands)
TITLE: A case series of anophthalmic socket cysts excised utilising fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1080/01676830.2017.1383482 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anophthalmic socket cysts are challenging to remove and incomplete excision has been shown to increase the risk of recurrence. This case series describes a novel technique utilising the fibrin sealant Tisseel (Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria) to retain the socket cyst integrity during surgical removal to facilitate its complete excision. Five patients were included and followed up for a minimum of 1&#xa0;year, and there were no signs of recurrence in any of the cases. The surgical technique is described and illustrated. This technique is a safe way of simplifying challenging socket cyst surgery.

### PMID 28863116 (2018) — Ophthalmic plastic and reconstructive surgery
TITLE: An Aesthetic Orbicularis Oculi Myectomy Technique for Blepharospasm: Use of Topical 5-Fluorouracil and Fibrin Sealant.
DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000000992 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To describe a modified technique of orbicularis oculi myectomy for refractory blepharospasm. This technique includes removal of orbicularis muscle, reformation of the eyelid crease and pretarsal platform using fibrin sealant (Tisseel), and topical 5-fluorouracil to reduce scar formation and improve aesthetic outcome.
METHODS: Retrospective chart review of 7 patients who underwent bilateral orbicularis oculi myectomy with our technique from 2013 to 2016. Outcome measures were postoperative botulinum toxin dose, frequency, duration between treatments, the amount of lagophthalmos, severity of dry eye, and patient satisfaction with aesthetic and functional outcome.
RESULTS: Patients who underwent the aesthetic myectomy technique had significantly decreased botulinum toxin use with relief of symptoms postoperatively. Only 1 of 7 patients experienced mild dry eye symptoms postoperatively, managed with artificial tears. All patients were satisfied with the aesthetic and functional outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: The aesthetic myectomy technique provides effective treatment for blepharospasm with good functional and aesthetic outcome.

### PMID 28799873 (2018) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: "Birdlime" technique using TachoSil tissue sealing sheet soaked with fibrin glue for sutureless vessel transposition in microvascular decompression: operative technique and nuances.
DOI: 10.3171/2017.1.JNS161243 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE Microvascular decompression (MVD) is effective for the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia (TN), hemifacial spasm (HFS), and glossopharyngeal neuralgia. The transposition technique is the standard procedure to avoid adhesions and granuloma around the decompression site but is more complex and difficult to perform than the interposition technique. The authors describe a simple and safe MVD transposition procedure they call the "birdlime" technique, which uses a tissue glue-coated collagen sponge soaked with fibrin glue, and the results of this technique. METHODS The authors retrospectively reviewed the medical charts and radiographic findings of 27 consecutive patients with TN (8 patients) and HFS (19 patients) who, between January 2012 and December 2015, had undergone an MVD transposition procedure utilizing a tissue glue-coated collagen sponge (TachoSil tissue sealing sheet) soaked with fibrin glue (Tisseel 2-component fibrin sealant, vapor heated). Offending arteries among the patients with TN were the superior cerebellar artery (SCA) in 5 patients, the SCA and anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) in 2, and the AICA in 1. Those among the patients with HFS were the vertebral artery (VA) in 3 patients, the VA and AICA in 4, the VA and posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) in 3, the PICA in 4, the AICA in 1, the AICA-PICA in 3, and the PICA and AICA in 1. Operations were performed according to the Jannetta procedure. The offending artery was transposed and fixed to the dura mater of the petrous bone using TachoSil pieces soaked with fibrin glue. Postoperative constructive interference in steady-state MRI was performed to evaluate the change in the position of the offending artery. RESULTS Transposition of the offending artery was easily and safely performed in all patients. All patients had total remission of symptoms directly after the procedure. No severe complications occurred. The postoperative course was uneventful. No recurrences, adhesions, or dysfunction of the cranial nerves was observed in any of the patients. Postoperative MRI showed that the offending vessels were displaced and fixed in the appropriate position. CONCLUSIONS The described transposition technique provides an easy and adjustable way to perform MVD safely and effectively. In addition, this transposition and fixation technique is simple and avoids the risk of needle injury close to the cranial nerves and vessels. This simple sutureless technique is recommended for MVD to reduce the risk of intraoperative neurovascular injury.

### PMID 29446455 (2018) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Uncultivated stromal vascular fraction is equivalent to adipose-derived stem and stromal cells on porous polyurethrane scaffolds forming adipose tissue in vivo.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.27124 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: To find an alternative approach to contemporary techniques in tissue augmentation and reconstruction, tissue engineering strategies aim to involve adipose-derived stem and stromal cells (ASCs) harboring a strong differentiation potential into various tissue types such as bone, cartilage, and fat.
STUDY DESIGN: Animal research.
METHODS: The stromal vascular fraction (SVF) was used directly as a cell source to provide a potential alternative to contemporary ASC-based adipose tissue engineering. Seeded in TissuCol fibrin, we applied ASCs or SVF cells to porous, degradable polyurethane (PU) scaffolds.
RESULTS: We successfully demonstrated the in vivo generation of volume-stable, well-vascularized PU-based constructs containing host-derived mature fat pads. Seeded human stem cells served as modulators of host-cell migration rather than differentiating themselves. We further demonstrated that preliminary culture of SVF cells was not necessary.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results bring adipose tissue engineering, together with automated processing devices, closer to clinical applicability. The time-consuming and cost-intensive culture and induction of the ASCs is not necessary.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: NA. Laryngoscope, 128:E206-E213, 2018.

### PMID 30444480 (2018) — Il Giornale di chirurgia
TITLE: Is human fibrin sealant a possible choice for the fixation of laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair? A single center experience and the analysis of the results after 326 TAPP in two years.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Groin hernioplasty is most intervention performed in the worldwide. The present study aimed to evaluate a combination between ultralight mesh and fibrin human sealant in the laparoscopic treatment of inguinal hernia.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This retrospective study included consecutive patients who underwent laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal hernioplasty (TAPP) from 1st of January 2015 to 31st of December 2016. Demographics, surgical data and postoperative outcomes were entered in an anonymized prospective database. Prospective longterm follow-up carried out in all patients.
RESULTS: One hundred eighty-four patients with a median age 57.5 (range 19-84) and median BMI (Body Mass Index) of 28.5 (range 18.5-31.5) were included. A median follow-up of 25 months (median 13-35) was carried out. Five recurrences (1.5%) and two cases of missed lipoma were observed and operated. Chronic pain (CP) was observed in eleven (9%) patients but in 9 patients it decreased spontaneously.
CONCLUSIONS: Combination of ultralight mesh and Evicel&#xae; in TAPP operation is a safe solution for the treatment of groin hernia. Recurrences and chronic pain are similar to other combination of fibrin sealant and meshes. Moreover action of Evicel&#xae; may provide to improve the hemostasis and consequently hematoma of the cord.

### PMID 30119663 (2018) — BMC cancer
TITLE: A multi-center, double blind randomized controlled trial evaluating flap fixation after mastectomy using sutures or tissue glue versus conventional closure: protocol for the Seroma reduction After Mastectomy (SAM) trial.
DOI: 10.1186/s12885-018-4740-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017429">Clinical Trial, Phase IV, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Seroma formation is a common complication after mastectomy and is associated with delayed wound healing, infection, skin flap necrosis, patient discomfort and repeated visits to the out patient clinic to deal with seroma and its sequelae. Closing the dead space after mastectomy seems to be key in reducing seroma and its complications. Various methods have been described to reduce the dead space after mastectomy: closed suction drainage, quilting of the skin flaps and application of adhesive tissue glues. The aim of this trial is to compare seroma formation and its sequelae in the various methods of flap fixation.
METHODS: This is a multicenter, double-blind, randomized controlled trial in female breast cancer patients undergoing mastectomy, with or without axillary clearance. Exclusion criteria consist of breast conserving therapy, direct breast reconstruction and incapacity to comprehend implications and extent of study and unable to sign for informed consent. A total of 336 patients will be randomized. Patients will be randomly allocated to one of three treatment arms consisting of flap fixation using ARTISS tissue glue with a low suction drain, flap fixation using sutures and a low suction drain or conventional wound closure (without flap fixation) and low suction drainage. Follow up will be conducted up to twelve months post surgery. The primary outcome is the number of seroma aspirations and secondary outcomes consist of number of out patient clinic visits, surgical skin infection rate, shoulder function, cosmesis, health-related quality of life and costs and cost-effectiveness (cost/QALY).
DISCUSSION: This is the first study of its kind to evaluate the effect of flap fixation and its sequelae (ie seroma aspirations, number of out patient clinic visits, infection, shoulder function, patient assessed cosmesis, quality of life and cost-effectiveness) in a double blind randomized controlled trial.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial was approved by the hospitals' joint medical ethical committee (14-T-21, 2 June 2014). The SAM Trial is registered in ClinicalTrials.gov since October 2017, Identifier: NCT03305757 .

### PMID 29340750 (2018) — Aesthetic plastic surgery
TITLE: A Pilot Study Evaluating the Efficacy and Safety of ARTISS Human Fibrin Sealant in External Rhinoplasty.
DOI: 10.1007/s00266-017-1039-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealant application in rhytidectomy has previously demonstrated a reduction in adverse events and drainage volume. Fibrin sealant offers multiple potential benefits including decreasing downtime, reducing complication rates, and improving patient satisfaction. In this study, we evaluated the efficacy and safety of ARTISS [fibrin sealant (human)] in external rhinoplasty.
METHODS: Nine healthy participants between the ages of 18 and 50 seeking external rhinoplasty completed this study. All subjects were randomized into control and treatment groups and then underwent external rhinoplasty, with only the treatment group receiving ARTISS [fibrin sealant (Human)] during surgery. Photographs were taken before surgery and 1&#xa0;day, 1&#xa0;week, 1&#xa0;month, 3&#xa0;months and 6&#xa0;months after surgery and used in a blinded assessment of recovery time and esthetic improvement with ecchymosis and satisfaction scales. Subject recovery time, downtime, and self-esteem were evaluated at 1&#xa0;day, 1&#xa0;week, 1&#xa0;month and 6&#xa0;months after surgery. Recovery time was determined by live assessment of edema and ecchymosis using categorical scales. Subject downtime was assessed through a 30-day patient diary and a downtime questionnaire. Subject self-esteem was evaluated with the Heatherton &amp; Polivy State Self-Esteem Scale. The degree of technical ease with the product was determined by the treating investigator with a 10-cm Visual Analog Scale.
RESULTS: Patients treated with ARTISS intra-operatively reported significantly higher self-esteem 1&#xa0;month and 6&#xa0;months following external rhinoplasty. The ARTISS Easyspray&#x2122; Spray Set was rated as technically easy to administer.
CONCLUSION: The use of ARTISS fibrin sealant in external rhinoplasties is a safe and easy method and may enhance patient self-esteem. Larger studies are warranted to either verify or challenge the validity of our findings.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE IV: This journal requires that authors assign a level of evidence to each article. For a full description of these Evidence-Based Medicine ratings, please refer to the Table of Contents or the online Instructions to Authors www.springer.com/00266 .

### PMID 30444484 (2018) — Il Giornale di chirurgia
TITLE: Fibrin sealant agents: clinical application of TachoSil&#xae; in abdominal surgery. Six years experience in an emergency surgery department and review of the literature.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The success of every surgical procedure depends on an appropriate hemostatis. Topical haemostatic agents, like fibrin sealants, are an option for providing haemostasis and may be particularly useful for complex injuries.
AIM: The aim of the study is to evaluate the use of TachoSil&#xae; in abdominal surgery and its benefits to prevent bleedings, and to establish its fields of use.
METHODS: A retrospective observational study was performed on 308 patients underwent to emergency surgery with TachoSil&#xae;'s application into our department between January 2012 and March 2018.
RESULTS: After the application of the hemostatic device there have been no haemorrhagic complications that have needed a second surgical intervention. Most frequently use of TachoSil&#xae; was in the gallbladder bed after cholecystectomy for an acute cholecystitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our experience, supported by other reports in the literature, suggests the use of TachoSil&#xae; may provide an effective option in helping to control bleedings.

### PMID 29557532 (2018) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Cisterna magna arachnoid membrane suturing decreases incidence of pseudomeningocele formation and incisional CSF leakage.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-018-3507-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: A pseudomeningocele and an incisional cerebrospinal fluid leak are considered frequent complications following neurosurgical operations. The rate of these complications especially increases following neurosurgical procedures on the posterior cranial fossae. According to some publications, the rate of pseudomeningoceles has been reported as high as 40%, whereas that of incisional cerebrospinal fluid leaks is up to 17%. For the purposes of reducing the risk of these complications after a midline suboccipital craniotomy, we propose suturing the arachnoid membrane of the cisterna magna. In this paper, we present a retrospective analysis of arachnoid membrane suturing.
METHODS: Seventy patients underwent midline suboccipital craniotomy by the first author between 2012 and 2016 at Burdenko Neurosurgery Institute. In this group was included a consecutive group of patients with posterior fossae tumors where the approach was performed through the cisterna magna arachnoid membrane following midline suboccipital craniotomy and dural opening. The patients were divided into two groups. Group 1 included 38 patients to whom cisterna magna arachnoid membrane suturing was performed with monofilament nonabsorbable suture 7.0., and additionally, the suture was sealed with fibrin adhesive sealant TachoComb&#xae;. Group 2 included 32 patients without arachnoid membrane suturing. There was no other significant difference in terms of clinical signs and surgical procedures between these groups. In the postoperative period, the frequency of developing a pseudomeningocele and an incisional cerebrospinal fluid leak was assessed in these two groups. The results were evaluated on the basis of clinical, CT, and MRI data performed in the postoperative period.
RESULTS: In the patients who underwent arachnoid membrane suturing (group I), pseudomeningocele formation was observed in one (2.6%) and CSF leak in one (2.6%) of the 38 patients. In group II, in which patients had no arachnoid membrane suturing, we observed pseudomeningocele formation in 11 (34.4%) patients and a CSF leak in 7 (25.0%) out of 28 patients with known follow-up. Statistical analysis of the data indicates a significantly higher risk of postoperative pseudomeningocele formation and/or an incisional cerebrospinal fluid leak in a group of patients who did not undergo arachnoid membrane suturing (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Suturing of the arachnoid membrane of the cisterna magna and its further sealing with fibrin adhesive sealant TachoComb&#xae; create an additional barrier for preventing cerebrospinal fluid collection in the extradural space. This technique significantly reduces the risk of postoperative pseudomeningocele formation and/or an incisional cerebrospinal fluid leak in patients with midline suboccipital craniotomy.

### PMID 28931468 (2018) — Annals of anatomy = Anatomischer Anzeiger : official organ of the Anatomische Gesellschaft
TITLE: Platelet-released growth factors inhibit proliferation of primary keratinocytes in vitro.
DOI: 10.1016/j.aanat.2017.09.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Autologous thrombocyte concentrate lysates as platelet-released growth factors (PRGF) or Vivostat Platelet Rich Fibrin (PRF&#xae;) represent important tools in modern wound therapy, especially in the treatment of chronic, hard-to-heal or infected wounds. Nevertheless, underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms of the beneficial clinical effects of a local wound therapy with autologous thrombocyte concentrate lysates are poorly understood. Recently, we have demonstrated that PRGF induces antimicrobial peptides in primary keratinocytes and accelerates keratinocytes' differentiation. In the present study we analyzed the influence of PRGF on primary human keratinocytes' proliferation. Using the molecular proliferation marker Ki-67 we observed a concentration- and time dependent inhibition of Ki-67 gene expression in PRGF treated primary keratinocytes. These effects were independent from the EGFR- and the IL-6-R pathway. Inhibition of primary keratinocytes' proliferation by PRGF treatment was confirmed in colorimetric cell proliferation assays. Together, these data indicate that the clinically observed positive effects of autologous thrombocytes concentrates in the treatment of chronic, hard-to-heal wounds are not based on an increased keratinocytes proliferation.

### PMID 29107157 (2018) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Efficacy, Reliability, and Safety of Completely Autologous Fibrin Glue in Neurosurgical Procedures: Single-Center Retrospective Large-Number Case Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2017.10.097 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Commercially available fibrin glue (Com-FG), which is used commonly worldwide, is produced with pooled human plasma from multiple donors. However, it has added bovine aprotinin, which involves the risk of infection, allogenic immunity, and allergic reactions. We evaluate the efficacy, reliability, and safety of completely autologous fibrin glue (CAFG).
METHODS: From August 2014 to February 2016, prospective data were collected and analyzed from 153 patients. CAFG was prepared with the CryoSeal System using autologous blood and was applied during neurosurgical procedures. Using CAFG-soaked oxidized regenerated cellulose and/or polyglycolic acid sheets, we performed a pinpoint hemostasis, transposed the offending vessels in a microvascular decompression, and covered the dural incision to prevent cerebrospinal fluid leakage.
RESULTS: The CryoSeal System had generated up to a mean of 4.51 mL (range, 3.0-8.4 mL) of CAFG from 400 mL autologous blood. Com-FG products were not used in our procedures. Only 6 patients required an additional allogeneic blood transfusion. The hemostatic effective rate was 96.1% (147 of 153 patients). Only 1 patient who received transsphenoidal surgery for a pituitary adenoma presented with the complication of delayed postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage (0.65%). No patient developed allergic reactions or systemic complications associated with the use of CAFG.
CONCLUSIONS: CAFG effectively provides hemostatic, adhesive, and safety performance. The timing and three-dimensional shape of CAFG-soaked oxidized regenerated cellulose and/or polyglycolic acid sheets solidification can be controlled with slow fibrin formation. The cost to prepare CAFG is similar compared with Com-FG products, and it can therefore be easily used at most institutions.

### PMID 29061456 (2018) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Multilayer Dura Reconstruction After Thoracoscopic Microdiscectomy: Technique and Results.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2017.10.056 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Anterior transthoracic approaches, including thoracoscopic microdiscectomy (TMD), are the preferred techniques for central, broad-based, calcified thoracic disc herniations (TDHs). Dural defects due to manipulation or transdural extension may create a potentially life-threatening subarachnoid-pleural fistula. We evaluate a fast, sutureless technique for reconstructing the dura.
METHODS: We analyzed 476 anterior transthoracic approaches for TDHs (437 TMDs, 31 mini-thoracotomies, 7 transaxillary approaches, and 1 sternotomy). Dural defects were closed using an onlay dura substitute, fibrin glue, an autologous fat graft, and another layer of fibrin glue topped by an absorbable gelatin sponge. A chest tube was used to provide a water seal, and the use of external lumbar drains (ELDs) was discontinued in recent years.
RESULTS: We encountered 35 dural defects (7.35%), including 27 in 279 procedures (9.67%) in the first 10 years and 8 in 197 (4.06%) in the past 6 years. Five defects were large, 23 were relatively small, and 5 had an intact arachnoid layer, likely preventing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) egress. Two CSF leaks in the early series were overlooked intraoperatively; 1 patient died following widespread cortical venous thrombosis, whereas the other merely had a headache that disappeared within 1 week. Overall, an ELD was inserted in 3 of 5 large defects and in 17 of 23 small defects; however, in the past 6 years, an ELD was inserted in no large defects and in only 1 of 5 small defects. The technique was successful in all but 1 patient, who underwent reoperation using a larger fat graft.
CONCLUSIONS: Dural defects encountered during anterior transthoracic approaches to TDHs can be reconstructed endoscopically, while avoiding the use of an ELD in most cases.

### PMID 29361923 (2018) — BMC surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous therapy of a mediastinal lymphangioma with fibrin glue: case report with clinical success after 4&#xa0;years.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-018-0339-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Lymphangioma of the mediastinum is a rare benign tumor, and most of the cases are treated by a surgical approach.
CASE PRESENTATION: This work reports the case of a 62-year-old female with a large lymphangioma extending from her neck to her abdomen with dysphagia, dyspnea, and cough for 2&#xa0;months. Because of the location of the mass, only bilateral excision could remove the multiloculated cyst completely. However, the patient's overall physical condition was very poor, and we thought she could not tolerate the bilateral surgery. Therefore, the patient was treated by percutaneous aspiration drainage followed by fibrin glue injection. Our method has never been reported in the treatment of such a large intrathoracic lesion thus far.
CONCLUSIONS: Percutaneous puncture and aspiration drainage followed by fibrin glue injection may be a feasible treatment option for the therapy of intrathoracic lymphangioma, with less damage than with other therapies.

### PMID 30662251 (2018) — JSLS : Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons
TITLE: Systematic Review of Topical Hemostatic Agent Use in Minimally Invasive Gynecologic Surgery.
DOI: 10.4293/JSLS.2018.00070 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To perform a systematic review of articles evaluating hemostatic effectiveness and peri-operative outcomes when topical hemostatic agents (HA) are used in minimally invasive gynecologic surgeries (MIGS) for benign conditions.
METHODS: Studies published through March 31, 2017 were retrieved through PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane, and ClinicalTrials.gov to identify all eligible studies. No studies were excluded based on publish date. All comparative studies or case series with &gt;10 participants reporting use of at least one topical HA in MIGS for benign conditions were included as long as full-text articles were available and written in English. Studies were excluded if surgery was done for malignancy or completed via an open approach. Articles that included multiple surgical subspecialties were excluded if data related to MIGS was unable to be isolated. Evaluation for eligibility and data extraction was performed by three independent reviewers. Quality of evidence was also assessed by each reviewer.
RESULTS: From 132 articles, a total of 8 studies were included in this systematic review. We found that use of fibrin sealant decreased time to hemostasis, postoperative hemoglobin drop, and estimated blood loss (EBL) compared with bipolar energy and reduced the overall operative time in laparoscopic myomectomy. When fibrin sealant use at time of myomectomy was compared to bipolar energy there was no significant difference in the rate of postoperative complications. Furthermore, there was less of a decrease in anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) level when a thrombin-gelatin matrix was used compared to bipolar energy on ovarian tissue.
CONCLUSION: Application of topical HA in MIGS can reduce operative time, blood loss, and ameliorate damage to ovarian function. However, more data needs to be gathered for use of HA during different types of gynecologic procedures (adnexal surgery, myomectomy, and hysterectomy) to provide better quality evidence to guide their use.

### PMID 28847164 (2017) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Histological effects of fibrin glue and synthetic tissue glues on the spinal cord: are they safe to use?
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2017.1359491 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Fibrin glues such as Tisseel&#xae; have been established in neurosurgery for over thirty years. They are recommended for extradural use but have intradural applications. Brachial plexus reimplantation after trauma requires intradural fibrin glue because reimplanted nerves cannot be sutured to the spinal cord. Recently synthetic glues have become popular in spinal surgery but there is limited information about their safety. Our study compared the histological effects of Tisseel&#xae;, Adherus&#xae; and BioGlue&#xae; on spinal cord using our rat brachial plexus repair model.
MATERIALS &amp; METHODS: Randomised observational animal study. Forty-one Sprague-Dawley rats divided in to control (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;9), Tisseel&#xae; (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8), BioGlue&#xae; (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10) and Adherus&#xae; (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;14) groups. Under general anaesthesia a posterior midline cervical incision was made and hemi-laminectomies performed at C7 and T1. Dura was opened and T1 dorsal root transected and repositioned on the spinal cord. Two drops of Tisseel&#xae;, BioGlue&#xae;, Adherus&#xae; or no glue (control) were applied over the cut nerve and cord. At days 7, 14 and 28 rats were euthanized, processed and sections stained with Haematoxylin &amp; Eosin and evaluated blind by a neuropathologist.
RESULTS: Control and Tisseel&#xae; groups showed only mild focal inflammation in the cord. Adherus&#xae; and Bioglue&#xae; groups showed evidence of spinal cord inflammation and degeneration. All BioGlue&#xae; and Adherus&#xae; rats had evidence of distortion of the cord from the glue mass at all time points. Two BioGlue&#xae;-treated and one Adherus&#xae;-treated rat developed a hemiparesis. One BioGlue&#xae; rat developed hind limb paralysis. One BioGlue&#xae; rat failed to wake up at the end of the procedure. There were no complications in control and Tisseel&#xae; groups.
CONCLUSION: Tisseel&#xae; caused a similar inflammatory response to control and may be used on spinal cord. BioGlue&#xae; and Adherus&#xae; should be applied thinly for a watertight dural closure but intradural use and contact with spinal tissue must be avoided.

### PMID 27474497 (2017) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Sutureless closure of colonic defects with tissue adhesives: an in&#xa0;vivo study in the rat.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2016.05.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tissue adhesives (TAs) in gastrointestinal surgery are gradually gaining acceptance. Before implementation as colonic sealants, an evaluation of the sealing capability of a TA when in contact with fecal matter, as in a leaking anastomosis, is needed. In this study, we used clinically available TAs for the sutureless closure of colonic defects evaluating mechanical strength and tissue healing.
METHODS: A total of 160 rats were divided into 8 groups. Two .5-cm incisions were created, one in the proximal and another in the distal colon. Incisions were sealed with a TA: Histoacryl Flex, Bioglue, Dermabond, Tissucol, Duraseal Xact, gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde or Glubran 2. A control group was included in which the colonic defects were not sealed. Follow-up time was 3 or 10&#xa0;days. Clinical complication rate, bursting pressure, and histopathologic analysis was included.
RESULTS: Leakage rates in the TA groups were highest for Duraseal Xact, Bioglue, and gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde at 3 and 10&#xa0;days. The cyanoacrylates Glubran 2, Histoacryl Flex, and Omnex, and the fibrin glue Tissucol showed the lowest overall clinical complication rates while maintaining the highest bursting pressure at day 10. Histoacryl Flex exhibited significantly higher collagen formation at day 10 than the other TAs.
CONCLUSIONS: This experimental model evaluates the protective effect of a TA seal on a leaking colonic defect. We found large differences in leakage rates and inertness of the tested TAs. The cyanoacrylates Histoacryl Flex, Omnex, and Glubran 2 as well as the fibrin glue Tissucol demonstrated the lowest leakage rates and the most inert histopathologic profile while maintaining high mechanical strength.

### PMID 26804979 (2017) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part B, Applied biomaterials
TITLE: Clinical, mechanical, and immunohistopathological effects of tissue adhesives on the colon: An in-vivo study.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.b.33621 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tissue adhesives may be useful for sealing bowel anastomoses by preventing anastomotic leakage. Prior to clinical implementation, an in-depth analysis of the clinical and immunohistopathological effects of tissue adhesives on the target tissue and of the mechanical strength of the adhesive bond in an in vivo model is needed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 84 rats, two bowel segments were glued using one of the following tissue adhesive: Bioglue, Gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde (GRF), Glubran 2, Histoacryl Flex, Omnex, Duraseal Xact, or Tissucol. Rats were followed for 7 or 28 days. Endpoints were clinical complication rate, mechanical strength, and immunohistopathological reactions.
RESULTS: Of the seven tissue adhesives, GRF and Bioglue showed the highest rates of bowel wall destruction and ileus and the most severe immunohistopathological tissue reactions at 7 and 28 days. Cyanoacrylates (Histoacryl Flex, Omnex, Glubran 2) showed high mechanical strength and mild immunohistopathological reactions at 7 and 28 days. Duraseal Xact and Tissucol were the most inert tissue adhesives, but exhibited low mechanical strength. At 28 days, mechanical strength was significantly correlated to CD8, CD68, and Ki67 cell counts.
CONCLUSION: Based on the clinical and immunohistopathological outcomes, GRF and Bioglue were found to be the least suitable tissue adhesives for colonic use. Duraseal Xact and Tissucol were inert but also showed low mechanical strength. Cyanoacrylates exhibited mild clinical and immunohistopathological effects while maintaining high strength, which makes them promising as colonic sealants. &#xa9; 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res Part B: Appl Biomater, 105B: 846-854, 2017.

### PMID 28755096 (2017) — Journal of materials science. Materials in medicine
TITLE: Analysis of the hemostatic potential of modern topical sealants on arterial and venous anastomoses: an experimental porcine study.
DOI: 10.1007/s10856-017-5932-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: One of the widely accepted adjunctive agents in the variety of surgical modalities are sealants. Our study aim was to compare four commonly used modern sealants in a standardized experimental setting to assess their feasibility, and hemostatic efficacy in vascular anastomosis. Forty landrace pigs (weight: 24.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;3.8&#x2009;kg) were randomized into the control (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8) and four sealant groups; TachoSil&#xae; (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8), Tissucol Duo&#xae; (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8), Coseal&#xae; (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8), and FloSeal&#xae; (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8). After doing a portal vein end-to-end anastomosis as well as stitches of aortic incision, the sealants were applied on anastomotic site. The control group was left intact. In portal vein anastomosis, the sealants led to a complete hemostasis significantly better than control group. The mean of blood loss was also significantly reduced. In successful subgroups, there was a difference in the mean-time to reach complete hemostasis ranging from 15&#x2009;s in Coseal&#xae; to 76&#x2009;s in FloSeal&#xae; group (p&#x2009; &lt;&#x2009;0.05). In aortotomy experiments, except Tissucol Due&#xae;, which had insufficient hemostasis, other sealants led to a complete hemostasis. The mean blood loss was significantly reduced in sealants groups as well. The four sealants are effective in reducing the suture-hole bleeding in portal vein anastomosis. However, the hemostatic potential is heterogeneous among sealants. This means that "one-size-fits-all" approach is not appropriate for application of sealants in diversity of vascular surgery and it should be based on the type and the severity of injury and the structure of tissue. Comparison of hemostasis efficacy of four modern sealants (TachoSil&#xae;, Tissucol Duo&#xae;, Coseal&#xae;, and FloSeal&#xae;) in vascular anastomosis in porcine model. The figures below show the total blood loss (g) in the control and sealant groups after aortotomy (left) and portal vein anastomosis (right). The mean of blood loss decreased significantly by the usage of sealants in both experiment groups as compared to control group (*: p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05; sealant groups vs. control group). 1. The right column shows the mean of blood loss (g) in all experiments in each group. 2. The middle column presents the subgroup with unsuccessful hemostasis at the end of observation time (Tmax&#x2009;=&#x2009;20&#x2009;sec. for aortotmy and 300&#x2009;sec. for portal vein anastomosis). 3. The left column shows mean of total blood loss in subgroups with successful hemostasis during observation time (20&#x2009;sec for aortotomy and 300&#x2009;sec for portal vein).

### PMID 27800586 (2017) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Liquid antiadhesive agents for intraperitoneal hernia repair procedures: Artiss&#xae; compared to CoSeal&#xae; and Adept&#xae; in an IPOM rat model.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-016-5277-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Adhesion formation remains an important issue in hernia surgery. Liquid agents were developed for easy and versatile application, especially in laparoscopy. The aim of this study was to compare the antiadhesive effect of fibrin sealant (FS, Artiss&#xae;), Icodextrin (ID, Adept&#xae;) and Polyethylene glycol (PEG, CoSeal&#xae;) alone and in combination and to evaluate the resulting effect on tissue integration of the mesh.
METHODS: A total of 56 Sprague-Dawley rats were operated in open IPOM technique. A middleweight polypropylene mesh of 2&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;2&#xa0;cm size was implanted and covered with 1: FS, 2: ID, 3: PEG, 4: FS&#xa0;+&#xa0;ID, 5: FS&#xa0;+&#xa0;PEG, 6: PEG&#xa0;+&#xa0;ID, 7: control group, uncovered mesh (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;8 per treatment/control). Observation period was 30&#xa0;days. Macroscopic and histological evaluation was performed.
RESULTS: Severe adhesions were found in group 2 (ID), group 6 (PEG&#xa0;+&#xa0;ID) and the controls. Best results were achieved with FS alone or FS&#xa0;+&#xa0;ID. Mesh integration in the treatment groups was reduced in comparison with the control group. This is a new finding possibly relevant for the outcome of intraperitoneal mesh repair. Group 6 (PEG&#xa0;+&#xa0;ID) showed an impairment of tissue integration with &lt;50&#xa0;% of the mesh surface in seven samples.
CONCLUSION: FS alone and in combination with ID yielded excellent adhesion prevention. ID alone did not show significant adhesion prevention after 30&#xa0;days. Tissue integration of FS-covered meshes was superior to ID or PEG alone or combined. PEG did show adhesion prevention comparable to FS but evoked impaired tissue integration. So Artiss&#xae; is among the most potent antiadhesive agents in IPOM repair.

### PMID 28736354 (2017) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Novel Technique of Percutaneous Fat Graft for Repair of Persistent Large Pseudomeningocele.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2017.07.089 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Pseudomeningocele is an uncommon but problematic complication in lumbar spine surgery. Initial conservative measures frequently are successful, but persistence requires additional management. The current surgical approach can involve a range of techniques, including blood patches, hydrogel/fibrin sealants, drains, open surgical repair of the dura, or a combination of the all techniques if symptoms persist. This report demonstrates a novel technique for repair via a percutaneous approach to deliver an autologous fat graft into the pseudomeningocele.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 64-year-old woman with a history of multiple complex lumbar spinal surgeries with previous durotomy had persistent positional headaches from an unresolved pseudomeningocele from L3 to L5. The defect and symptoms remained after all available surgical options were exhausted, including blood patches, hydrogel sealants (Duraseal), and open surgical repair with muscle and Gelfoam grafts. After autologous fat harvest, the patient underwent percutaneous repair of the pseudomeningocele with simultaneous aspiration of cerebrospinal fluid and injection of fat into the defect space.
CONCLUSIONS: At 3 months postoperatively, the patient's symptoms were resolved with no clinical or radiographic findings of nerve root or thecal sac impingement and complete obliteration of the pseudomeningocele. This less-invasive approach offers the option of open surgical repair for persistent pseudomeningocele with the use of autologous graft material.

### PMID 28676314 (2017) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Cerebrospinal fluid leaks after transsphenoidal surgery - Effect of a polyethylene glycol hydrogel dural sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2017.06.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To investigate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak rates after mainly endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery with and without polyethylene glycol hydrogel dural sealant (DuraSeal&#xae;), we prospectively collected data from a single-centre consecutive case series over four years from January 2007 to December 2010 inclusive. 250 patients were identified (135 male, 115 female; median age 52years, range 14-83). 180 patients received DuraSeal&#xae; (72%). 85 (34%) had intra-operative dural breach and 13 (5.2%) developed post-operative CSF leaks (3 without intra-operative dural breach) requiring lumbar drainage or formal repair. Of this group 5/251 (2.0%) patients required a formal repair. Post-operative CSF leak was seen in 5/189 (2.7%) of patients with pituitary adenoma, of which 2/5 (40%) were in cases undergoing revision surgery. 5/13 (38.4%) patients who developed a CSF leak presented with either Rathke's cleft cyst or craniopharyngioma. 3/71 patients not receiving DuraSeal&#xae; leaked (4.2%) and 10/180 patients receiving DuraSeal&#xae; leaked (5.6%). 11/234 patients without Tisseel (4.7%) and 2/16 receiving Tisseel (12.5%) leaked. 54 patients (22%) received intra-operative lumbar drains, one of whom developed subsequent CSF leak (1.9%), in contrast to 12/197 (6.1%) of patients without intra-operative lumbar drains who later developed CSF leak. The rate of post-operative CSF leak requiring re-exploration and nasoseptal flap repair was low (2.0%) in this mainly endoscopic case series without statistically significant benefit from either DuraSeal&#xae; or Tisseel. Intra-operative and post-operative lumbar drainage appears beneficial in patients at higher risk of post-operative CSF leak.

### PMID 28632556 (2017) — Clinical spine surgery
TITLE: Watertight Sealing Without Lumbar Drainage for Incidental Ventral Dural Defect in Transthoracic Spine Surgery: A Retrospective Review of 53 Cases.
DOI: 10.1097/BSD.0000000000000249 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective review.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of the triple layer closure technique to establish watertight sealing without diversion of lumbar drainage, in preventing persistent incidental subarachnoid-pleural fistula and other neurological complications related to excessive drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) after dural defect in transthoracic ossified posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) surgery.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: CSF leakage into the pleural cavity leads to unfavorable conditions for natural healing of incidental durotomy due to the negative pressure environment of the pleural space and lack of wound healing around the bony cavity near the decompressed spinal cord. This often leads to a persistent incidental subarachnoid-pleural fistula. In addition, diversion of lumbar drainage may lead to excessive CSF drainage resulting in intracranial hypotension. To avoid this, we studied the efficacy of a modified sealing method to establish a more watertight covering at the ventral dural defect without lumbar CSF drainage.
METHODS: Fifty-three patients who had CSF leakage from the ventral aspect of the spinal cord during transthoracic spine surgery for thoracic OPLL between 2004 and 2013 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were divided into 2 groups: a conventional group (group A) and a triple layer closure group (group B). In group A (n=33 patients), the dural defect was covered with fibrin glue (Beriplast P) mixed with gelfoam (Spongostan Standard) with subsequent subarachnoid lumbar drainage. In group B (n=20 patients), the dural defect was sealed using the triple layer technique with 2 layers of fibrin glue and gelatin sponge plus a third layer of synthetic hydrogel (Duraseal, Dural Sealant System) without subsequent subarachnoid lumbar drainage. Both groups had chest tubes that drained through an underwater seal. Clinical data including duration and total amount of drainage (chest tube and lumbar drainage), related complications, and duration of hospital stay were compared between the 2 groups.
RESULTS: Compared with the patients in group A, group B had a significantly smaller total volume of drainage and shorter chest tube drainage time (P&lt;0.05) during their hospital stay. In group A, complications occurred in 6 cases (18.2%), including 3 cases of intracranial hypotension combined with transient mental status alteration, postural headache, and dizziness, 1 case of regional atelectasis with pneumonia, and 2 cases of revision thoracotomy. Revision thoracotomy was performed to treat persistent subarachnoid-pleural fistula due to significant and prolonged CSF leakage. In group B, there were no complications and no revision thoracotomy was needed. The mean duration of hospital stay was shorter in group B (15.6 d) compared with group A (22.4 d).
CONCLUSIONS: The established watertight closure of the dural defect using the triple layer sealing method without lumbar drainage was more effective and safe.

### PMID 29267611 (2017) — Brazilian journal of cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Comparison of Arterial Repair through the Suture, Suture with Fibrin or Cyanoacrylate Adhesive in Ex-Vivo Porcine Aortic Segment.
DOI: 10.21470/1678-9741-2017-0107 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Tissue adhesives can be used as adjacent to sutures to drop or avoid bleeding in cardiovascular operations.
OBJECTIVE: To verify the efficiency of fibrin and cyanoacrylate adhesive to seal arterial sutures and if the adhesives penetrate through suture line to the inner of arteries.
METHODS: 20 abdominal aorta segments of pigs were divided into two groups according to the adhesive which would be used as adjacent to the suture. In every arterial segment an arteriotomy was done, followed by a conventional artery closure. Afterwards a colloidal fluid was injected inside the arterial segment with a simultaneous intravascular pressure monitoring up to a fluid leakage through the suture. This procedure was repeated after application of one of the adhesives on the suture in order to check if the bursting pressure increases. The inner aorta segments also were analyzed in order to check if there was intraluminal adhesive penetration.
RESULTS: In Suture 1 group, the mean arterial pressure sustained by the arterial suture reached 86&#xb1;5.35 mmHg and after the fibrin adhesive application reached 104&#xb1;11.96 (P&lt;0.002). In the Suture 2 group, the mean arterial pressure sustained by the suture reached 83&#xb1;2.67 mmHg and after the cyanoacrylate adhesive application reached 152&#xb1;14.58 mmHg (P&lt;0.002). Intraluminal adhesive penetration has not been noticed.
CONCLUSION: There was a significant rise in the bursting pressure when tissue adhesives were used as adjacent to arterial suture, and this rise was higher if the cyanoacrylate adhesive was used. In addition, the adhesives do not penetrate through the suture line into the arteries.

### PMID 29279844 (2017) — BioMed research international
TITLE: Effectiveness of Fibrin Sealant Patch in Reducing Drain Volume after Pelvic Lymph Node Dissection in Women with Gynecologic Malignancy.
DOI: 10.1155/2017/3086857 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The goal of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of fibrin sealant in decreasing postoperative lymphatic drainage in women after pelvic lymphadenectomy and/or para-aortic lymphadenectomy during gynecologic cancer surgery.
METHODS: This study is a retrospective case-control study. Forty-five patients who underwent staging surgery were enrolled. Twenty-seven patients were in the fibrin sealant group (group A) and 18 in the control group (group B). The two groups were compared for the total volume of drain, hospital stay, harvested lymph node, and incidence of asymptomatic lymphocele. Lymphocele formation was evaluated by computed tomography (CT) on 3 months after surgery.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in patient demographics between group A and B with respect to age, BMI, and harvested lymph nodes. Patients who received fibrin sealants had reduced total volume of drainage from postoperative days 2 to 5 compared to the control group (group A versus group B: 994.819 &#xb1; 745.85&#x2009;ml versus 1847.89 &#xb1; 1241.41&#x2009;ml; P = 0.015). However no differences were observed in hospital stay (P = 0.282), duration of drain (P = 0.207), and incidence of asymptomatic lymphocele at 3 months (P = 0.126).
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate that the application of fibrin sealants after pelvic and/or para-aortic lymphadenectomy may reduce lymphatic drainage in gynecologic malignancy.

### PMID 29221263 (2017) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: A prospective randomized trial comparing homologous and autologous fibrin sealants for the control of alveolar air leak.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2017.08.02 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative air leak is a common complication seen after pulmonary resection. It is a significant reason of morbidity and also leads to greater hospital cost owing to prolonged length of stay. The purpose of this study is to compare homologous sealant with autologous one to prevent air leak following pulmonary resection.
METHODS: A total of 57 patients aged between 20 and 79 (mean age: 54.36) who underwent pulmonary resection other than pneumonectomy (lobar or sublobar resections) were analyzed. There were 47 males (83%) and 10 females (17%). Patients who intraoperatively had air leaks were randomized to receive homologous (Tisseel; n=28) or autologous (Vivostat; n=29) fibrin sealant. Differences among groups in terms of air leak, prolonged air leak, hospital stay, amount of air leak were analyzed.
RESULTS: Indications for surgery were primary lung cancer in 42 patients (71.9%), secondary malignancy in 5 patients (8.8%), and benign disease in 10 patients (17.5%). Lobectomy was performed in 40 patients (70.2%), whereas 17 patients (29.8%) had wedge resection. Thirteen (46.4%) patients developed complications in patients receiving homologous sealant while 11 (38.0%) patients had complication in autologous sealant group (P=0.711). Median duration of air leak was 3 days in two groups. Time to intercostal drain removal was 3.39 and 3.38 days in homologous and autologous sealant group respectively (P=0.978). Mean hospital stay was 5.5 days in patients receiving homologous sealant whereas it was 5.0 days in patients who had autologous agent (P=0.140). There were no significant differences between groups in terms of measured maximum air leak (P=0.823) and mean air leak (P=0.186). There was no significant difference in the incidence of complications between two groups (P=0.711).
CONCLUSIONS: Autologous and heterologous fibrin sealants are safe and acts similarly in terms of air leak and hospital stay in patients who had resectional surgery.

### PMID 29142855 (2017) — Gland surgery
TITLE: Single port thoracoscopic treatment of thoracic duct injury after thyroidectomy with neck dissection.
DOI: 10.21037/gs.2017.07.14 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chylous leakage is a complication of thyroidectomy accompanied by bilateral neck dissection with incidence of 0.5-6.2%. A 51-year-old female patient underwent total thyroidectomy, bilateral and central neck dissection for papillary thyroid carcinoma. In post-operative 4th day, left sided chylous leakage was observed as 1,500 cc/day through neck drain. Leakage did not cease after 1-month conservative treatment so single port thoracoscopic intervention was performed. Under general anesthesia, patient was placed in left lateral decubitus position. An Alexis&#xae; retractor was placed through sixth intercostal space. Thoracic cavity was visualized with 30&#xba; scope. Posteroinferior edge of lower lobe was retracted superior posteriorly with a Foerster clamp to display inferior pulmonary ligament, which was then divided with electrocautery. Posterior mediastinal pleura between azygous vein and chest wall was incised to mobilize the vein. After that, mediastinal pleura between azygous vein and esophagus was cut longitudinally and esophagus was retracted anteriorly to dissect towards aorta. By dissection, thoracic duct was revealed as a thin tubular structure with occasional peristalsis. After isolation of the duct, it was clipped using Hem-o-lok&#xae;. Finally, fibrin sealant was applied to decrease risk of recurrence. One chest tube was placed to ensure adequate drainage of thoracic cavity and complete re-expansion of lung. Neck drain and chest tube was extracted in postoperative second and fourth day respectively and patient was discharged at 8th day. Single port thoracoscopy is a safe choice for treatment of chylous leakages due to cervical ductus thoracicus injury with faster recovery.

### PMID 28621617 (2017) — Journal of neurosurgery. Spine
TITLE: Intrathoracic meningocele associated with neurofibromatosis Type 1 and a novel technique for surgical repair: case report.
DOI: 10.3171/2017.2.SPINE16699 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1) is a neurocutaneous disorder that can have associated spinal abnormalities related to both bone and dural dysplasia. Thoracic meningoceles are one spine anomaly associated with NF1, although they are a fairly uncommon pathology. Surgical techniques to treat these meningoceles, usually undertaken only when the patient is symptomatic, are targeted at decreasing the size of the protrusion and improving lung capacity. Surgical interventions discussed in the literature include shunting the pseudomeningocele, primary repair with laminectomy, thoracoscopic plication, and reinforcement of the closure with cement, muscle, or fascia. Authors here report the case of a 43-year-old woman with NF1 with worsening pulmonary function tests and in whom shunting of the pseudomeningocele failed. Subsequently, a posterolateral thoracotomy was performed. The dura mater was reconstructed and primarily closed. On this closure a Gore-Tex soft-tissue patch was placed along with polypropylene mesh and Evicel fibrin sealant, followed by titanium mesh. At the end of the procedure, a chest tube was left in place and therapeutic pneumoperitoneum was performed to decrease the dead space as the lung did not fully expand with positive-pressure ventilation. The patient's pulmonary function tests improved after the procedure. Thoracic meningoceles are uncommon and difficult pathologies to treat surgically. Although shunting is arguably the least invasive surgical option, it can fail in some patients. When it does fail, there are other options that require a multidisciplinary approach and careful attention to the dural closure and reinforcing layers.

### PMID 28459951 (2017) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Localization of peripheral pulmonary lesions to aid surgical resection: a novel approach for electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopic dye marking.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezx114 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Video-assisted thoracoscopic sublobar resection of ultra-small, non-visible and non-palpable pulmonary lesions is challenging. The purpose of this study was to explore an alternative and efficient method for the localization of pulmonary lesions using electromagnetic navigation bronchoscopy (ENB).
METHODS: Between May 2015 and April 2016, 24 consecutive patients with 30 pulmonary peripheral lesions underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery for sublobar resection in our hospital. ENB was performed before surgery to guide a catheter adjacent to the target lesion, and fibrin sealant mixed with methylene blue was injected.
RESULTS: All patients underwent ENB with pleural dye marking followed immediately by surgery. No surgical complications occurred. The median size of the nodules was 11.0&#x2009;mm (range, 6-19&#x2009;mm). The median navigation time was 18.0&#x2009;min (range, 13 to 120&#x2009;min), and the average interval between dye marking and thoracic surgery was 22.1&#x2009;min (range, 15-40&#x2009;min). In all cases, the target pulmonary parenchyma was stained and had tactile sense with few complications. All lesions were fully excised, and pathological examination confirmed the accuracy of the dye staining.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant mixed with methylene blue injection with ENB guidance is a new effective approach to localize even ultra-small and non-palpable pulmonary lesions. The visible staining and tactile sensation of this method may allow more rapid intraoperative identification of lesions.

### PMID 27860350 (2017) — Macromolecular bioscience
TITLE: Enhanced Sealing by Hydrophobic Modification of Alaska Pollock-Derived Gelatin-Based Surgical Sealants for the Treatment of Pulmonary Air Leaks.
DOI: 10.1002/mabi.201600349 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Pulmonary air leaks are medical complications of thoracic surgery for which fibrin sealant is the main treatment. In this study, innovative sealants based on hydrophobically modified Alaska pollock-derived gelatin (hm-ApGltn) and a poly(ethylene)glycol-based 4-armed cross-linker (4S-PEG) have been developed and their burst strengths have been evaluated using fresh rat lung. The developed sealants show higher lung burst strength compared with the nonmodified original ApGltn (Org-ApGltn)-based sealant and a commercial fibrin sealant. The maximum burst strength of the hm-ApGltn-based sealant is 1.6-fold higher than the Org-ApGltn-based sealant (n = 5, p &lt; 0.05), and 2.1-fold higher than the commercial fibrin sealant (n = 5, p &lt; 0.05). Cell culture experiments show that modification of ApGltn with cholesteryl or stearoyl groups effectively enhances anchoring to the cell surface. In addition, binding constants between hm-ApGltn and extracellular matrix proteins such as fibronectin and fibrillin are increased. Therefore, the new hm-ApGltn/4S-PEG-based sealant has the potential for applications in thoracic surgery.

### PMID 27633564 (2017) — Microsurgery
TITLE: Effect of fibrin sealant in positioning and stabilizing microvascular pedicle: A comparative study.
DOI: 10.1002/micr.30094 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Fibrin sealants have had applications in hemostasis, cohesion, and promotion of healing in plastic surgery. In this article, we review cases where fibrin sealant was used to stabilize microvascular pedicles and compared with previous free flaps performed without fibrin sealant.
METHODS: Between 2008 and 2010, 62 consecutive patients underwent free tissue transfer for reconstruction; this involved 33 latissimus dorsi perforator flaps, 14 thoracodorsal artery perforator flaps, 9 latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flaps, 3 lateral thoracic artery perforator flaps, and 3 transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous flaps, used in head and neck reconstruction, lower limb reconstructions, breast reconstructions, and facial palsy reconstruction. Following microvascular anastomosis, the microvascular pedicles were placed in the optimal position, and fibrin sealant was used to fix and stabilize them. The complications, such as venous thrombosis, arterial thrombosis, hematoma, and vascular pedicle kinking, were compared with that of 672 previous free flaps without fibrin sealant for stabilizing microvascular pedicles.
RESULTS: Among the 62 free tissue transfers using fibrin sealant, there was only one complication involving flap failure (1.6%), in this case due to venous thrombosis. Analysis of 672 free flaps performed without application of fibrin sealant revealed 24 complications (3.6%), due to 3 venous thrombosis, 1 arterial thrombosis, 4 vascular pedicel compression due to hematoma, and 16 pedicle kinking. However, the comparison of complications between the free flap using fibrin sealant and the free flap without fibrin sealant were not statistically significant (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.65).
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant can be used to prevent vascular kinking and to position anastomosed vessels after successful micro-anastomosis and allow the reconstructive surgeon to overcome challenging situations of vascular pedicle related complications &#xa9; 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Microsurgery 37:406-409, 2017.

### PMID 28320573 (2017) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Bleeding-Related Complications and Readmission Rates Associated With Fibrin Sealant Use in Patients Undergoing Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery in the United States.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2016.11.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To compare the clinical and economic outcomes of EVICEL (Ethicon, Inc., Somerville, NJ) and TISSEEL (Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Westlake Village, CA) use in patients undergoing primary coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery.
DESIGN: Retrospective database analysis.
SETTING: Premier prospective hospital database (June 2009 through March 2014) covering approximately 20% of hospital discharges in the United States.
PARTICIPANTS: Adults undergoing primary CABG surgery who received either EVICEL or TISSEEL on the day of surgery (index date).
INTERVENTIONS: Two intervention groups were formed, EVICEL and TISSEEL. Clinical outcomes compared included postoperative bleeding complications (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification code: 998.1) and number of blood transfusions received on the index day. Economic outcomes compared included hospital length of stay, hospital costs, and 30-day readmission rates. Propensity-score matching was used to control for patient and hospital characteristics.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A total of 129,014 primary CABG surgery patients were identified; 986 patients (mean age: 64 years, 73% male) received EVICEL and 6,340 patients (mean age: 65 years, 75% male) received TISSEEL on the index day. After propensity-score matching, patients who received EVICEL compared with TISSEEL had significantly fewer postoperative bleeding complications (3.0% v 5.0%, p = 0.0197), index-day blood transfusion rates (19% v 34%, p&lt;0.0001), readmission rates (18% v 32%, p&lt;0.0001), and costs ($40,736 [standard deviation $19,465] v $46,005 [standard deviation $24,049], p&lt;0.0001). Results from a sensitivity analysis using a generalized linear model to control for other hemostatic agent use also favored EVICEL over TISSEEL.
CONCLUSION: Results from this real-world retrospective database analysis showed fewer bleeding complications and lower costs in patients undergoing primary CABG surgery who received EVICEL compared with TISSEEL.

### PMID 27931522 (2017) — American journal of otolaryngology
TITLE: Effectiveness of fibrin coating in the management of web formation after laryngomicrosurgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjoto.2016.09.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To explore the effectiveness of fibrin coating in reducing web formation after endoscopic management of the anterior commissure of the larynx.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using a spray device that is generally used for laparoscopic operations, we covered the wound with fibrin glue (Bolheal&#xae;) to avoid web formation. This technique was employed in cases wherein the anterior commissure was mainly managed by laser operation; the glue was sprayed after vaporization. Fibrinogen was first sprayed and the wound was properly soaked with a swab, which was followed by application of thrombin. We used this method in 17 cases and evaluated voice function by acoustic analysis - pitch perturbation quotient (PPQ) and amplitude perturbation quotient (APQ) - and maximum phonation time (MPT) before and after the operation.
RESULTS: No severe web formation was observed at three months after the operation. PPQ values improved from 3.048&#xb1;2.801% to 0.653&#xb1;0.463% (p&lt;0.05, paired t-test). APQ values improved from 7.996&#xb1;5.003% to 3.042&#xb1;1.872% (p&lt;0.05, paired t-test). Voice quality did not worsen in any of the cases. MPT values improved from 17.2&#xb1;10.8s to 26.7&#xb1;14.2s (p&lt;0.05, paired t-test) Voice function improved 3months after the operation in all cases.
CONCLUSION: The fibrin coating method is an easy and effective approach to avoid web formation without creating cervical wounds in cases that require handling of the anterior commissure under laryngomicrosurgery.

### PMID 29296285 (2017) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Tisseel's impact on hemostasis for 2-3 and 4-6-level lumbar laminectomies.
DOI: 10.4103/sni.sni_302_17 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tisseel (Baxter International Inc., Westlake Village, CA, USA), a fibrin sealant, was originally devised to strengthen repairs of spinal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistulas. Here, we evaluated how Tisseel correlated with hemostasis (e.g., defined as reduced postoperative drainage, time to drain removal, length of stay (LOS), and postoperative transfusion requirements) in 58 patients undergoing 2-3 vs. 79 patients having 4-6 level lumbar laminectomies.
METHODS: We assessed how Tisseel correlated with hemostasis in 58 patients undergoing 2-3 level laminectomies/stenosis (with 48 herniated discs and 20 synovial cysts, 1 degenerative spondylolisthesis) vs. 79 having 4-6 level laminectomies/stenosis (with 39 lumbar discs, 45 synovial cysts, and 26 degenerative spondylolisthesis).
RESULTS: Following 2-3 level laminectomies, the average drainage on postoperative day 1 was 87.26 cc, and on day 2 was 59.62 cc; most drains were removed and the majority of patients were discharged on postoperative day 2, requiring no transfusions. After 4-6 level decompressions, greater postoperative drainage was observed on postoperative days 1 (e.g., 156.63 cc), and 2 (115.8 cc), and many were continued for 3 (85.7 cc; 44 patients), and 4 postoperative days (93.6: 6 patients) respectively. Drains were typically removed and patients were discharged on postoperative days 3 and 4, with just 6 requiring transfusions. Notably, there were four CSF fistulas for patients undergoing 4-6 level laminectomies; one had a large disc hernation in conjunction with postoperative scare, while three had massive calcified synovial cysts extending to/through the dura.
CONCLUSIONS: Utilizing Tisseel as a hemostatic allowed us to quantitate hemostasis (the average postoperative drainage, time to drain removal, LOS, and postoperative transfusion requirements) for those undergoing 2-3 level laminectomies vs. 4-6 level procedures with large subsets also exhibiting herniated discs, synovial cysts, and degenerative spondylolisthesis.

### PMID 28863319 (2017) — Clinical biomechanics (Bristol, Avon)
TITLE: Comparison of mechanical compressive properties of commercial and autologous fibrin glues for tissue engineering applications.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiomech.2017.08.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin glues are widely used in orthopedic surgery as adhesives and hemostatic agents. We evaluated the compressive properties of selected fibrin glues in order to identify which are appropriate for tissue regeneration applications subject to compression.
METHODS: Uniaxial unconfined compression tests were performed on fibrin gels prepared from commercial and autologous products: (1) Evicel (Ethicon), (2) Tisseel (Baxter), (3) Angel (Arthrex), and (4) ProPlaz (Biorich). Cyclic loads were applied from 0 to 30% strain for 100cycles at 0.5Hz. Following cyclic testing, specimens were subjected to ramp displacement of 1% strain per second to 80% strain.
FINDINGS: Throughout cyclic loading, Evicel and Tisseel deformed (shortened) less than Angel at all but one time point, and deformed less than ProPlaz at cycles 10 and 20. The dynamic moduli, peak stress, and strain energy were significantly greater in Tisseel than all other groups. Evicel displayed significantly greater dynamic moduli, peak stress, and strain energy than Angel and ProPlaz. Following cyclic testing, Tisseel and Evicel were significantly less deformed than Angel. No specimens exhibited gross failure during ramp loading to 80% strain. Ramp loading trends mirrored those of cyclic loading.
INTERPRETATION: The tested commercial glues were significantly more resistant to compression than the autologous products. The compressive properties of Tisseel were approximately twice those of Evicel. All preparations displayed moduli multiple orders of magnitude less than that of native articular cartilage. We conclude that in knee surgeries requiring fibrin glue to undergo compression of daily activity, commercial products are preferable to autologous preparations from platelet-poor plasma, though both will deform significantly.

### PMID 28859245 (2017) — International forum of allergy &amp; rhinology
TITLE: Comparison of the effect of aerosolized fibrin sealant and biodegradable synthetic polyurethane foam on hemostasis and wound healing after endoscopic sinus surgery: a prospective randomized study.
DOI: 10.1002/alr.22011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Use of absorbable packing materials after functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) is associated with increased patient comfort and a lack of need for packing removal. Different materials may induce different patterns of mucosal healing and hemostasis. This study investigated the effect of fibrin sealant (FS; Tisseel) or biodegradable synthetic polyurethane foam (Nasopore&#xae; ) packing on hemostasis and wound healing after FESS.
METHODS: This prospective randomized controlled trial included 35 consecutive patients who underwent bilateral FESS for chronic rhinosinusitis. The patients were randomized to receive FS through aerosol spraying on 1 side and Nasopore packing on the opposite side. They were followed at 1, 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks after surgery. Endoscopically visible packing material, crusting, adhesion, bleeding, granulation tissue formation, frontal sinus patency, and adverse effects were assessed. Subjective symptoms related to nasal packing were evaluated by using questionnaires quantified with a visual analogue scale.
RESULTS: No significant differences were found between the FS-treated side and the Nasopore-packed side with respect to postoperative bleeding, adhesion, or frontal sinus patency. However, crusting and granulation were significantly lower in FS-treated nostrils (p &lt; 0.01). The patients' satisfaction and willingness to reuse the material were not significantly different between FS and Nasopore. There were no allergic reactions to either material.
CONCLUSION: FS and Nasopore were equally successful in achieving hemostasis and patient satisfaction after FESS. However, our results suggest that differential mucosal healing patterns may be induced by alternative absorbable hemostatic materials. FS-treated sides showed more optimal healing patterns than Nasopore-packed sides.

### PMID 28825024 (2017) — Surgery journal (New York, N.Y.)
TITLE: Efficacy and Safety of Artiss Fibrin Tissue Sealant Use in Rhytidectomy: A Review of 120 Cases.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0037-1599237 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hematoma formation has persisted as the most common complication in rhytidectomy. The objective of this study is to determine the efficacy and safety of Artiss (Baxter) for use in rhytidectomies. In addition, we determine the use of fibrin tissue sealants by facial plastic surgeons. In this retrospective chart review, 120 patients in a single private practice were identified who underwent a rhytidectomy from August 2013 to January 2015 by a single facial plastic surgeon. The last 60 rhytidectomies performed with Tisseel (Baxter) were compared with the first 60 rhytidectomies performed with Artiss. All perioperative or postoperative complications were identified and recorded, focusing on the incidence of hematoma. In addition, a six-question survey was created and sent to all members of the American Academy of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery. Results of the survey were recorded and analyzed for trends or patterns in the data. In total, 120 patients were assessed. In the Tisseel group, two complications of fluid collection requiring needle aspiration were recorded. No other complications were found. In the Artiss group, 10 complications were recorded, including 9 fluid collections requiring needle aspiration and 1 hematoma. In total, 179 members of the American Academy of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery completed the six-question survey. Of all respondents, 61 (34%) use tissue sealants for rhytidectomies, whereas 118 (66%) do not. Artiss is efficacious and safe for use in rhytidectomies. Its use obviates the need for surgical drains, and complications are minimal and similar in rate to the use of Tisseel.

### PMID 28715950 (2017) — Surgical innovation
TITLE: Efficacy of the Novel Medical Adhesive, MAR-VIVO-107, in an Acute Porcine Liver Resection Model.
DOI: 10.1177/1553350617720993 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Despite modern surgical techniques, insufficient hemostasis after liver trauma is still a major cause of morbidity and mortality after injury. Therefore, efficient hemostatic agents are indicated. In this study, we evaluated the hemostatic efficacy of a novel synthetic wound adhesive (MAR-VIVO-107) based on polyurethane/polyurea, compared with a widely used fibrin adhesive (Tisseel).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twelve German Landrace pigs were randomly assigned to 2 groups. The animals were operated under sterile conditions. A midline laparotomy was performed and the left liver lobe was isolated and resected, using a surgical scissor, in order to induce hepatic trauma. MAR-VIVO-107 or Tisseel was applied to the resected area. The animals were monitored for 60 minutes; thereafter, they were sacrificed under anesthesia. Blood and tissue samples were collected pre- and postresection for biochemical and hematological analyses.
RESULTS: MAR-VIVO-107 versus Tisseel (mean &#xb1; SD, P value)-postsurgical survival rate was 100% in both groups. Bleeding time was significantly higher in Tisseel compared with MAR-VIVO-107 (10.3 &#xb1; 5.0 vs 3.7 &#xb1; 1.5 minutes, P = .0124). In trend, blood loss was less in the MAR-VIVO-107 group (54.3 &#xb1; 34.9 vs 105.5 &#xb1; 65.8 g, P = .222). Aspartate transaminase levels were significantly lower in the MAR-VIVO-107 group when compared with the Tisseel group (39.0 &#xb1; 10.0 vs 72.4 &#xb1; 23.4 U/L, P = .0459).
CONCLUSION: The efficacy of MAR-VIVO-107 and comparable performance to the gold standard fibrin have been shown under pre-clinical conditions. MAR-VIVO-107 permits hemorrhage control within seconds, even in wet environment.

### PMID 28688644 (2017) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: A mussel-inspired double-crosslinked tissue adhesive on rat mastectomy model: seroma prevention and in&#xa0;vivo biocompatibility.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2017.03.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Seroma formation is a common postsurgical complication of breast cancer surgery. It delays wound healing and may lead to other more serious complications. Conventional methods of reducing seroma formation through suturing or placement of surgical drainage produce inconsistent clinical outcomes. Tissue adhesives are viable alternatives&#xa0;but most of them are unsuitable for internal use and for large-area applications because of weak tissue adhesion strength or biocompatibility issues. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and biocompatibility of a mussel-inspired double-crosslinked tissue adhesive (DCTA) in reducing seroma formation after mastectomy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-six female Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly assigned to either the saline control group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;12), the TISSEEL sealant (Baxter) group (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;12), or the DCTA group (n = 12). After performing a mastectomy and applying the corresponding treatment, the efficacy of DCTA was evaluated by measurement of seroma volume while its biocompatibility was assessed via micronuclei test and histopathologic examination.
RESULTS: During the 1-wk postsurgical period, the average total seroma volume of DCTA was significantly lower than the saline control group. Importantly, the mean seroma volume in DCTA showed a decreasing trend, whereas those in TISSEEL and saline control groups showed otherwise. The application of DCTA showed no genotoxic effect on the host and no severe inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that the good tissue adhesion strength and stability of DCTA were successful in reducing seroma formation over a period of 1&#xa0;wk. Furthermore, the results also showed that it is biocompatible, which makes it suitable for large-area, internal use.

### PMID 28648705 (2017) — The Journal of arthroplasty
TITLE: An Aprotinin Containing Fibrin Sealant Does Not Reduce Blood Loss in Total Hip Arthroplasty.
DOI: 10.1016/j.arth.2017.05.040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants are topical agents used to reduce perioperative blood loss; however, their efficacy in total hip arthroplasty (THA) remains uncertain. The purpose of this study was to determine if a fibrin sealant containing aprotinin as an antifibrinolytic agent, TISSEEL (Baxter, Deerfield, IL), reduces postoperative blood loss and transfusion during THA when compared with intravenous (IV) tranexamic acid (TXA) and control groups.
METHODS: Three retrospective uniform cohorts of primary THA procedures were identified, from a prospectively maintained database: 1 group who received TISSEEL, 1 group who received 1 g IV TXA, and 1 group who received neither (control). There were 80 patients in each group. Outcome measures included the lowest measured hemoglobin during postoperative hospitalization, greatest decrease in hemoglobin from preoperative to postoperative values, and blood transfusion rates.
RESULTS: The minimum postoperative hemoglobin level was significantly lower for TISSEEL patients compared with that of IV TXA patients (P&#xa0;= .021) and no different when compared with that of control patients (P&#xa0;= .134). Patients receiving fibrin sealant had a greater hemoglobin level decrease compared with that of IV TXA (P&#xa0;= .029) and control (P&#xa0;= .036). Postoperative transfusion rates were no different for the group receiving TISSEEL compared with those of control (P&#xa0;= .375) and were statistically greater when compared with those of IV TXA (P&#xa0;= .002).
CONCLUSION: TISSEEL fibrin sealant does not reduce postoperative blood loss or transfusions; however, IV TXA reduced postoperative transfusions compared with TISSEEL and control. Therefore, TXA is recommended to reduce perioperative blood loss, while, utilization of a fibrin sealant requires further refinements before being adopted for routine use in THA.

### PMID 28637109 (2017) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Closing the dura: dural hitching versus surgicel and tisseel overlay graft in craniocervicaldecompression for Chiari 1 malformation.
DOI: 10.1080/02688697.2017.1297363 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study compares dural hitching to surgicel and tisseel overlay graft following craniocervical decompression and C1 laminectomy with simple durotomy for Chiari I malformation. Outcome measures were syrinx decompression, headache resolution and complication rates.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of case notes was conducted. Patients who had undergone craniocervical decompression (CCD) were grouped by method of dural closure. Outcomes compared were rates of syrinx decompression, headache resolution, and post-operative complications. Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS v20.
RESULTS: We identified 32 adult patients for inclusion in this study. 53.1% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;17) had asyrinx, and 78.1% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;25) had a pre-operative headache. All were treated with suboccipital craniectomy, C1 laminectomy (with or without C2 laminectomy), and durotomy. The dura was either left open by dural hitching (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;23) or closed with surgicel and tisseel overlay graft (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;9). We found a statistically significant association between the method of dural closure and the rate of syrinx resolution. Resolution occurred in 91.7% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;11) of the hitching group, compared to 20.0% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1) of the overlay graft group: &#x3a7;2(1)&#x2009;=&#x2009;5.6, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.018. There were no statistically significant differences between the two groups in the rates of headache resolution or other complications.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with symptomatic Chiari I malformation and associated syringomyelia, syrinx resolution is more likely if the dura is hitched open rather than closed bysurgicel and tisseel overlay graft after durotomy.

### PMID 28600045 (2017) — Taiwanese journal of obstetrics &amp; gynecology
TITLE: The use of fibrin sealant (Tisseel) in laparoscopic excision of ovarian endometrioma.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tjog.2017.04.014 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the use of Tisseel, a 2-component fibrin sealant agent for the control of minor bleeding and repair of the ovarian defect at the end of laparoscopic cystectomy (LC) of endometriomas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From January 2011 to December 2015, an observational study of all patients who underwent LC of endometrioma using Tisseel (group A) was performed. The demographic and operative data, including age, body mass index, operative indications, operative time, estimated blood loss, complications, and postoperative hospital stay duration were recorded. A contemporary cohort of patients, who underwent LC of endometrioma without Tisseel (group B) was also retrospectively compared.
RESULTS: A total of 274 patients were recruited in this study (53&#xa0;LCs with Tisseel and 221&#xa0;LCs without Tisseel, respectively). Complete hemostasis was achieved in all patients. The mean size of main mass was significantly larger in the group A than in the group B (7.8&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;2.4&#xa0;cm vs. 7.0&#xa0;&#xb1;&#xa0;2.3&#xa0;cm, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.033) but the mean operating time, operative blood loss, febrile morbidity, and length of hospitalization were not significantly different between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: This preliminary series demonstrated the use of Tisseel in LC of endometriomas without any bipolar coagulation and/or suturing of ovarian tissue is clinically safe and feasible.

### PMID 28576300 (2017) — The British journal of oral &amp; maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealant (Tisseel&#x2122;) for mesh fixation in repair of the deep circumflex iliac artery (DCIA) free flap donor site.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bjoms.2017.04.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 28436361 (2017) — The Canadian journal of urology
TITLE: Robotic repair of vesicovaginal fistulas using fibrin sealant.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Although infrequent, when encountered vesicovaginal fistulas (VVF) are a difficult condition for both patients and physicians alike. After the first robotic repair was described in 2005, this has been an increasingly common treatment modality. At our institution between 2009 and 2014, eleven of these patients were evaluated and treated with robotic repair. However, fibrin sealant was used in place of the traditional tissue flap. Included are six patients who had previously undergone operative repair.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: After IRB approval was obtained, a retrospective study was undertaken to identify patients with VVF. Inclusion criteria were operative repair utilizing a da Vinci robotic system; there were no exclusion criteria. A total of eleven patients were identified, and in each case, a robot assisted laparoscopic approach was utilized and Tisseel fibrin sealant was used in lieu of tissue interposition.
RESULTS: All patients underwent successful repair of their VVF without evidence of recurrence at a mean follow up of 15.6 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Robotic vesicovaginal fistula repair with fibrin sealant seems to be a safe and viable alternative to the traditional repair utilizing a tissue flap.

### PMID 28385501 (2017) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Percutaneous Embolization of Delayed External Carotid Artery Pseudoaneurysm Eight Years after Partial Parathyroidectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2016.12.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: External carotid artery pseudoaneurysm (ECAP) is very rare. The usual mechanism is trauma or iatrogenic. We report a case of a patient with an asymptomatic, chronic ECAP secondary to partial parathyroidectomy. Percutaneous injection of the 2-component Fibrin Sealant (Tisseel; Baxter int, Deerfield, IL) with the 2 active ingredients (Sealer Protein Solution and Thrombin Solution) was carried out with successful occlusion of the pseudoaneurysmal sac. The 6-month follow-up computed tomographic scan confirmed the ECAP thrombosis. The ECAP endovascular approach is less invasive and reduces the complications of the open surgical intervention, especially in high-risk patients or presenting with hostile neck.

### PMID 28813710 (2017) — Urologia internationalis
TITLE: Is Endoscopic Vasectomy Just a Dream: An ex vivo Study on Feasibility and Reliability of Endoluminal Occlusion of Porcine Vas Deferens.
DOI: 10.1159/000478790 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION AND AIM: Surgical vasectomy remains the gold standard for fertility control in men. Endoluminal occlusion of the seminal ducts, thus avoiding an external incision, may become an appealing alternative to this approach. As our group has shown, nontraumatic endoscopic inspection of the seminal ducts is feasible in the human cadaver. We investigated the feasibility and reliability of occlusion using several commercially available medical sealing agents in the porcine vas deferens (VD).
METHODS AND MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Tests were conducted using 25 porcine spermatic ducts (10 cm length) ex vivo. The explanted specimens were fixed and cannulated using the Seldinger technique. We administered 5 different agents (n-butyle-2-cyanoacrylate, n-butyle-2-cyanoacrylate in combination with a platinum vascular coil, Tissucol Duo S&#xae;, Gelita Spon&#xae; and AFP Plug&#xae;) endoluminally. Tightness was evaluated after 5, 15, 60, 360, 720, and 1,440 min for each of the five grades, respectively, using a solution of methylene blue and saline injected under controlled pressure of 300 mm Hg followed by histological examination.
RESULTS: All agents were administered into the porcine seminal ducts (4 out of 5 via a ureteric catheter). Gelita Spon&#xae; and Tissucol Duo S&#xae; did not occlude the lumen sufficiently, whereas n-butyle-2-cyanoacrylate, n-butyle-2-cyanoacrylate in combination with coil, Tissucol Duo and AFP Plug&#xae; performed satisfactorily. In particular, cyanoacrylate combined with a coil was able to close the seminal duct tightly and for a long time. Histological findings confirmed this sealant's gapless adhesion. AFP Plug&#xae; application revealed similarly good results. However, its form needs to be optimized to ensure its suitability for endoscopic use.
CONCLUSION: Various developments regarding minimally invasive fertility control methods have been underway for decades. Further miniaturization of endoscopy and novel materials may pave the way for endoscopic fertility control in males in the future. We demonstrated the potential of commercially available medical sealing agents to reliably occlude the porcine VD.

### PMID 28683896 (2017) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Analysis of the biliostatic potential of two sealants in a standardized porcine model of liver resection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2017.06.038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Improved resection techniques has decreased mortality rate following liver resections(LRx). Sealants are known as effective adjuncts for haemostasis after LRx. We compared biliostatic effectiveness of two sealants in a standardized porcine model of LRx.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We accomplished left hemihepatectomy on 27 pigs. The animals were randomized in control group(n&#xa0;=&#xa0;9) with no sealant and treatment groups (each n&#xa0;=&#xa0;9), in which resection surfaces were covered with TachoSil&#xae; and TissuFleece&#xae;/Tissucol Duo&#xae;. After 5 days the volume of ascites(ml), bilioma and/or bile leakages and degree of intra-abdominal adhesions were analysed.
RESULTS: Proportion of ascites was lower in TissuFleece/Tissucol Duo&#xae; group. The ascites volume was lower in TachoSil&#xae; group. In sealant groups, increased adhesion specially in the TachoSil&#xae; group was seen. A reduction of the "bilioma rate" was seen in sealant groups, which was significantly lower in TissuFleece&#xae;/Tissucol Duo&#xae; group.
CONCLUSION: In a standardized condition sealants have a good biliostatic effect but with heterogeneous potentials. This property in combination with the cost-benefit analysis should be the focus of future prospective studies.

### PMID 28466646 (2017) — The British journal of radiology
TITLE: Ultrasound-guided transvaginal thrombin injection of uterine arteries pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1259/bjr.20160913 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the utility of transvaginal ultrasound-guided thrombin injection (UGTI) to treat uterine artery pseudoaneurysms (UAPs) as an alternative to emergency arterial embolization.
METHODS: Two females presenting with heavy vaginal bleeding were diagnosed with UAPs by pelvic CT scan. After UAP identification by transvaginal ultrasound, 2&#x2009;cm3 of thrombin (Tissucol&#xae;; Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Munich, Germany) was slowly injected into the UAPs using a 30-cm long 22-gauge needle through a needle guide attached to the vaginal probe. The same procedure was performed in both cases, and the Doppler sign disappeared immediately and the bleeding stopped.
RESULTS: We describe two cases of UAPs treated with transvaginal UGTI: one after intrauterine tandem and vaginal colpostat insertion for brachytherapy after diagnosis of cervical cancer (Case 1) and the other after the insertion of a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device (Case 2).
CONCLUSION: Transvaginal UGTI could be a minimally invasive tool to treat selected cases of UAPs with severe vaginal bleeding. Advances in knowledge: Transvaginal UGTI could avoid the need for uterine embolization and emergency hysterectomy in selected cases of UAPs diagnosed by CT scan.

### PMID 28419404 (2017) — Ophthalmic surgery, lasers &amp; imaging retina
TITLE: Use of Evicel Fibrin Sealant in Optic Disc Pit-Associated Macular Detachment.
DOI: 10.3928/23258160-20170329-13 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Optic disc pit is a rare congenital anomaly of the optic nerve. Retinal detachment is a common complication with poor outcomes. Many surgical alternatives have been described for the treatment of this condition, producing variable results. Herein, the authors describe four cases of optic disc pit-associated macular detachment managed with pars plana vitrectomy, fluid-air exchange, drainage of subretinal fluid through the optic disc pit, temporal peripapillary laser, and application of Evicel fibrin sealant (human) (Ethicon, Bridgewater, NJ) over the optic disc head. Case 1 showed stable visual acuity and improvement of subretinal fluid. Cases 2 and 3 showed visual acuity and subretinal fluid improvements. At the 1-week follow-up visit, Case 4 showed almost total subretinal fluid absorption. The sealant invariably disappeared between 1 and 2 weeks and was tolerated by all patients. This case series suggests that Evicel fibrin sealant may be considered as an adjunctive option in the surgical treatment of optic disc pit-associated maculopathy. [Ophthalmic Surg Lasers Imaging Retina. 2017;48:358-363.].

### PMID 27817915 (2017) — Ophthalmology
TITLE: Evicel versus Tisseel versus Sutures for Attaching Conjunctival Autograft in Pterygium Surgery: A Prospective Comparative Clinical Study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2016.09.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the outcome of pterygium surgery with conjunctival autograft using Vicryl sutures (Ethicon, NJ), Evicel fibrin glue (Omrix Biopharmaceuticals Ltd, Ramat-Gan, Israel), or Tisseel fibrin glue (Baxter Corp., Deerfield, IL).
DESIGN: Prospective, randomized study.
PARTICIPANTS: Eighty-nine adult patients with primary pterygium.
METHODS: Patients undergoing pterygium surgery with conjunctival autografting were randomized into groups receiving 10-0 Vicryl sutures, Evicel fibrin glue, or Tisseel fibrin glue.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Duration of surgery, level of patient discomfort, visual acuity (VA), surgically induced refractive change (SIRC), complications, and pterygium recurrence.
RESULTS: Eighty-nine patients participated: 25 in the Vicryl group, 29 in the Evicel group, and 35 in the Tisseel group. The patients' preoperative characteristics were similar in all groups. Fashioning and repositioning of the conjunctival autograft (flap time) was significantly shorter in the fibrin glue groups compared with the Vicryl group: 5.46 minutes for Evicel, 3.6 minutes for Tisseel, and 16.72 minutes for sutures (P &lt; 0.0001). The patient discomfort level during the first postoperative day was significantly lower in the fibrin glue groups compared with the suture group (P&#xa0;= 0.047). There were no significant group differences in the change in logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution VA before surgery and 3 months after surgery (P&#xa0;= 0.7). There were also no significant group differences in the SIRC (P&#xa0;= 0.108). The recurrence rate was 17.24% in the sutures group, 4.17% in the Evicel group, and 0% in the Tisseel group (P&#xa0;= 0.027 sutures vs. fibrin glue groups). Complications included 5 cases of conjunctival graft dislocation in the Evicel group, 1 case of pyogenic granuloma in the Tisseel group, and no complications in the sutures group (P&#xa0;= 0.019 sutures vs. fibrin glue groups).
CONCLUSIONS: Tisseel fibrin glue for the repositioning of conjunctival autografts in pterygium surgery was associated with a similar functional outcome as that of Vicryl sutures in terms of VA and SIRC. Pterygium recurrence, patient discomfort level, and surgery time were reduced markedly, as were flap dislocation and pterygium recurrence with Tisseel fibrin glue compared with Evicel fibrin glue.

### PMID 28235239 (2017) — Clinical otolaryngology : official journal of ENT-UK ; official journal of Netherlands Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology &amp; Cervico-Facial Surgery
TITLE: Prophylactic use of fibrin sealant (ARTISS&#x2122;) for facilitating safe transition to drain-free thyroid surgery: A single-centre case series review of 109 procedures.
DOI: 10.1111/coa.12854 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 28202253 (2017) — Clinical breast cancer
TITLE: Flap Fixation Using Tissue Glue or Sutures Appears to Reduce Seroma Aspiration After Mastectomy for Breast Cancer.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clbc.2017.01.005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Up to 90% of patients undergoing breast cancer surgery suffer from seroma formation, which can cause discomfort and various complications after mastectomy. This retrospective observational cohort study aimed to elucidate whether flap fixation with fibrin sealant (ARTISS) tissue glue reduces seroma formation and seroma aspiration after mastectomy when compared with flap fixation using Vicryl sutures and when compared with a conventional wound closure technique.
METHODS: All patients undergoing mastectomy due to invasive breast cancer or ductal carcinoma in situ were eligible for inclusion. From May 2012 to March 2013, all patients undergoing mastectomy in 2 large breast cancer centers were treated using flap fixation with Vicryl sutures. From September 2013 to March 2014, all patients undergoing mastectomy were treated with flap fixation using ARTISS tissue glue. The data were retrospectively analyzed and compared with a "drain-only" group that was not treated with flap fixation (May 2011-March 2012).
RESULTS: A total of 230 women who underwent mastectomy were retrospectively analyzed in this trial; 88 patients were included in the drain-only group (DO), 92 patients were included in the flap fixation group using Vicryl sutures (FF-1), and 50 patients were included in the flap fixation group using ARTISS tissue glue (FF-2). There was significantly less seroma formation in the group after flap fixation using sutures (P&#xa0;= .006). There were significantly fewer patients who required seroma aspiration in the FF-1 group (P&#xa0;= .001) and the FF-2 group (P&#xa0;= .001) after undergoing mastectomy and sentinel node biopsy or modified radical mastectomy.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that flap fixation after mastectomy using ARTISS tissue glue or sutures reduces postoperative seroma aspiration. As a result, flap fixation might lead to less patient discomfort. A randomized, prospective trial should be performed to verify these results.

### PMID 28181985 (2017) — Journal of burn care &amp; research : official publication of the American Burn Association
TITLE: Artiss Sealant&#xae;: An Alternative to Stapling Skin Grafts on the Dorsal Side of the Hand and Fingers.
DOI: 10.1097/BCR.0000000000000503 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The aim of this study was to evaluate the benefit of using a new slow-setting fibrin sealant compared with staples for adherence of split-thickness skin grafts on the backs of hands and fingers. Staple removal is often painful for patients. Twenty-eight patients were included for a graft total of 34 hands. The authors chose to test this sealant on zones that are often difficult to graft given their varied topographies. Its low concentration of thrombin (4 IU/ml) compared with other sealants provides it with prolonged polymerization time (60 seconds) making it easier to use in this location. All 34 grafts had taken at 5 days postoperatively and no graft required revision surgery. Six of our patients had sealant on one hand and staples on the other hand. All of the patients reported less pain on the sealant hand with a mean visual analog scale inferior to 2.6 times less (Mann-Whitney U test, P = .0035). Eighteen months after treatment, all of the patients had acceptable function and esthetic aspect of their hands with no difference noted between glued or stapled hands. The only notable drawbacks to the use of this sealant are the preparation and application time which is longer than with staples, the need to evacuate small seromas under the graft and obstruction of the drainage points by the sealant. The use of Artiss Sealant enabled us to reduce the amount of care and to decrease the pain because there was no staple removal.

### PMID 28640177 (2017) — International journal of gynecological cancer : official journal of the International Gynecological Cancer Society
TITLE: The Efficacy of Fibrin Sealant Patches in Reducing the Incidence of Lymphatic Morbidity After Radical Lymphadenectomy: A Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.1097/IGC.0000000000001051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Although pivotal in the oncological management of most tumors, radical lymphadenectomy is associated with a significant number of lymphatic complications. The aim of this meta-analysis is to evaluate the efficacy of fibrinogen sealant patches in reducing lymphadenectomy-related postoperative complications.
METHODS/MATERIALS: The electronic databases PubMed, Medline, and Scopus were searched using the terms "lymphadenectomy" or "lymph node dissection" and "TachoSil," "TachoComb," or "fibrin sealant patch." Series evaluating the efficacy of fibrin-thrombin collagen sealant patches were included in the meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Overall, 26 studies were retrieved through the literature search. Ten studies including 720 patients met selection criteria. The use of fibrin-thrombin sealant patches to the sole scope of reducing lymphadenectomy-related complications significantly reduced the incidence of lymphocele, symptomatic lymphocele, the need of percutaneous drainage procedures, the volume of lymph drained, and the duration of the drainage. No effect on wound and/or lymphocele infection was noted.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis demonstrates that the use of fibrin-thrombin sealant patches significantly reduces the total volume of lymph drained, the duration of the drainage, the incidence of lymphocele and symptomatic lymphocele, and the need for postoperative percutaneous drainage procedures. Its use does not affect the incidence of wound or lymphocele infections.

### PMID 28526037 (2017) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Off-pump sutureless repair for ischemic left ventricular free wall rupture: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-017-0603-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Clinical results of ischemic left ventricular free-wall rupture show high mortality rates.
METHODS: We reviewed studies published after 1993 on PubMed.
RESULTS: A sutureless technique using fibrin glue sheets or patches with/without fibrin glue might contribute to improved clinical results. However, some technique limitations remain for blowout-type ruptures, and the possibility of a pseudoaneurysm formation at the repair site after surgery should be considered.
CONCLUSIONS: The sutureless technique can be a promising strategy for the treatment of ischemic rupture, but serial echocardiographic studies should be mandatory for diagnosing a left ventricular pseudoaneurysm formation thereafter.

### PMID 28811680 (2017) — Mediators of inflammation
TITLE: The Antimicrobial Peptide Human Beta-Defensin-3 Is Induced by Platelet-Released Growth Factors in Primary Keratinocytes.
DOI: 10.1155/2017/6157491 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Platelet-released growth factors (PRGF) and its related clinically used formulations (e.g., Vivostat Platelet-Rich Fibrin (PRF&#xae;)) contain a variety of chemokines, cytokines, and growth factors and are therefore used to support healing of chronic, hard-to-heal, or infected wounds. Human beta-defensin-3 (hBD-3) is an antimicrobial peptide inducibly expressed in human keratinocytes especially upon wounding. The potent antimicrobial activity of hBD-3 together with its wound closure-promoting activities suggests that hBD-3 may play a crucial role in wound healing. Therefore, we analyzed the influence of PRGF on hBD-3 expression in human primary keratinocytes in vitro. In addition, we investigated the influence of Vivostat PRF on hBD-3 expression in artificially generated human skin wounds in vivo. PRGF treatment of primary keratinocytes induced a significant, concentration- and time-dependent increase in hBD-3 gene expression which was partially mediated by the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). In line with these cell culture data, in vivo experiments revealed an enhanced hBD-3 expression in experimentally produced human wounds after the treatment with Vivostat PRF. Thus, the induction of hBD-3 may contribute to the beneficial effects of thrombocyte concentrate lysates in the treatment of chronic or infected wounds.

### PMID 28808357 (2017) — Mediators of inflammation
TITLE: Platelet-Released Growth Factors Induce Differentiation of Primary Keratinocytes.
DOI: 10.1155/2017/5671615 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Autologous thrombocyte concentrate lysates, for example, platelet-released growth factors, (PRGFs) or their clinically related formulations (e.g., Vivostat PRF&#xae;) came recently into the physicians' focus as they revealed promising effects in regenerative and reparative medicine such as the support of healing of chronic wounds. To elucidate the underlying mechanisms, we analyzed the influence of PRGF and Vivostat PRF on human keratinocyte differentiation in vitro and on epidermal differentiation status of skin wounds in vivo. Therefore, we investigated the expression of early (keratin 1 and keratin 10) and late (transglutaminase-1 and involucrin) differentiation markers. PRGF treatment of primary human keratinocytes decreased keratin 1 and keratin 10 gene expression but induced involucrin and transglutaminase-1 gene expression in an epidermal growth factor receptor- (EGFR-) dependent manner. In concordance with these results, microscopic analyses revealed that PRGF-treated human keratinocytes displayed morphological features typical of keratinocytes undergoing terminal differentiation. In vivo treatment of artificial human wounds with Vivostat PRF revealed a significant induction of involucrin and transglutaminase-1 gene expression. Together, our results indicate that PRGF and Vivostat PRF induce terminal differentiation of primary human keratinocytes. This potential mechanism may contribute to the observed beneficial effects in the treatment of hard-to-heal wounds with autologous thrombocyte concentrate lysates in vivo.

### PMID 28686663 (2017) — PloS one
TITLE: In-vitro release pharmacokinetics of amikacin, teicoplanin and polyhexanide in a platelet rich fibrin-layer (PRF)-a laboratory evaluation of a modern, autologous wound treatment.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181090 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Platelet rich fibrin (PRF) is an autologous fibrin glue, produced from patients' blood, which, besides intraoperative use, has applications in the treatment of infected wounds. The combination with antimicrobial agents results in a prolonged antibacterial effect allowing for wound dressing change intervals of seven days even in infected wounds. The aim of this study was to evaluate release kinetics of amikacin, teicoplanin or polyhexanide from a PRF-layer.
METHODS: PRF mixed with teicoplanin, amikacin or polyhexanide was sprayed on a silicon gauze patch and put on a colombia agar with bacteria with known minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) and incubated for 24 hours and afterwards transferred to another agar with the same bacterial strain. Inhibition zones were measured every 24 hours. This was repeated on 7 consecutive days. Antibiotic concentrations were calculated by interpolation.
RESULTS: More than 1000 mg/L teicoplanin were released within the first 24 hours and 28.22 mg/L after 168 hours. Amikacin release was above 10,000 mg/L within the first 24 hours and still 120.8 mg/L after 120 hours. A release of polyhexanide could be verified for the first 24 hours only. Consequently teicoplanin and amikacin released from PRF showed antimicrobial in-vitro effects for almost a week, whereas an antimicrobial effect of polyhexanide could only be verified for the first 24 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: Our Results show that a weekly dressing regimen may be justified in wounds treated with PRF plus amikacin or teicoplanin, since bacteria will be eradicated over a considerable period of time after a single application of PRF.

### PMID 28552640 (2017) — Annals of anatomy = Anatomischer Anzeiger : official organ of the Anatomische Gesellschaft
TITLE: Platelet-released growth factors induce psoriasin in keratinocytes: Implications for the cutaneous barrier.
DOI: 10.1016/j.aanat.2017.04.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Millions of patients around the world suffer minor or major extremity amputation due to progressive wound healing complications of chronic or infected wounds, the therapy of which remains a challenge. One emerging therapeutic option for the treatment of these complicated wounds is the local application of an autologous thrombocytes concentrate lysate (e.g. platelet-released growth factors ((PRGF)) or Vivostat PRF&#xae;) that contains a multitude of chemokines, cytokines and growth factors and is therefore supposed to stimulate the complex wound healing process. Although PRGF and Vivostat PRF&#xae; are already used successfully to support healing of chronic, hard-to-heal and infected wounds the underlying molecular mechanisms are not well understood. Psoriasin, also termed S100A7, is a multifunctional antimicrobial protein expressed in keratinocytes and is involved in various processes such as wound-healing, angiogenesis, innate immunity and immune-modulation. In this study, we investigated the influence of PRGF on psoriasin expression in human primary keratinocytes in vitro and the influence of Vivostat PRF&#xae; on psoriasin expression in experimentally generated skin wounds in vivo. PRGF treatment of primary keratinocytes caused a significant concentration- and time-dependent increase of psoriasin gene and protein expression in vitro that were partially mediated by the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and the interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R). In accordance with these cell culture data, Vivostat PRF&#xae; induced a significant psoriasin gene and protein expression when applied to artificially generated skin wounds in vivo. The observed psoriasin induction in keratinocytes may contribute to the wound healing-promoting effects of therapeutically used thrombocyte concentrate lysates.

### PMID 29682257 (2017) — ORAL &amp; implantology
TITLE: Therapeutic efficiency of platelet gel for the treatment of oral ulcers related to chronic graft versus host disease after allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
DOI: 10.11138/orl/2017.10.4.398 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Platelet (PLT) gel has been successfully used in tissue regeneration of diabetic and surgical wounds through the releasing of growth factors such as basic fibroblast and PLT-derived growth factors. Based on this background, our previous clinical trial have assessed the feasibility and efficacy of PLT gel for the treatment of muco-cutaneous lesions related to graft versus host disease (GvHD) after allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantion (HSCT). The promising results reported in a small series of 6 patients, of whom 1 with oral ulcers, represent the rationale of the present study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The aim of this study was to verify the efficacy and safety of PLT gel for treating oral ulcers due to chronic GvHD. Allogeneic hemocomponents were used to obtain PLT gel with an automated system for the on-site preparation and application of patient (autologous) or healthy blood donor (allogeneic)-derived fibrin sealant or PLT-rich fibrin (Vivostat system, Vivostat A/S). Ten patients with multiple oral lesions related to chronic GvHD underwent allogeneic PLT gel as local therapy alone or in combination with systemic therapy in half of the cases.
RESULTS: After the second PLT gel application, all patients resumed the feeding and a significant improvement of the oral pain was observed. After a median of five PLT gel applications (range, 2-15), 7 out of 10 patients showed a complete response. No side effects were documented.
CONCLUSION: These data confirm that the PLT gel may be used as a safe and effective tool, alone or in combination with systemic therapy, for the treatment of mucosal lesions of mouth related to cGvHD.

### PMID 27345775 (2017) — Burns : journal of the International Society for Burn Injuries
TITLE: Successful application of keratinocyte suspension using autologous fibrin spray.
DOI: 10.1016/j.burns.2016.05.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The back is a challenging anatomical area to resurface in acute burns due to its large surface area, its dependent position with the patient lying down and the shearing forces applied to any method of resurfacing employed. This case study presents the use of Vivostat&#xae; (Vivostat A/S, Liller&#xf8;d, Denmark) in resurfacing the back in conjunction with Recell&#xae; regenerative epithelial suspension. Vivostat&#xae; (Vivostat A/S, Liller&#xf8;d, Denmark) is a "novel patented biotechnological process that enables reproducible preparation of autologous fibrin sealant or platelet rich fibrin without cryoprecipitation or a separate thrombin component" [1].
METHODS: A 29-year-old female sustained 27% total body surface area (TBSA) flame burns, including the whole back. This area was initially grafted with the sandwich autograft/allograft technique on day four after injury, with approximately 80% graft take on day eight. Unfortunately, there was subsequent significant graft loss on the back proving to be a stubborn area to treat despite further grafting sessions. This challenge led to the decision to use Vivostat&#xae; (Vivostat A/S, Liller&#xf8;d, Denmark) and Recell&#xae; to resurface the back.
RESULTS: The patient underwent one session of resurfacing with Vivostat&#xae; (Vivostat A/S, Liller&#xf8;d, Denmark) and Recell&#xae; and went on to have full healing on the back.
CONCLUSIONS: NICE (The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence) states that Recell&#xae; shows potential to improve healing in acute burns and we believe that its co-delivery with fibrin via Vivostat&#xae; (Vivostat A/S, Liller&#xf8;d, Denmark) allows for precise delivery of the fibrin suspended cells while minimising loss in the "run off" encountered when Recell&#xae; is just simply sprayed on, assisting the anchoring of keratinocytes to the wound surface and thus aiding in the treatment of challenging areas.

### PMID 28162204 (2017) — Zhonghua wai ke za zhi [Chinese journal of surgery]
TITLE: [Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of dural tears and the consequent cerebrospinal fluid leak during spine surgery].
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5815.2017.02.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Dural tears (DT) and the consequent cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) leak are not rare in spine surgeries. CSF leak can be troublesome, leading to pseudomeningocele, cutaneous CSF fistula, and meningitis. Revision surgery is unavoidable in some cases. The reported incidences of DT and CSF leak are different according to the various pathologies. Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament, revision spine surgery and multi-segment laminectomy have higher risks for DT. Various techniques have been described to manage this complication, such as bed rest, repair with dural substitutes, fibrin glue, gelatin sponge, lumbar drain, muscle flap, etc.Through objective evaluation of the evidence and transparency in the process of making recommendations, it is Chinese Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons' goal to develop evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of incidental DT and the consequent CSF leak during spine surgery. The current clinical guidelines focus on 9 clinical questions and the strength of recommendations were made based on the quality of the literature. The work group considers that this guideline recommendations aim to assist in delivering optimum, efficacious treatment and functional recovery from this complication. &#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x5916;&#x79d1;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x53d1;&#x751f;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x53ca;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x5e76;&#x4e0d;&#x7f55;&#x89c1;&#x3002;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x4f1a;&#x5e26;&#x6765;&#x591a;&#x79cd;&#x5e76;&#x53d1;&#x75c7;&#xff0c;&#x5982;&#x5047;&#x6027;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x81a8;&#x51fa;&#x3001;&#x76ae;&#x4e0b;&#x7aa6;&#x9053;&#x53ca;&#x86db;&#x7f51;&#x819c;&#x708e;&#x7b49;&#xff0c;&#x5c11;&#x6570;&#x60a3;&#x8005;&#x751a;&#x81f3;&#x9700;&#x8981;&#x63a5;&#x53d7;&#x7ffb;&#x4fee;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x3002;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x75be;&#x75c5;&#x7684;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x548c;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x53d1;&#x751f;&#x7387;&#x4e5f;&#x6709;&#x6240;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x3002;&#x540e;&#x7eb5;&#x97e7;&#x5e26;&#x9aa8;&#x5316;&#x3001;&#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x7ffb;&#x4fee;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x3001;&#x591a;&#x8282;&#x6bb5;&#x690e;&#x677f;&#x5207;&#x9664;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x7684;&#x98ce;&#x9669;&#x66f4;&#x9ad8;&#x3002;&#x9488;&#x5bf9;&#x8fd9;&#x4e00;&#x95ee;&#x9898;&#xff0c;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x91c7;&#x53d6;&#x4e86;&#x591a;&#x79cd;&#x63aa;&#x65bd;&#x8fdb;&#x884c;&#x5904;&#x7406;&#xff0c;&#x5305;&#x62ec;&#x5e73;&#x5367;&#x5236;&#x52a8;&#xff0c;&#x4f7f;&#x7528;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x8865;&#x7247;&#x3001;&#x7ea4;&#x7ef4;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x80f6;&#x3001;&#x660e;&#x80f6;&#x6d77;&#x7ef5;&#x4fee;&#x590d;&#x3001;&#x8170;&#x690e;&#x5f15;&#x6d41;&#x3001;&#x808c;&#x74e3;&#x586b;&#x585e;&#x7b49;&#x3002;&#x4e2d;&#x56fd;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x534f;&#x4f1a;&#x9aa8;&#x79d1;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x5206;&#x4f1a;&#x6307;&#x5357;&#x7f16;&#x5199;&#x5de5;&#x4f5c;&#x7ec4;&#x4f9d;&#x636e;&#x5faa;&#x8bc1;&#x533b;&#x5b66;&#x65b9;&#x6cd5;&#xff0c;&#x9488;&#x5bf9;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x60c5;&#x51b5;&#x5236;&#x5b9a;&#x4e86;&#x300a;&#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x53ca;&#x672f;&#x540e;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x7684;&#x5faa;&#x8bc1;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x8bca;&#x7597;&#x6307;&#x5357;&#x300b;&#xff0c;&#x7740;&#x91cd;&#x5173;&#x6ce8;9&#x4e2a;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x95ee;&#x9898;&#xff0c;&#x5e76;&#x4f9d;&#x636e;&#x6587;&#x732e;&#x8bc1;&#x636e;&#x7b49;&#x7ea7;&#x7ed9;&#x51fa;&#x76f8;&#x5e94;&#x7684;&#x63a8;&#x8350;&#x7b49;&#x7ea7;&#x3002;&#x5de5;&#x4f5c;&#x7ec4;&#x5e0c;&#x671b;&#x672c;&#x6307;&#x5357;&#x80fd;&#x591f;&#x4e3a;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x7684;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x8bca;&#x7597;&#x63d0;&#x4f9b;&#x6700;&#x4f73;&#x7684;&#x3001;&#x6709;&#x6548;&#x7684;&#x6cbb;&#x7597;&#x65b9;&#x6848;&#xff0c;&#x4ece;&#x800c;&#x8ba9;&#x60a3;&#x8005;&#x83b7;&#x5f97;&#x6700;&#x4f73;&#x7684;&#x5eb7;&#x590d;&#x6548;&#x679c;&#x3002;.

### PMID 28965258 (2017) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Low-voltage coagulation, polyglycolic acid sheets, and fibrin glue to control air leaks in lung surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-017-0829-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the efficacy of low-voltage coagulation (LVC) with polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheets (Neoveil, GUNZE Ltd., Japan) and fibrin glue to control intraoperative alveolar air leaks after lung surgery.
METHODS: We included 176 patients with non-small cell lung cancer who underwent thoracoscopic lobectomies. When alveolar air leak was confirmed after lung resection, we applied LVC system to the pleural defect followed by layers of PGA sheets and fibrin glue (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;40). We then analyzed postoperative air leaks (rate of occurrence and duration time).
RESULTS: 73% of patients (29/40 cases) experienced no postoperative air leaks. Although 11 patients experienced air leaks after surgery, there were no prolonged air leaks (&gt;7&#xa0;days) (resolution time, 3.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.4&#xa0;days; range, 2-6&#xa0;days). Two patients required drainage for late-onset air leaks, but their conditions improved without further treatment. There were no further adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of LVC with PGA sheets and fibrin glue following pulmonary resection efficiently prevented both intraoperative air leaks and prolonged air leaks after lung surgery.

### PMID 27956071 (2017) — Journal of pediatric surgery
TITLE: Solution blow spun polymer: A novel preclinical surgical sealant for bowel anastomoses.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.11.044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Solution blow spinning is a technique for depositing polymer fibers with promising potential use as a surgical sealant. This study assessed the feasibility and efficacy of solution blow spun polymer (BSP) for sealing bowel perforations in a mouse model of partial cecal transection. We then evaluated its use for reinforcing a surgical anastomosis in a preclinical piglet model.
METHODS: Three commercially available surgical sealants (fibrin glue, polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel, and cyanoacrylate) were compared to BSP in the ability to seal partially transected cecum in mice. For anastomosis feasibility testing in a piglet model, piglets were subjected to small bowel transection with sutured anastomosis reinforced with BSP application. Outcome measures included anastomotic burst pressure, anastomotic leak rate, 14-day survival, and complication rate.
RESULTS: For the mouse model, the survival rates for the sealants were 30% for fibrin glue, 20% for PEG hydrogel, 78% for cyanoacrylate, and 67% for BSP. Three of 9 mice died after BSP administration because of perforation leak, failure to thrive with partial obstruction at the perforation site, and unknown causes. All other mice died of perforation leak. The mean burst pressure at 24h was significantly higher for BSP (81mm Hg) when compared to fibrin glue (6mm Hg, p=0.047) or PEG hydrogel (10mm Hg, p=0.047), and comparable to cyanoacrylate (64mm Hg, p=0.91). For piglets, 4 of 4 animals survived at 14days. Mean burst pressures at time of surgery were 37&#xb1;5mm Hg for BSP and 11&#xb1;9mm Hg for suture-only controls (p=0.09).
CONCLUSIONS: Solution blow spinning may be an effective technique as an adjunct for sealing of gastrointestinal anastomosis. Further preclinical testing is warranted to better understand BSP properties and alternative surgical applications.

### PMID 29221335 (2017) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Chylothorax after mediastinal ganglioneuroma resection treated with fibrin sealant patch: a case report.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2017.08.73 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chylothorax is a severe condition resulting from the accumulation of chyle into the pleural space. We report the treatment of postoperative chylothorax after resection of mediastinal ganglioneuroma in a 17-year-old boy. Since conservative measures were not effective, we performed direct ligation of lymphatic vessels and pleurodesis. At subsequent surgical re-exploration for persisting chylothorax, accurate inspection of pleural cavity revealed residual chyle leakage. Fibrin sealant patches (TachoSil&#xae;) were placed over the source of leak with complete resolution of chylous effusion. To our knowledge, this is the first report of postoperative chylothorax successfully treated by the use of a fibrin sealant patch.

### PMID 29142186 (2017) — Journal of Nippon Medical School = Nippon Ika Daigaku zasshi
TITLE: Endoscopic Treatment of Boerhaave Syndrome Using Polyglycolic Acid Sheets and Fibrin Glue: A Report of Two Cases.
DOI: 10.1272/jnms.84.241 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Boerhaave syndrome, the spontaneous perforation of the esophagus, is an emergency, life-threatening condition. Current endoscopic treatment options include clipping and stenting, but the use of polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheets for treating the condition has not been reported. In recent years, PGA sheets have been used after endoscopic submucosal dissection to prevent perforations and stricture formation in patients treated for early-stage carcinoma. We report the cases of two patients with Boerhaave syndrome who were successfully treated using PGA sheets. The present clinical outcomes suggest that the use of PGA sheets is feasible and safe for treating patients with Boerhaave syndrome, and that they may be another treatment option.

### PMID 29078663 (2017) — Journal of visualized surgery
TITLE: Endoscopic treatment with fibrin glue of post-intubation tracheal laceration.
DOI: 10.21037/jovs.2017.06.12 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Post-intubation tracheal laceration (PITL) is a rare and potential life-threatening condition requiring prompt diagnosis and treatment. A conservative treatment is indicated in patients with laceration &lt;2 cm in length while surgery is the treatment of choice for laceration &gt;4 cm. For laceration between 2-4 cm, the best treatment is debate; some authors recommend surgery while others do not definitely exclude endoscopic treatment. Herein, we reported the endoscopic treatment with fibrin glue of PITL. The procedure is performed using a standard video-bronchoscopy in operating room; the patient is in spontaneous breathing and deep sedation. After identification of tracheal laceration, the fibrin glue is injected through a dedicated double lumen catheter into the lesion. After mixing both components of fibrin glue, polymerization of fibrin occurs resulting in an elastic and opaque clot that closes the lesion. The key success of the procedure is based on accurate patient selection. Patients are eligible if (I) they are clinically stable and in spontaneous respiration; (II) with a small and superficial tracheal laceration (&#x2264;4 cm in length and without oesophageal injury); (III) localized at level of the upper or middle trachea; and (IV) without clinical and/or radiological signs of mediastinal collection, of emphysema or pneumomediastinum progression, and of infection.

### PMID 29034022 (2017) — Annals of vascular diseases
TITLE: Mediastinal Perigraft Seroma after Repair of Type A Dissection with a Polyester Graft.
DOI: 10.3400/avd.cr.16-00112 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Perigraft seromas are uncommon after surgical repair of the thoracic aorta with woven polyester grafts. A 50-year-old woman required redo sternotomy for the treatment of a perigraft seroma 6 months after total arch replacement for acute type A dissection. After removal of a jelly-like mass, a prosthetic graft was covered with fibrin glue, and the bilateral pleurae beside the graft were opened widely for drainage of effusion into the bilateral pleural cavities. Bacterial culture and laboratory and histological examination of the content confirmed the final diagnosis of perigraft seroma. No evidence of recurrence was observed 4 months after drainage.

### PMID 27431923 (2017) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: A Case of Successful Therapy by Intrapleural Injection of Fibrin Glue for Chylothorax after Lung Transplantation for Lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
DOI: 10.5761/atcs.cr.15-00319 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 37-year-old woman underwent bilateral lung transplantation for lymphangioleiomyomatosis. Dense pleural adhesions due to past pleurodesis for chylothorax were observed and dissected in both thoracic cavities. The patient developed chylothorax after transplant. Chylothorax in the right thoracic cavity was successfully treated by conventional pleurodesis; however, pleural effusion from the left thoracic cavity was not reduced. According to fluoroscopic images obtained by injecting a contrast medium through the chest tube, the remaining pleural space in the left thoracic cavity was small and localized in the lower region adjacent to the mediastinum. We opted to fill this space with fibrin glue; we injected fibrinogen and thrombin solution into the space through the chest tube. We performed fibrin glue treatment three times and pleural effusion was dramatically decreased. We removed the chest tube on day 107 post-transplant. No recurrent chylothorax has been recorded for 10 years after lung transplantation.

### PMID 27211944 (2016) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Epicardial Tachosil Patch Repair of Ventricular Rupture in a 90-Year-Old After Mitral Valve Replacement.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2015.07.066 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report our experience with emergent treatment of ventricular rupture following a mitral valve replacement in a 90 year-old male. The repair was performed using a Tachosil patch (Baxter Health Care Corporation, Westlake Village, California), a fibrin sealant coated on an equine collagen sponge, and BioGlue (Cryolife, Kenneson, GA) and bovine pericardium (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA). Aside from early ventricular dysfunction requiring a low-dose dopamine infusion, this patient's recovery was uneventful. Follow-up echocardiograms demonstrated no gross anatomic abnormality at the repair site, and steady improvement in his ventricular function.

### PMID 27437022 (2016) — Korean Journal of Spine
TITLE: Repair of Inaccessible Ventral Dural Defect in Thoracic Spine: Double Layered Duraplasty.
DOI: 10.14245/kjs.2016.13.2.87 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We propose a double layered (intradural and epidural patch) duraplasty that utilizes Lyoplant and Duraseal. We examined a 47-year-old woman after decompression for thoracic ossification of posterior longitudinal ligament was performed in another hospital. On postoperative day 7, she complained of weakness in both legs. Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection with cord compression. In the operative field, we found 2 large dural defects on the ventral dura mater. We performed a conventional fat graft with fibrin glue. However, the patient exhibited neurologic deterioration, and a postoperative MRI again showed CSF collection. We performed dorsal midline durotomy and inserted a intradural and epidural Lyoplant patch. She immediately experienced diminishing back pain postoperatively. Her visual analog scale and motor power improved markedly. Postoperative MRIs performed at 2 and 16 months showed no spinal cord compression or CSF leakage to the epidural space. We describe a new technique for double layered duraplasty. Although we do not recommend this technique for all dural repairs, double-layered duraplasty may be useful for repairing large inaccessible dural tears in cases of persistent CSF leakage refractory to conventional management.

### PMID 28051764 (2016) — Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)
TITLE: The use of fibrin sealant during non-emergency surgery: a systematic review of evidence of benefits and harms.
DOI: 10.3310/hta20940 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants are used in different types of surgery to prevent the accumulation of post-operative fluid (seroma) or blood (haematoma) or to arrest haemorrhage (bleeding). However, there is uncertainty around the benefits and harms of fibrin sealant use.
OBJECTIVES: To systematically review the evidence on the benefits and harms of fibrin sealants in non-emergency surgery in adults.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic databases [MEDLINE, EMBASE and The Cochrane Library (including the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects, the Health Technology Assessment database and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials)] were searched from inception to May 2015. The websites of regulatory bodies (the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, the European Medicines Agency and the Food and Drug Administration) were also searched to identify evidence of harms.
REVIEW METHODS: This review included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies using any type of fibrin sealant compared with standard care in non-emergency surgery in adults. The primary outcome was risk of developing seroma and haematoma. Only RCTs were used to inform clinical effectiveness and both RCTs and observational studies were used for the assessment of harms related to the use of fibrin sealant. Two reviewers independently screened all titles and abstracts to identify potentially relevant studies. Data extraction was undertaken by one reviewer and validated by a second. The quality of included studies was assessed independently by two reviewers using the Cochrane Collaboration risk-of-bias tool for RCTs and the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination guidance for adverse events for observational studies. A fixed-effects model was used for meta-analysis.
RESULTS: We included 186 RCTs and eight observational studies across 14 surgical specialties and five reports from the regulatory bodies. Most RCTs were judged to be at an unclear risk of bias. Adverse events were inappropriately reported in observational studies. Meta-analysis across non-emergency surgical specialties did not show a statistically significant difference in the risk of seroma for fibrin sealants versus standard care in 32 RCTs analysed [n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3472, odds ratio (OR) 0.84, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.68 to 1.04; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.13; I2&#x2009;=&#x2009;12.7%], but a statistically significant benefit was found on haematoma development in 24 RCTs (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;2403, OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.86; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01; I2&#x2009;=&#x2009;0%). Adverse events related to fibrin sealant use were reported in 10 RCTs and eight observational studies across surgical specialties, and 22 RCTs explicitly stated that there were no adverse events. One RCT reported a single death but no other study reported mortality or any serious adverse events. Five regulatory body reports noted death from air emboli associated with fibrin sprays.
LIMITATIONS: It was not possible to provide a detailed evaluation of individual RCTs in their specific contexts because of the limited resources that were available for this research. In addition, the number of RCTs that were identified made it impractical to conduct independent data extraction by two reviewers in the time available.
CONCLUSIONS: The effectiveness of fibrin sealants does not appear to vary according to surgical procedures with regard to reducing the risk of seroma or haematoma. Surgeons should note the potential risk of gas embolism if spray application of fibrin sealants is used and not to exceed the recommended pressure and spraying distance. Future research should be carried out in surgery specialties for which only limited data were found, including neurological, gynaecological, oral and maxillofacial, urology, colorectal and orthopaedics surgery (for any outcome); breast surgery and upper gastrointestinal (development of haematoma); and cardiothoracic heart or lung surgery (reoperation rates). In addition, studies need to use adequate sample sizes, to blind participants and outcome assessors, and to follow reporting guidelines.
STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42015020710.
FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.

### PMID 27341135 (2016) — Colloids and surfaces. B, Biointerfaces
TITLE: Effect of alkyl chain length on the interfacial strength of surgical sealants composed of hydrophobically-modified Alaska-pollock-derived gelatins and poly(ethylene)glycol-based four-armed crosslinker.
DOI: 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2016.06.017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Surgical sealants are widely used clinically. Fibrin sealant is a commonly used sealant, but is ineffective under wet conditions during surgery. In this study, we developed surgical sealants composed of hydrophobically modified Alaska-pollock-derived gelatins (hm-ApGltns) with different alkyl chain lengths from C3 to C18 and a poly(ethylene)glycol-based 4-armed crosslinker (4S-PEG). The burst strength of the hm-ApGltns-based sealant was evaluated using a fresh porcine blood vessel and was found to increase with increasing alkyl chain length from 167&#xb1;22 to 299&#xb1;43mmHg when the substitution ratio of amino groups of ApGltn was around 10mol%. The maximum burst strength was observed when stearoyl-group modified ApGltn (Ste-ApGltn)/4S-PEG-based sealant was used, displaying 3-fold higher burst strength than the original ApGltn (Org-ApGltn)/4S-PEG sealant, and 10-fold higher than the commercial fibrin sealant. Ste-ApGltn/4S-PEG-based sealant was biodegraded in rat subcutaneous tissue within 8 weeks without severe inflammation. By molecular interaction analysis using surface plasmon resonance, the binding constant of Ste-ApGltn to fibronectin was found to be 9-fold higher than that of Org-ApGltn. Therefore, the developed sealant, in particular the Ste-ApGltn/4S-PEG-based sealant, has potential applications in the field of cardiovascular surgery as well as thoracic surgery.

### PMID 27217265 (2016) — Chest
TITLE: Abrasion Plus Local Fibrin Sealant Instillation Produces Pleurodesis Similar to&#xa0;Pleurectomy in Rabbits.
DOI: 10.1016/j.chest.2016.05.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Pleurodesis performed either by pleurectomy or pleural abrasion is recommended in the approach to primary spontaneous pneumothorax to avoid recurrence. However, the efficacy of parietal pleural abrasion in producing pleurodesis is questioned. This study aims to determine the efficacy of apical abrasion alone, abrasion plus fibrin sealant application, and pleurectomy in producing pleurodesis in rabbits.
METHODS: Rabbits were subjected to video-assisted thoracic surgery alone (control) or to video-assisted thoracic surgery with apical gauze abrasion, abrasion plus fibrin sealant instillation, or apical pleurectomy. Blood samples were collected preoperatively and 48&#xa0;h and 28&#xa0;days postoperatively to measure total leukocytes (white blood cell count), neutrophil counts, and serum interleukin (IL)-8 levels. After 28&#xa0;days the animals were sacrificed for macroscopic evaluation of the degree of apical pleurodesis and microscopic evaluation of local pleural fibrosis and collagen deposition.
RESULTS: White blood cell and neutrophil counts were similar in all groups, whereas the serum IL-8 level peaked at 48&#xa0;h in all groups and decreased after 28&#xa0;days, except in the pleurectomy group. After 28&#xa0;days the abrasion plus fibrin sealant and pleurectomy groups had significantly more pleural adhesions, pleural fibrosis, and collagen deposition than the abrasion alone group, mainly due to thick mature fibers.
CONCLUSIONS: Abrasion with local fibrin sealant instillation is as effective as pleurectomy in producing pleurodesis in rabbits. Apical pleurectomy elicits a more persistent elevation of serum IL-8 levels than apical abrasion alone or abrasion plus fibrin adhesive instillation.

### PMID 27107043 (2016) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Effectiveness and predictability of pleurodesis with the Tachosil&#xae; surgical patch compared with talc poudrage: an experimental study.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezw118 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The human fibrinogen/thrombin surgical patch is proposed for videothoracoscopic pleurodesis after recurrent observation in routine clinical practice of site-specific pleuro-pulmonary adhesions.
METHODS: A total of 36 experimental videothoracoscopies were performed on 18 pigs, all of which underwent a bilateral sequential procedure. The right or left side was casually approached and two 4.8 &#xd7; 4.8 cm Tachosil&#xae; patches were placed over the dorsal lung surface in the highest antigravitary position through a double-port thoracoscopy. The contralateral side was subsequently entered by a single-port thoracoscopy to perform talc poudrage in accordance with current recommendations (1 g/18 kg). Thoracoscopy and autopsy were performed after 60 days to evaluate the outcome. Pleurodesis was graded on a predefined three-tier scale (none-moderate-firm); specimens were then submitted to the pathologist. The statistical analyses performed were: frequencies distribution, variables association test and hypothesis testing using binomial distribution.
RESULTS: Pleurodesis was firm in 15/18 cases (P = 0.004), moderate in 2/18, and none in 1/18 cases with the sealant matrix. Talc pleurodesis was firm in 7/18 cases and moderate in 11/18. No surgical, medical, behavioural or growth disorders were recorded. There was complete correspondence between lung surface covered by the sealant patch and pleural adhesion topography (P &lt; 0.001) and no other sites of adhesion were found at autopsy, whereas talc effect was commonly found to produce random pleural cavity obliteration, most frequently in declivous places, with inhomogeneous pleural adhesion for tissue density and rough/smooth outline (P &lt; 0.001). The pathologist disclosed that talc creates a variable and unpredictable inflammatory background, sometimes severe, with the development of many granulomas. Fibrin sealant patch pleurodesis is caused by connective tissue irrespective of the pleural and pulmonary anatomy.
CONCLUSIONS: The fibrin sealant patch is effective in producing localized pleurodesis in swine. The morphology and topography of the adhesions, 2 months after the patch placement, are consistent and more predictable than after talc poudrage. The latter causes a diffuse pleurodesis which is not predictable, with a predominantly gravitational location and produces a much more serious inflammatory response.

### PMID 27011040 (2016) — Heart, lung &amp; circulation
TITLE: Novel Technique Using Polyester Fabric and Fibrin Sealant Patch for Acute Aortic Dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.hlc.2016.02.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe a simple and effective technique for acute aortic dissection using a combination of polyester fabric and a fibrin sealant patch (FSP) to achieve effective reinforcement and haemostasis of the aortic stump. Firstly, the 0.61mm thick knitted polyester fabric sheet was cut to half of the size of the FSP. Next, fibrin glue was sprayed onto the collagen layer of the FSP. Subsequently, a fabric sheet was placed upon it, and the FSP was put together with the irrigated collagen layer, and then completely dried to bind the patch. As a result, the dry fibrinogen/thrombin layers, as an adhesive surface, faced outward. This patch was trimmed to a 10-15-mm-wide strip. The composite patch was inserted into the false lumen. The stump was gently pressed to fix the aortic intima and adventitia. There are several advantages: the combined patch can be prepared during systemic cooling, and therefore can minimise the circulatory arrest time; secondly, the false lumen is not directly exposed to fibrin glue and so the risk of embolism is extremely low; thirdly, the expected haemostatic effect is greater as FSP lines the exterior of the intima, achieving haemostasis for suture holes.

### PMID 26548537 (2016) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Life-Threatening Cardiac Tamponade Secondary to Chylopericardium Following Orthotopic Heart Transplantation-A Case Report.
DOI: 10.5761/atcs.cr.15-00233 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chylopericardium is a rare complication in cardiac surgery, and an extremely rare occurrence in patients following orthotopic heart transplantation (OHT), which, however, can lead to cardiac tamponade. Here we present a case of a 59-year-old man who underwent OHT and suffered from chylopericardium resulting in cardiac tamponade late in the postoperative course, despite the initially uneventful early postoperative period (decreasing blood drainage was observed directly after the procedure, and the drains were safely removed). After the diagnosis of chylopericardium was made, the conservative treatment was initiated, which turned out to be insufficient, and eventually invasive approach for the recurrence of tamponade secondary to chylopericardium was required. We discuss the available therapeutic options for chylopericardium and demonstrate the successful invasive therapeutic approach with use of the absorbable fibrin sealant patch.

### PMID 26166293 (2016) — The Thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon
TITLE: Validation of an External Support for Coronary Artery Saphenous Vein Grafts without Fibrin Sealant.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1556083 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: &#x2003;The aim of the study is to report on a new technique for applying the eSVS Mesh (Kips Bay Medical, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States), an external saphenous vein support system, without the use of fibrin sealant.
METHODS: &#x2003;The mesh covers the entire body of the graft with the exception of both anastomoses. Fibrin sealant was not used to fix the mesh. Two patients underwent surgery using this preparation.
EVALUATION: &#x2003;At 4 weeks, computed tomographic angiography revealed no signs of mesh compression at either anastomotic area. The proximal anastomosis inflow diameter was greater than the diameter of the mesh-supported body of the graft.
CONCLUSION: &#x2003;This technique successfully eliminates the need for the use of sealant and supports favorable anastomotic geometry.

### PMID 26017909 (2016) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Transtracheal thoracic natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) in a swine model.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-015-4228-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) has the potential to be the final frontier in minimally invasive procedures in thoracic surgery. In order for thoracic pleural NOTES to 1 day be ready for clinical trials, each step of the procedure must be independently evaluated for both safety and efficacy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the trachea as a portal of entry for thoracic NOTES.
METHODS: Eight 40-kg swine underwent right thoracic pleuroscopy in a survival model. In order to avoid inadvertent injury to the superior vena cava, endobronchial ultrasound was employed to select the location of airway incision. A 7-mm linear incision was then performed at the chosen location using an endoscopic electrocautery needle knife through a therapeutic flexible videobronchoscope. The mediastinal fat and parietal pleura were then dissected with electrocautery, and complete right pleuroscopy was performed. The tracheal and mediastinal portal of entry were then sealed with 1-2 cc of fibrin sealant. The pigs were kept alive for 21 days postoperatively. Postmortem diagnostic bronchoscopy was performed to assess tracheal healing. All tracheal specimens underwent histologic examination for healing and signs of mediastinal infection.
RESULTS: Thoracic NOTES procedures on all eight pigs were successful. There were no intraoperative complications except for one minor bleeding episode within the mediastinal dissection site which stopped spontaneously. Two pigs died from severe laryngospasm in the early postoperative period. Six pigs survived for 21 days post-procedure and experienced uneventful postoperative courses. Postmortem examination demonstrated complete tracheal healing with appropriate scarring in all pigs.
CONCLUSIONS: The trachea appears to be a safe port of entry for thoracic NOTES procedures in a swine model. Smaller tracheal incisions followed by balloon dilatation are associated with less postoperative morbidity and mortality. Tracheal incisions sealed with fibrin sealant healed rapidly and without signs of mediastinal infection. This procedure represents a work in progress and is not yet ready for human trials.

### PMID 26898493 (2016) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: An Experimental Study of Histopathologic Effects of Hemostatic Agents Used in Spinal Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2016.02.052 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To evaluate and compare the histopathologic effects of various hemostatic agents used in spinal surgery on an experimental laminectomy model in rats.
METHODS: There were 110 rats randomly allocated into 11 groups, including sham, control, AnkaferdBlood Stopper (herbal hemostatic), SeraSeal (agar and bovine factor proteins), FLOSEAL (gelatin granules and thrombin), SURGIFLO (gelatin paste), HELITENE (absorbable collagen), Beriplast (fibrin sealant containing fibrinogen, factor XIII, and thrombin), TISSEEL (fibrin sealant), BLOODCARE (hemostatic powder), and SURGICEL (oxidized cellulose polymer) groups. Hemostatic agents were applied on the epidural region after laminectomy was performed until the identification of dura mater and nerve root. After a follow-up period of 12 weeks, rats were sacrificed, and histologic sections were performed proximal and distal to laminectomy zone. Groups were histopathologically compared in terms of chronic inflammation, fibrosis, and vascularization.
RESULTS: There was no difference between groups in terms of acute inflammation (P&#xa0;= 0.159). Chronic inflammation was more remarkable in the herbal hemostatic group (P&#xa0;= 0.036), and there was severe fibrosis in absorbable collagen hemostatic, fibrin sealant, and powder hemostatic agent groups (P &lt; 0.001). Vascularity was more obvious in herbal hemostatic; fibrin sealant; absorbable collagen; fibrin sealant containing fibrinogen, factor XIII, and thrombin; hemostatic powder; and oxidized cellulose polymer groups (P &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Hemostatic agents can cause notable histopathologic alterations, including inflammation, fibrosis, and vascularity. In this context, flowable hemostats such as gelatin granules and thrombin or gelatin paste seem to provide more promising results in spinal surgery.

### PMID 28408994 (2016) — United European gastroenterology journal
TITLE: Endoscopic management of patients with post-surgical leaks involving the gastrointestinal tract: A large case series.
DOI: 10.1177/2050640615626051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Post-surgical anastomotic leaks often require a re-intervention, are associated with a definite morbidity and mortality, and with relevant costs. We described a large series of patients with different post-surgical leaks involving the gastrointestinal tract managed with endoscopy as initial approach.
METHODS: This was a retrospective analysis of prospectively collected cases with anastomotic leaks managed with different endoscopic approaches (with surgical or radiological drainage when needed) in two endoscopic centres during 5 years. Interventions included: (1) over-the-scope clip (OTSC) positioning; (2) placement of a covered self-expanding metal stent (SEMS); (3) fibrin glue injection (Tissucol); and (4) endo-sponge application, according to both the endoscopic feature and patient's status.
RESULTS: A total of 76 patients underwent endoscopic treatment for a leak either in the upper (47 cases) or lower (29 cases) gastrointestinal tract, and the approach was successful in 39 (83%) and 22 (75.9%) patients, respectively, accounting for an overall 80.3% success rate. Leak closure was achieved in 84.9% and 78.3% of patients managed by using a single or a combination of endoscopic devices. Overall, leak closure failed in 15 (19.7%) patients, and the surgical approach was successful in all 14 patients who underwent re-intervention, whilst one patient died due to sepsis at 7 days.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that an endoscopic approach, with surgical or radiological drainage when needed, is successful and safe in the majority of patients with anastomotic gastrointestinal leaks. Therefore, an endoscopic treatment could be attempted before resorting to more invasive, costly and risky re-intervention.

### PMID 27801403 (2016) — Zhurnal voprosy neirokhirurgii imeni N. N. Burdenko
TITLE: [A technique of TachoComb application in dura mater reconstruction in surgery for posterior cranial fossa tumors].
DOI: 10.17116/neiro201680585-89 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Liquorrhea is a condition characterized by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage from the cranial cavity due to injury to the integrity of the dura mater (DM) and bone structures of the skull base. Surgery for posterior cranial fossa (PCF) lesions distinguishes wound CSF leakage when CSF leaks from a surgical wound as well as basal CSF leakage (nasal liquorrhea and, less often, otoliquorrhea). The main cause of basal CSF leakage is injury (including surgical injury) resulting in a defect in the DM and bone structures (cells of the mastoid process in the case of a suboccipital retrosigmoid approach). There are a variety of DM restoration techniques ranging from DM closure or placement of a synthetic or autologous patch to application of various synthetic adhesives in the form of adhesive compositions (Tissucol) and adhesive substances (TachoComb). This article describes the experience with application of a TachoComb&#xae; sponge gained at the 5th Clinical Department of the Burdenko Neurosurgical Institute.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study included 176 patients with acoustic neurinomas. At the final stage of surgery, all the patients underwent DM reconstruction with a TachoComb&#xae; collagen sponge. CSF leakage occurred in 3 (1.7%) patients, with each of them having Koos grade 4 tumor. One (0.56%) patient had wound liquorrhea, and 2 (1.1%) patients had nasal liquorrhea. CSF leakage was managed by placement of a lumbar drain; postoperative wound revision was not required.
CONCLUSION: Using the TachoComb&#xae; sponge for DM reconstruction in PCF surgery is an effective way to prevent postoperative CSF leakage, provided that the algorithm of manipulations described in the article is followed.

### PMID 27429100 (2016) — Zeitschrift fur Gastroenterologie
TITLE: [Sealing of the hepatic resection area using hemostat devices does not improve results of adequate surgery].
DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-100284 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: In hepatic resections, there has been a high quality demand. The aim of this systematic clinical, prospective, unblinded unicenter observational study with two arms in an unselected patient cohort was to investigate whether hemostat device can significantly improve outcome in resective liver surgery, in particular, in high risk patients.
METHODS: All consecutive patients (mean age, 60.5 [range, 17&#x200a;-&#x200a;96] years) who underwent hepatic resection (ntotal&#x200a;=&#x200a;770) were prospectively documented in a computer-based registry at a university hospital (tertiary center) over a time period of 10&#xa0;years and retrospectively evaluated specifically with regard to the use (-/+; in daily practice and intraoperative decision-making) of hemostat device (Tissucol(&#xae;), n&#x200a;=&#x200a;59/Tachocomb(&#xae;), n&#x200a;=&#x200a;202/combination, n&#x200a;=&#x200a;55) indicated (among others) by drainage volume, inflammatory parameters and rate of specific complications (nvalidated&#x200a;=&#x200a;541 [100&#x200a;%]).
RESULTS: Most frequently, (a-)/typical segmental resections were used: n&#x200a;=&#x200a;192/90 (3-segment resection, only n&#x200a;=&#x200a;38). 1) For the assignment of patients to the two different groups (-/+ hemostat device), weight loss and type of resection were found as significant factors (trend: ASA, cirrhosis), for the amount of drainage volume, ASA, sex, Karnofsky Performance Scale and also type of resections using independent distributed statistical tests (such as &#x3c7;(2), U test [Mann/Whitney]; H test [Kruskal-Willis]; correlation coefficient by Spearman) - no impact: smoking, diabetes, BMI, ethanol. 2) Not taking into account these parameters, the use of hemostat device was characterized by an increased drainage volume (negative control &lt;&#xa0;Tissucol&#x200a;=&#x200a;Tachocomb &lt; combination). 3) Using multifactorial analysis of variance, it was found even under correction by the factors with significant impact elucidated in the single test that the application of hemostat device onto the hepatic resection area resulted unexpectedly rather in an increase than a&#xa0;decrease of the drainage volume but 4) under accompanying more pronounced increase of the white blood cell count (leucocytosis). 5) General and specific complications such as postoperative bleeding, biliary fistula and subhepatic abscess were not further lowered in a significant manner using hemostat device.
CONCLUSION: Adequate surgery in the operative management of hepatic resection area cannot further be improved or optimized using hemostat device. In this context, drainage volume may not be considered a sufficient rather an orienting parameter. However, there is an inflammatory response detectable most likely indicated by a(n un-)specific effusion and increase of white blood cell count, which can be interpreted as a) being characteristic for the problematic group of patients, in whom hemostat device was decided to be useful and was finally used in daily prectice, or b) reactive inflammation to foreign material.

### PMID 27330945 (2016) — Arthroscopy techniques
TITLE: The Use of All-Arthroscopic Autologous Matrix-Induced Chondrogenesis for the Management of Humeral and Glenoid Chondral Defects in the Shoulder.
DOI: 10.1016/j.eats.2015.11.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Autologous matrix-induced chondrogenesis (AMIC) is often used for treating chondral defects in different joints. We describe an all-arthroscopic approach for the treatment of glenoid and humeral chondral lesions with this technique. AMIC starts with the use of microfractures of the damaged cartilage, followed by coverage of the defect with a type I/III collagen matrix (Chondro-Gide; Geistlich Pharma, Wolhusen, Switzerland) that is fixed with fibrin glue (Tissucol; Baxter, Warsaw, Poland). In a 1-step approach, the unstable cartilage is debrided, microfractures that penetrate up to the subchondral bone are performed, and the membranes are pasted to the lesion. Our technique reduces morbidity rates compared with traditional open surgery. The arthroscopic AMIC procedure is a viable, cost-effective treatment for the repair of chondral lesions of the shoulder.

### PMID 27132491 (2016) — Archivos de la Sociedad Espanola de Oftalmologia
TITLE: Large pterygium surgery: When coverage of the scleral bed justifies graft rotation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.oftal.2016.03.019 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To perform a 12 month follow-up study to assess the safety and effectiveness of resection and conjunctival autograft fixed with Tissucol&#xae; in selected cases of large pterygium. The orientation of the graft was adapted to the morphology of the scleral bed for a better coverage free of traction, with limbal position being lost.
METHODS: A prospective, non-comparative study of 10 cases of grade II or superior pterygium (7 primary, 3 recurrent) with at least 8mm of limbal extension. A wide scleral bed was obtained after pterygium and Tenon resection, with larger grafts being required to cover the defects. A superior conjunctival autograft was harvested and fixed to bare sclera using Tissucol. The orientation was adapted to the morphology of the scleral bed and limbal position was lost. Patients were periodically assessed for recurrence and complications for a period of 12 months.
RESULTS: Minor complications occurred in 4 eyes. In one case a buttonhole was formed during dissection of the graft. Two presented with small limbal dehiscence, but epithelialisation was completed in the first week. In a third case, it was necessary to increase topical corticosteroids for pyogenic granuloma on the donor site, with secondary increased intraocular pressure (IOP). There were no recurrences after 12 months follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: A conjunctival graft of appropriate size adapted to the morphology of the scleral bed to ensure good coverage free of tension, provides good surgical results in selected cases of pterygium, regardless of the conservation the limbal orientation, with no recurrences after one year follow-up.

### PMID 26989762 (2016) — TheScientificWorldJournal
TITLE: Spontaneous Transethmoidal Meningoceles in Adults: Case Series with Emphasis on Surgical Management.
DOI: 10.1155/2016/3238297 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Spontaneous onset transethmoidal meningocele is a rare entity among the adult population.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review was performed and cases of adults diagnosed with spontaneous transethmoidal meningoceles from November 2000 till February 2014 were reported. Data collected included demographics, clinical presentation, diagnostic modalities, and results. Intraoperative findings, the type of surgical reconstruction performed, and the percentage of recurrence, if present, were also reported.
RESULTS: Ten cases of spontaneous transethmoidal meningoceles in adults were diagnosed. Eight were females and two males with a mean age of 47.5 years. All patients presented with CSF leakage with or without meningitis. They underwent a reconstruction of the base of skull defect using the temporalis fascia graft in addition to fibrin glue (Tissucol) and Surgicel (Ethicon). In two cases with a larger defect, a piece of septal bone and turbinate mucosa were applied achieving a watertight seal in all cases.
CONCLUSION: Spontaneous transethmoidal meningocele in adults is a rare condition. It usually presents with clear rhinorrhea with or without meningitis and an endoscopic multilayer reconstruction is advocated for treatment of such conditions.

### PMID 26707252 (2016) — Cirugia y cirujanos
TITLE: [Application of fibrin sealant in patients operated on for differentiated thyroid cancer. What do we improve?].
DOI: 10.1016/j.circir.2015.02.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: In recent years, several publications have shown that new adhesives and sealants, like Tissucol(&#xae;), applied in thyroid space reduce local complications after thyroidectomies.
STUDY AIMS: To demonstrate the effectiveness of fibrin glue Tissucol(&#xae;) in reducing the post-operative hospital stay of patients operated on for differentiated thyroid carcinoma in which total thyroidectomy with central and unilateral node neck dissection was performed (due to the debit drains decrease), with consequent cost savings.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A prospective randomised study was conducted during the period between May 2009 and October 2013 on patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma with cervical nodal metastases, and subjected to elective surgery. Two groups were formed: one in which Tissucol(&#xae;) was used (case group) and another where it was not used (control group). Patients were operated on by surgeons specifically dedicated to endocrine surgical pathology, using the same surgical technique in all cases.
RESULTS: A total of 60 total thyroidectomies with lymph node dissection were performed, with 30 patients in the case group, and 30 patients in control group. No statistically significant differences were observed in most of the studied variables. However, the case group had a shorter hospital stay than the control group with a statistically significant difference (p&lt;0.05).
CONCLUSION: Implementation of Tissucol(&#xae;) has statistically and significantly reduced the hospital stay of patients undergoing total thyroidectomy with neck dissection, which represents a significant reduction in hospital costs. This decrease in hospital stay has no influence on the occurrence of major complications related to the intervention.

### PMID 26156227 (2016) — European archives of oto-rhino-laryngology : official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS) : affiliated with the German Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
TITLE: The impact of tissue glue in wound healing of head and neck patients undergoing neck dissection.
DOI: 10.1007/s00405-015-3709-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: We investigated the impact of fibrin glue on postoperative drainage amount and duration in head and neck cancer patients who underwent neck dissection. This study was a prospective randomized controlled trial. Patients who were scheduled to undergo neck dissection due to head and neck cancer were eligible for this study. After receiving a detailed explanation, all patients signed an informed consent form before enrollment. Patients were then randomly assigned to the study group (fibrin glue) or control group. In the study group, 2 ml of fibrin glue (Tissucol(&#xae;); Duploject, Baxter AG) was applied on the surface of the surgical wound before closure. Basic demographic data along with tumor-related features, operation-related variables, postoperative drainage amount/duration, postoperative pain, and analgesic usage were collected and analyzed. A total of 15 patients were included in the final analyses, with eight patients in the study group and seven patients in the control group. No significant differences were found between the two groups in age, gender, primary site, clinical N stage, neck dissection levels, perioperative bleeding, postoperative drainage amount/duration, hospitalization duration, and postoperative pain status. The application of 2 ml fibrin glue by the method described herein did not reduce the postoperative drainage amount/duration nor the postoperative pain status in patients who underwent neck dissection.

### PMID 27843896 (2016) — Ocular oncology and pathology
TITLE: Surgical Reconstruction of Ocular Surface Tumors Using Fibrin Sealant Tissue Adhesive.
DOI: 10.1159/000444532 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the surgical outcomes of ocular surface reconstruction in corneal-conjunctival tumors using fibrin tissue adhesive.
METHODS: A prospective noncomparative study was performed between May 2013 and February 2015. Patients were submitted to routine surgical procedure for corneal-conjunctival tumor excision followed by amniotic membrane graft transplantation using fibrin tissue adhesive (Evicel&#xae;, Omrix Biopharmaceuticals Ltd., Israel). Results were assessed on the 1st, 7th, 15th and 30th postoperative days to analyze subjective complaints, adhesiveness and positioning of the graft, potential complications and recurrences.
RESULTS: Twenty-five eyes were analyzed (male, 14). The diagnosis after the treatment was categorized as squamous cell neoplasia, dysplasia, actinic keratosis, squamous papilloma and compound melanocytic nevus. Few significant symptoms were reported, such as mild hyperemia and ocular dyscomfort. One case developed a conjunctival granuloma which regressed after topical treatment. All grafts were successful with no displacements or retraction postoperatively. There was no clinical recurrence of the tumor in a mean time of follow-up of 11 months.
CONCLUSION: Fibrin tissue adhesive is safe and effective in the surgery of ocular surface tumor. In this series, sutureless amniotic membrane transplantation using fibrin glue has the potential to shorten the surgical time, mitigate inflammation postoperatively and improve patient discomfort.

### PMID 26793564 (2016) — Urology case reports
TITLE: Transurethral Use of Evicel(&#xae;) Fibrin Sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/j.eucr.2015.10.006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Transurethral resection of bladder tumor remains the most common procedure for the diagnosis, management, and treatment of bladder cancer. Deep resection of the detrusor muscle for the correct staging of bladder cancer can increase the risk of hemorrhage that can be difficult to control with standard transurethral surgical maneuvers. Evicel(&#xae;) Fibrin Sealant was applied transurethrally to manage difficult hemorrhage following transurethral resection of bladder tumor in two surgically complex bladder cancer patients. Our early experience suggests Evicel(&#xae;) can be an effective tool in managing difficult to control hemorrhage associated with TURBT. Further clinical investigation is to be encouraged.

### PMID 26816671 (2016) — GMS Interdisciplinary plastic and reconstructive surgery DGPW
TITLE: Reducing morbidity with surgical adhesives following inguinal lymph node dissections for the treatment of malignant skin tumors.
DOI: 10.3205/iprs000084 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Inguinal lymph node dissection (ILND) is associated with a high rate of morbidity. To evaluate the clinical benefit of surgical adhesives to reduce complications in patients undergoing ILND, we compared the use of TissuGlu(&#xae;) Surgical Adhesive and ARTISS(&#xae;) fibrin sealant with a control population.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of patients undergoing ILND for metastatic malignant skin tumors at one hospital, Fachklinik Hornheide (M&#xfc;nster, Germany), from January 2011 through September 2013, assessing 137 patients with a total of 142 procedures.
RESULTS: Complications occurred in 22/60 procedures in the TissuGlu group (TG), in 8/17 in the ARTISS group (AG), and in 29/65 in the control group (CG). Prolonged drainage and seroma were recorded in 16 (26.7%), four (23.5%), and 26 (40%) respectively (non-significant). TG showed less extended drainage vs. CG (p=0.082). Mean daily drain volumes were significantly lower in AG vs. CG (p=0.000). With regard to wound infection, there was a 15% reduction in TG and 74% increase in AG group. Revision surgery was reduced by 36% in TG and increased by 54% in AG. Mean daily drain volumes were significantly lower in AG vs. CG (p=0.000). Mean total post-operative drain volume was lower in TG and AG vs. CG (p&lt;0.001 among groups, CG vs. TG p&lt;0.001, CG vs. AG p&lt;0.001). The mean body mass index (BMI) was significantly higher in patients with complications, 29.4&#xb1;5.8 vs. 25.3&#xb1;4.1 (p=0.000).
CONCLUSION: The use of TissuGlu in our ILND patients was associated with a reduction in post-operative wound related complications and the need for revision surgeries compared to the control group. Daily drainage was significantly lower within the first 7 post-operative days with the use of ARTISS, but the benefit was lost due to the higher occurrence of wound infection and revision surgery. BMI above 29 is a risk factor for complications following ILND. (
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: level IV, retrospective case study).

### PMID 27501071 (2016) — Zentralblatt fur Chirurgie
TITLE: [Distal Pancreatectomy with Autologous Fibrin Sealant - Implementation of an Established Concept of Tissue Sealing in Pancreatic Surgery].
DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-109979 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: Postoperative pancreatic fistulas (POPF) remain a major concern after distal pancreatectomy. Irrespective of the technique to close the pancreatic remnant, pancreatic fistulas will occur in approximately 30&#x200a;% of patients undergoing distal pancreatectomy. For the first time ever, autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat&#xae;) was used to additionally seal the pancreatic remnant after a distal pancreatectomy. The aim was to analyse whether this changes the postoperative outcome. Patients/Material and Methods: In 2015, a technical case series was performed in 15 patients who underwent distal pancreatectomy. The pancreatic remnant was additionally sealed with autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat&#xae;). Results: A postoperative pancreatic fistula (POPF) occurred in 5/15 patients (33&#x200a;%). One patient had a POPF grade A (1/15, 6.7&#x200a;%), whereas a POPF grade B occurred in 4/15 patients (26.7&#x200a;%). 75&#x200a;% (3/4) of the patients with a POPF grade B were sufficiently treated with antibiotics, whereas a CT-guided percutaneous drainage had to be placed only in one case. Conclusion: Autologous fibrin sealant is simple to apply and seems to be well tolerated. However, it does not seem to avoid the development of postoperative pancreatic fistulas after distal pancreatectomy.

### PMID 26904371 (2016) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Aulogous fibrin sealant (Vivostat(&#xae;)) in the neurosurgical practice: Part II: Vertebro-spinal procedures.
DOI: 10.4103/2152-7806.174894 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Epidural hematomas, cerebrospinal fluid fistula, and spinal infections are challenging postoperative complications following vertebro-spinal procedures. We report our preliminary results using autologous fibrin sealant as both fibrin glue and a hemostatic during these operations.
METHODS: Prospectively, between January 2013 and March 2015, 68 patients received an autologous fibrin sealant prepared with the Vivostat(&#xae;) system applied epidurally to provide hemostasis and to seal the dura. The surgical technique, time to bleeding control, and associated complications were recorded.
RESULTS: Spinal procedures were performed in 68 patients utilizing autologous fibrin glue/Vivostat(&#xae;) to provide rapid hemostasis and/or to seal the dura. Only 2 patients developed postoperative dural fistulas while none exhibited hemorrhages, allergic reactions, systemic complications, or infections.
CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary study, the application of autologous fibrin sealant with Vivostat(&#xae;) resulted in rapid hemostasis and/or acted as an effective dural sealant. Although this product appears to be safe and effective, further investigations are warranted.

### PMID 26856400 (2016) — Revista espanola de enfermedades digestivas
TITLE: Using autologous platelet-rich plasma for the treatment of complex fistulas.
DOI: 10.17235/reed.2016.3946/2015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study aims to demonstrate the effectiveness and safety of autologous fibrin gel rich in platelet growth factors for the treatment of complex perianal fistulas.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Prospective epidemiological study. Patients with complex perianal fistula or perianal fistula mere alteration of continence are included. identification of both holes and the journey, curettage of it and instillation of Vivostat PRF&#xae; in the way it is done to observe excess material by OFE. The variables analyzed were: age, sex, use of prior Seton clinic prevalent type of fistula, postoperative complications, fistula closure and impaired quality of life using the SF-36 test (v2).
RESULTS: From January 2011 to May 2013 have involved 23 patients, 12 men and 11 women, with an average age of 49 years and a minimum follow-up of 12 months. Two dropped out. 17 patients had low transsphincteric fistulas, 2 and 2 high transsphincteric intersphincteric with impaired continence. The most common symptom is the discharge. Twelve patients had a loose seton (62%), of which nine cured. Of all the patients we have operated the success rate is 62%. No patient developed incontinence after treatment. Only two reported a worse quality of life after surgery.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that there is a clear benefit to the use of Vivostat PRF&#xae; as a treatment for complex perianal fistulas. It is a highly reproducible technique with acceptable results and does not produce impairment of continence.

### PMID 26843467 (2016) — Experimental dermatology
TITLE: Platelet-released growth factors induce the antimicrobial peptide human beta-defensin-2 in primary keratinocytes.
DOI: 10.1111/exd.12966 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Platelet-released growth factors (PRGF) and its related clinically used formulations [e.g. Vivostat platelet-rich fibrin (PRF(&#xae;) )] are thrombocyte concentrate lysates that support healing of chronic, hard-to-heal and infected wounds. Human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2) is an antimicrobial peptide expressed in human keratinocytes exhibiting potent antimicrobial activity against wound-related bacteria. In this study, we analysed the influence of PRGF on hBD-2 expression in human primary keratinocytes and the influence of Vivostat PRF(&#xae;) on hBD-2 expression in experimentally generated skin wounds in vivo. Treatment of primary keratinocytes with PRGF caused a significant increase in hBD-2 gene and protein expressions in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. The use of blocking antibodies revealed that the PRGF-mediated hBD-2 induction was partially mediated by the epidermal growth factor receptor and the interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R). Luciferase gene reporter assays indicated that the hBD-2 induction through PRGF required activation of the transcription factor activator protein 1 (AP-1), but not of NF-kappaB. In concordance with these cell culture data, Vivostat PRF(&#xae;) induced hBD-2 expression when applied to experimentally generated skin wounds. Together, our results indicate that the induction of hBD-2 by thrombocyte concentrate lysates can contribute to the observed beneficial effects in the treatment of chronic and infected wounds.

### PMID 26472610 (2016) — Acta biomaterialia
TITLE: Novel method for the generation of tissue-engineered vascular grafts based on a highly compacted fibrin matrix.
DOI: 10.1016/j.actbio.2015.10.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: The generation of tissue-engineered blood vessel substitutes remains an ongoing challenge for cardiovascular tissue engineering. Full biocompatibility and immediate availability have emerged as central issues for clinical use. To address these issues, we developed a technique that allows the generation of highly stable tubular fibrin segments. The process is based on the compaction of fibrin in a custom-made high-speed rotation mold. In an automated process, fibrin is precipitated from plasma by means of the Vivostat&#xae; system. Following application to the rotating mold, the fibrin was compacted by centrifugal force and excess fluid was pressed out. This compaction results in increasing cross-links between the fibrin fibrils and a corresponding significant increase of biomechanical stability up to a burst strength of 230mm of mercury. The molding process allows for a simultaneous seeding procedure. In a first in vivo evaluation in a sheep model, segments of the carotid artery were replaced by tissue-engineered vascular grafts, generated immediately prior to implantation (n=6). Following subjection to the body's remodeling mechanisms, the segments showed a high structural similarity to a native artery after explantation at 6months. Thus, this technique may represent a powerful tool for the generation of biomechanically stable vascular grafts immediately prior to implantation.
STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Fibrin has previously been shown to be suitable as a matrix for the seeding of different celltypes and for that reason was widely used as scaffold in different fields of tissue engineering. Nevertheless, fibrin's lack of stability has strongly limited its application. Our study describes a novel moulding technique for the generation of a highly compacted fibrin matrix. Using this approach, it was possible to optimize the engineering process of tubular fibrin segments to provide bioartificial vascular grafts within one hour with sufficient stability for immediate implantation in the arterial system. Thus, this technique may represent a powerful tool to get closer to the ultimate aim of an optimal bioartificial vascular graft.

### PMID 27658949 (2016) — Veterinary surgery : VS
TITLE: Magnetic Resonance Imaging Appearance and Mechanism of Action of Five Hemostatic Agents Used in Neurosurgery.
DOI: 10.1111/vsu.12551 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To describe the magnetic resonance (MR) image appearance of 5 hemostatic agents placed in the brain, and to review their clinical application.
STUDY DESIGN: Descriptive ex vivo and in vivo study.
ANIMALS: Canine cadavers (n=4), client-owned dogs (n=4).
METHODS: Heads from 4 canine cadavers were used, each with 5 hemostatic agents placed in specific locations in the brain. Hemostatic agents were used in their native form in 2 cadaveric brains, and in 2 others the materials were saturated with fresh whole blood prior to placement to mimic application in a field of active hemorrhage. The heads underwent MR imaging and the images were reviewed. Postoperative MRI images from 4 dogs undergoing brain tumor resection were retrospectively reviewed and compared to the images from the cadavers. All clinical cases and cadaveric specimens underwent surgical closure prior to MR imaging including placement of titanium mesh over the craniotomy defect with a dural graft of porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS) sealed with Tisseel (fibrin sealant).
RESULTS: The SIS and Tisseel used in the dural graft were consistently indistinguishable from the surrounding tissues on MR images. The MR imaging appearance of the remaining 4 hemostatic agents (Gelfoam, Avitene, Surgicel, and Floseal) placed on the surface or in the parenchyma of canine brain, varied with MR sequence weighting and blood saturation.
CONCLUSION: Accurate evaluation of the degree of brain tumor resection on postoperative MR images requires careful differentiation between hemorrhage, residual tumor, and hemostatic agents implanted.

### PMID 26162423 (2016) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Laparoscopic partial nephrectomy without intracorporeal suturing.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-015-4382-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Partial nephrectomy has gained wider acceptance as a surgical technique in treating small renal tumors. Laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (LPN) still remains a technically demanding surgery to this day. We present our technique of laparoscopic partial nephrectomy, one that is performed without intracorporeal suturing.
METHODS: We performed LPN on 31 patients with localized renal parenchymal tumor (stage T1). The procedures were done from September 2009 to March 2015 at the Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital and the Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital. Our technique involves the covering of renal defect layer by layer with FloSeal, Tisseel and a fat pad after monopolar coagulation.
RESULTS: Thirty-one patients were included in this study. Mean patient age was 53 years old (range 39-70). Mean tumor size was 2.9 cm (range 1.8-6.3). Mean RENAL nephrometry score was 5.3 (range 4-7). The average operation time was 188 min (range 120-290), and the average warm ischemic time was 19.0 min (range 9-26). Mean estimated blood loss was 171 ml (range 10-650), with no postoperative bleeding among the total 31 patients. No recurrent tumors were identified at a mean follow-up of 29 months postoperatively. The mean change in eGFR was 6.5 (ml/min/m2).
CONCLUSION: Laparoscopic partial nephrectomy is a feasible surgical method for most patients with stage 1 tumor. Our technique has shown to reduce warm ischemic time significantly and provide patients with excellent functional outcomes without affecting oncological results. With this technique, surgeons can perform LPN with more efficiency and with fewer complications.

### PMID 25860987 (2016) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: The impact of covering the bulla with an absorbable polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheet during pneumothorax surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-015-0545-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We herein present the pathological findings of a bulla covered using an absorbable polyglycolic acid sheet applied with fibrin glue. These findings indicated that the membrane of the bulla was reinforced. Covering the bulla with an absorbable polyglycolic acid sheet (Neoveil, Gunze Ltd, Kyoto, Japan) and applying fibrin glue was effective to prevent the recurrence of the pneumothorax. Moreover, this report is the first case report showing the pathological findings of a bulla which was covered with an absorbable polyglycolic acid sheet and fibrin glue.

### PMID 27301178 (2016) — Journal of biomedical nanotechnology
TITLE: Robust Sealing of Blood Vessels with Cholesteryl Group-Modified, Alaska Pollock-Derived Gelatin-Based Biodegradable Sealant Under Wet Conditions.
DOI: 10.1166/jbn.2016.2210 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: A novel surgical sealant was developed by partially modifying the amino groups of Alaska pollock-derived gelatin derivative with cholesteryl groups (Chol-apGltn), which was combined with the crosslinker, pentaerythritol poly(ethylene glycol) ether tetrasuccinimidyl glutarate (4S-PEG). The burst strength of the resultant sealant was tested using fresh porcine aorta as an adherend. The Chol-apGltn/4S-PEG sealant cured within 25.4 &#xb1; 2.0 s. Burst strength increased with increasing degree of Chol modification up to a maximum value of 8.3 mol% (8.3Chol-apGltn). The highest burst strength of the 8.3Chol-apGltn/4S-PEG sealant was 341.3 &#xb1; 77.5 mmHg, which was 3.5- and 11.6-fold higher than that of the original apGltn/4S-PEG and commercial fibrin sealants, respectively. The 8.3Chol-apGltn/4S-PEG sealant swelled only slightly in solution (1.1-fold as compared to commercially prepared sealant). Furthermore, tissue migration into the 8.3Chol-apGltn/4S-PEG sealant and subsequent biodegradation was observed following implantation for 4-8 weeks. These results suggest that the 8.3Chol-apGltn/4S-PEG sealant has biomedical applications, including use in cardiovascular and thoracic surgery.

### PMID 27670565 (2016) — The American surgeon
TITLE: Closure of a Traumatic Esophagomediastinal Fistula in a Child by Endoscopic Fulguration and Fibrin Injection.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Posttraumatic esophagomediastinal fistula is an uncommon clinical entity that warrants surgical awareness due to its life-threatening potential. Its management, especially in previously operated field, is controversial and several endoscopic methods are being proposed as alternatives. Ours is the first report of endoscopic fulguration and fibrin injection in successful closure of such fistula. A 9-year-old female sustained complete tracheoesophageal transection from a gunshot wound to the neck and underwent immediate primary repair. She presented nine months later with fevers and swelling over anterior neck. CT revealed air tracking posteriorly to the dorsal neck and inferiorly to the mediastinum. Considering difficulty of open surgical approach, endoscopic intervention was attempted. Posterior wall fistula was identified via microlaryngoscopy above the esophageal anastomosis. The fistula tract was de-epithelialized via a Bugbee fulgurating electrode and then sealed with fibrin glue. Consequent imaging studies demonstrated complete occlusion of the fistula. Posterior posttraumatic esophagomediastinal fistula presents a challenging scenario from a surgical standpoint, as it combines difficulty of safe approach, high rate of injury to surrounding structures, and significant postoperative recurrence rate. Endoscopic Bugbee fulguration and fibrin glue injection are a safe and effective alternative to the traditional approach.

### PMID 25793325 (2015) — Inflammatory bowel diseases
TITLE: Reducing colorectal anastomotic leakage with tissue adhesive in experimental inflammatory bowel disease.
DOI: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000336 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Anastomotic leakage after gastrointestinal surgery remains a challenging clinical problem. This study aimed to investigate the effectiveness of TissuCol (fibrin glue), Histoacryl Flex (n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate), and Duraseal (polyethylene glycol) on colorectal anastomotic healing during experimental colitis.
METHODS: We first performed colectomy 7 days after 10 mg trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis to validate a rat TNBS-colitis-colectomy model. Subsequently, this TNBS-colitis-colectomy model was used in 73 Wistar rats that were stratified into a colitis group (CG, no adhesive), a TissuCol group (TG), a Histoacryl group (HG), and a Duraseal group (DG). Anastomotic sealant was applied with one adhesive after constructing an end-to-end hand-sewn anastomosis. Clinical manifestations, anastomotic bursting pressure, and immunohistochemistry of macrophage type-one (M1) and type-two (M2) was performed on postoperative day (POD)3 or POD7.
RESULTS: TNBS-caused mucosal and submucosal colon damage and compromised anastomotic healing (i.e., abscess formation and low anastomotic bursting pressure). On POD3, higher severity of abscesses was seen in CG. Average anastomotic bursting pressure was 53.2 &#xb1; 35.5 mm Hg in CG, which was significantly lower than HG (134.4 &#xb1; 27.5 mm Hg) and DG (95.1 &#xb1; 54.3 mm Hg) but not TG (83.4 &#xb1; 46.7 mm Hg). Furthermore, a significantly higher M2/M1 index was found in HG. On POD7, abscesses were only seen in CG (6/9) but not in other groups; HG had the lowest severity of adhesion.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe the first surgical IBD model by performing colectomy in rats with TNBS-induced colitis, which causes intra-abdominal abscess formation and compromises anastomotic healing. Anastomotic sealing with Histoacryl Flex prevents these complications in this model. Alternative activation of macrophages seems to be involved in its influence on anastomotic healing.

### PMID 26424947 (2015) — Proceedings (Baylor University. Medical Center)
TITLE: Gastropericardial fistula as a delayed complication of a Nissen fundoplication.
DOI: 10.1080/08998280.2015.11929314 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 41-year-old man presented to the emergency department with substernal chest pain and was found to have ST elevations in the inferior leads on his electrocardiogram. An emergent cardiac catheterization did not identify significant coronary narrowing. Computed tomography of the thorax demonstrated a pneumopericardium and a hiatal hernia. The patient had a complicated past surgical history, including a Nissen fundoplication and three additional surgeries for postoperative complications. An esophagram later revealed an ulcer and possible fistula, and the patient underwent gastropericardial fistula resection after the fistula failed to close with fibrin sealant application. Enteropericardial fistulas occur infrequently but have high morbidity and mortality rates. This possibility is much more likely in patients with prior gastroesophageal surgery, including laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication.

### PMID 26265447 (2015) — The British journal of surgery
TITLE: Multicentre randomized clinical trial to investigate the cost-effectiveness of an allogeneic single-donor fibrin sealant after coronary artery bypass grafting (FIBER Study).
DOI: 10.1002/bjs.9877 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Reduction of blood transfusion in cardiac surgery is an important target. The aim of this study was to investigate the cost-effectiveness of the use of CryoSeal&#xae;, an allogeneic single-donor fibrin sealant, in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
METHODS: This randomized clinical study involved seven cardiac surgery centres in the Netherlands. Patients undergoing elective isolated CABG with the use of at least one internal thoracic artery (ITA) graft were assigned randomly to receive either CryoSeal&#xae; (5&#x2009;ml per ITA bed) or no CryoSeal&#xae;. Primary efficacy endpoints were units of transfused red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma and platelet concentrates, and duration of intensive care unit stay. Secondary efficacy endpoints were 48-h blood loss, reoperation for bleeding, mediastinitis, 30-day mortality and duration of hospital stay.
RESULTS: Between March 2009 and January 2012, 1445 patients were randomized. The intention-to-treat (ITT) population comprised 1436 patients; the per-protocol (PP) population 1292. In both the ITT and the PP analysis, no significant difference between the treatment groups was observed for any of the primary and secondary efficacy endpoints. In addition, no significant difference between the groups was seen in the proportion of transfused patients. Estimated CryoSeal&#xae; costs were &#x20ac;822 (95 per cent c.i. &#x20ac;808 to &#x20ac;836) per patient, which translated to &#x20ac;72,000 per avoided transfusion (unbounded 95 per cent c.i.).
CONCLUSION: The use of the fibrin sealant CryoSeal&#xae; did not result in health benefits. Combined with the high cost per avoided transfusion, this study does not support the implementation of routine CryoSeal&#xae; use in elective isolated CABG.
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NTR1386 ( http://www.trialregister.nl).

### PMID 26248820 (2015) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Stopping antiplatelet medication before coronary artery bypass graft surgery: is there an optimal timing to minimize bleeding?
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezv269 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: As the indication for antiplatelet medication expands, patients may be exposed to an increased risk of excessive blood loss when cardiac surgery is required. The optimal timing to stop acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) or ASA combined with clopidogrel (ASA+Clo) before surgery is the subject of controversy.
METHODS: A total of 1065 patients were selected from a prospective randomized study on the effect of a fibrin sealant application in coronary artery bypass graft surgery [Fibrin sealant Induced Blood Exposure Reduction study;
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NTR1386 (http://www.trialregister.nl)], and divided into three groups according to the use of antiplatelet medication within 10 days prior to surgery: (i) ASA only (n = 662), (ii) ASA+Clo (n = 290) or (iii) no antiplatelet medication (n = 113). To investigate if an optimal stop day could be established, we fitted a series of multiple linear regression models, one for each preoperative day (running from Day -10 up to -1). The specific day corresponding to the best fitting model (highest adjusted R(2), with blood loss in the first 48 h postoperatively as the dependent variable) was considered as the best estimate for the optimal stop day. Bootstrap analysis (1000 times) was performed to calculate the corresponding confidence interval. Furthermore, major adverse cardiovascular and cerebral events (MACCE) were evaluated.
RESULTS: We could not estimate an optimal stop day for patients using ASA or ASA+Clo prior to their operation. Last use of ASA on Day -2 or earlier significantly decreased the percentage of patients receiving platelet transfusions compared with continuation until surgery (7 vs 13% for Day -1, P = 0.007). In patients using ASA+Clo, this percentage was reduced from 41 to 10 (P &lt; 0.001). There was no association between stop day and the occurrence of MACCE.
CONCLUSIONS: There is no clinically relevant effect on blood loss indicating an optimal stop day for ASA alone or in combination with Clo. Last use on Day -2 resulted in the reduction of percentage of patients receiving platelet transfusions, especially in the ASA+Clo group.

### PMID 26028998 (2015) — Reviews in urology
TITLE: Hemostasis during urologic surgery: fibrin sealant compared with absorbable hemostat.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In the United States, fibrin sealants have been used to achieve hemostasis for nearly two decades. Although their clinical utility was first demonstrated in cardiac surgery, their effectiveness and safety have since been demonstrated to extend to a wide array of procedures. Fibrin sealants typically contain two components-fibrinogen and thrombin-that are combined and delivered simultaneously to a target bleeding site in order to achieve hemostasis. However, many commercial formulations contain other additional components, such as antifibrinolytic agents, that have been associated with adverse outcomes. This subanalysis compares the safety and effectiveness of a fibrin sealant versus an absorbable hemostat for achieving hemostasis during urologic procedures with mild to moderate bleeding.

### PMID 26008730 (2015) — International journal of colorectal disease
TITLE: Circular anastomotic experimental fibrin sealant protection in deep colorectal anastomosis in pigs in a randomized 9-day survival study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00384-015-2260-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The reported rate of clinically apparent anastomotic leakage (AL) in a low anterior resection of the rectum (LAR) (&#x2264;7&#xa0;cm from the anal verge) using a circular double-stapled anastomosis (CDSA) without defunctioning stoma is up to 37.5&#xa0;%. Since AL may result in life-threatening peritonitis, sepsis, and multiple organ failure, LAR and CDSA are regularly combined with defunctioning stoma. Accordingly, we now evaluated whether LAR and CDSA without defunctioning stoma but with extraluminal anastomotic application of an experimental fibrin sealant reduce the AL rate. This might prevent humans from defunctioning stoma increasing quality of life and decreasing surgical costs.
METHODS: Forty 8-week-old pigs underwent LAR and CDSA in an end-to-end technique (descendo-rectostomy). Animals were randomized into a therapy and control group (gr.). The therapy gr. (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;20) received an additional extraluminal circular application of an experimental fibrin sealant to the anastomosis. The objective was to assess the incidence of clinically apparent and non-clinically apparent leakage through the ninth postoperative day. Double-contrast barium CT radiographs of the colorectal region were performed on the ninth postoperative day or earlier, in case there were clinical signs of AL. All remaining animals were sacrificed on the ninth postoperative day and the anastomotic region was histopathologically analyzed. In case of earlier diagnosed AL, animals were sacrificed immediately. Blood samples were taken for complete blood count, chemistry, and coagulation profile prior to surgery and on the first, third, fifth, seventh, and ninth postoperative day.
RESULTS: A circular extraluminal anastomotic application of an experimental fibrin protection decreased the rate of clinically and non-clinically apparent AL from 20&#xa0;% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;4) in the control group to 5&#xa0;% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1) in the treatment group. Ulcerations were also observed in both gr. (control gr.-5 animals, therapy gr. -3 animals). All animals with AL showed necrosis surrounding the hole at the anastomoses. Three additional animals had a full wall defect at the anastomotic region that was blocked by the experimental fibrin sealant. The fibrin sealant was present at necropsy in all treated animals.
CONCLUSION: Circular anastomotic protection with the experimental fibrin sealant blocked anastomotic full wall defects, preventing peritonitis and significantly reducing the AL rate from 25 to 5&#xa0;%.

### PMID 25807171 (2015) — Innovations (Philadelphia, Pa.)
TITLE: Implantation of the eSVS Mesh: modification of recommended technique.
DOI: 10.1097/IMI.0000000000000130 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The eSVS Mesh is a knitted wire lattice manufactured in cylindrical sheaths of various diameters, designed to be placed around the outer surface of a saphenous vein graft before use in coronary surgery. The goal is to improve long-term vein graft patency by preventing expansive endothelial injury obviating neointimal hyperplasia and subsequent graft atherosclerosis. Since the First-In-Man feasibility trial of the eSVS Mesh, postmarket studies in Europe and a feasibility trial in the United States are ongoing. Consensus from the principal investigators indicated the trials had confounding variables that may impact results other than evaluation of the eSVS Mesh alone. With input from these investigators, the recommended operative technique has been modified for future trials by removing the mesh from proximal and distal anastomoses and eliminating the use of fibrin sealant. These changes allow for use of an implant technique closer to standard vein bypass grafting and a more focused evaluation of the eSVS Mesh.

### PMID 26538956 (2015) — Journal of pharmacy &amp; bioallied sciences
TITLE: Treatment of gingival recession using free gingival graft with fibrin fibronectin sealing system: A novel approach.
DOI: 10.4103/0975-7406.163524 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Periodontal plastic surgery is the branch of periodontology that is focused mainly on the correction or elimination of mucogingival problems associated with lack of attached gingiva, a shallow vestibule and aberrant frenum. Various mucogingival surgical procedures are used to halt the progression of the gingival recession and to correct poor esthetic appearance. Free gingival autograft is one of the most common techniques used for a gingival recession in areas of inadequate attached gingiva in the mandibular anterior region. Fibrin sealants are human plasma derivatives that mimic the final stages of blood coagulation, forming a fibrin clot. Fibrin Sealants enhances the overall outcome of surgical intervention because of their hemostatic, adhesive, and healing properties. These properties of fibrin sealants may reduce operating time, prevent complications, and enhance the overall outcome of many surgical interventions. Hence, this case report aims to investigate the clinical effectiveness of free gingival graft along with the commercially available fibrin-fibronectin sealing system (Tissucol(&#xae;)) in the treatment of Miller's class II gingival recession.

### PMID 26479693 (2015) — Advances in skin &amp; wound care
TITLE: Surgical Treatment of Pressure Ulcers with a Fibrin Sealant in Patients with Spinal Cord Injury: A Cost-Consequence Analysis.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ASW.0000471875.06135.a1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A comparative study was performed to evaluate the effectiveness and costs of a fibrin sealant (Tissucol Duo [known as Tisseel in the United States], Baxter International, Deerfield, Illinois) to improve postoperative outcomes in patients with spinal cord injury undergoing surgical treatment for pressure ulcers (PrUs).
METHODS: Between January and June 2011, 27 patients underwent surgical treatment for PrUs with the direct application of Tissucol Duo sprayed before closure. The costs and outcomes obtained in this cohort were compared with those obtained in a previous retrospective study where 71 patients underwent conventional surgery.
RESULTS: Lower rates of hematoma-seroma were observed in the study group (3.7% vs 33.8%; P &lt; .05). Drain removal occurred earlier (10 vs 15 days; P &lt; .05), and the average drain volume was also lower (155 vs 360 mL; P &lt; .05) for this group. The mean length of hospital stay was significantly lower in the study group and was the main contributing factor to the overall costs.
CONCLUSIONS: The application of Tissucol Duo during surgical treatment of PrUs in patients with spinal cord injury has been shown to be effective in reducing postoperative complications and in shortening the duration of the hospital stay with a consequent savings in costs.

### PMID 26353468 (2015) — Acta gastroenterologica Latinoamericana
TITLE: Pancreatic polypeptide: a review of its involvement in neuro-endocrine reflexes, islet-acinar interactions and ethanol-evoked physiopatologic pancreatic gland changes.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: prevents, in pancreocytes, the evolving of a "supramaximalecbolic-stimulation" process. The PP involvement as a modulating agent of pancreon's reactivity is reflected by the progressive increment of its plasma values in the first week of an evolving AP episode. In the AP associated to a large meal, an overpowering of the pancreon's brake might have a pivotal role. In experimental and clinical chronic alcoholism, a vagal neuropathy of the Pavlov inhibitory fibers that, as a consequence, impairs the pancreon's brake through a depression of PP secretion is at the basis of an enhanced reactivity of the duodeno-pancreatic reflexes. The latter leads to intrapancreatic cholinergic hypertonus and to Vater papilla's dysfunction. These changes, plus an enhanced pancreocyte's response to CCK, are at the core of acinar cell "supramaximal stimulation" with the organelle disruption that process implies. The intrapancreatic cholinergic hypertonus, the enhanced exocrine cell reactivity to CCK stimulation, and the augmented resistance to the pancreatic secretion flow at Oddi sphincter, explain the aggravating influence of chronic alcoholism on an episode of acute biliary pancreatitis. As the PP secretion, normally elicited by secretin, CCK, food and insulin hypoglycemia, is depressed in the presence of an augmented number of PP cells, as it is in the cases of chronic alcoholics, cystic fibrosis patients and, also, in dogs with pancreatic fibrosis (ductal ligation), it has been inferred, besides our postulated impairment of the Pavlov inhibitory fibers in the vagus nerves, that the defect of PP release is localized to the common final pathway of the above stimuli, probably in or near the PP cell itself This review was prompted by the unexpected experimental finding in canines that Tissucol-induced pancreatic ductal blockade elicits Pancreatic Polypeptide (PP) release and seems to be at the basis of the beneficial effects on taurocho- late-induced acute pancreatitis (AP). In the release mechanism of this regulatory peptide secreted by PP cells located in the periphery of Langerhans islets and scattered in the ductal epithelium, two neuroendocrine reflexes (NER) are involved. The "short" NER is evoked from the duodenum by an unknown component of bile-pancreatic secretion. The "long" NER is triggered by a vagovagal reflex. PP induces a depression of the intrapancreatic cholinergic tone. On the one hand suppressing, hormonally, nervous impulses discharge from the vagal nuclear complex in the brainstem. On the other, interfering paracrinically on the cholinergic transmission by acting, presynaptically, on post-ganglionic cholinergic neurons. The resulting PP-evoked fall of the intrapancreatic cholinergic tone depresses the hormone induced (secretin, CCK) pancreons secretory response. PP, with other agents, contributes to the "fail-safe" system or pancreon's brake that

### PMID 26062142 (2015) — Endoscopy
TITLE: Successful endoscopic treatment using biological fibrin glue (Tissucol) for an enterocutaneous fistula occurring after cephalic duodenopancreatectomy.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1365427 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 26037982 (2015) — European journal of trauma and emergency surgery : official publication of the European Trauma Society
TITLE: Use of local pro-coagulant haemostatic agents for intra-cavity control of haemorrhage after trauma.
DOI: 10.1007/s00068-014-0441-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Uncontrolled haemorrhage as a result of trauma remains a significant surgical challenge, accounting for approximately 25-40% of trauma-related mortality. A wide range of local internal haemostatic agents have been developed to help achieve intra-cavity control of bleeding, with choice of agent influenced by the circumstances and nature of the haemorrhage. Trauma patients are frequently coagulopathic, so products that incorporate pro-coagulant technology and thereby act independently of the clotting cascade may be more effective in these settings. A range of products that utilise thrombin and fibrinogen to promote local haemostasis at intra-cavity bleeding points are available or in development, including fibrin glues (e.g. Tisseel&#xae;/Tissucol&#xae; and Evicel&#xae;/Crosseal&#xae;/Quixil&#xae;), fibrin sealant patches (e.g. TachoSil&#xae;) and products based on a gelatin-thrombin haemostatic matrix (e.g. FloSeal&#xae;).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This systematic review was performed to assess all peer-reviewed evidence of product efficacy.
RESULTS: Fibrin sealant patches have shown haemostatic efficacy in a variety of surgical procedures and appear to offer practical advantages over liquid fibrin glues. Existing evidence suggests that patch products enable delivery of pro-coagulants to defined areas with less chance of dilution and/or displacement by blood flow, but they require a pressure buttress for a suitable amount of time to achieve good results after trauma.
CONCLUSIONS: Our experience, supported by other reports in the literature, suggests the use of such fibrin patches may provide an effective option in helping to control haemorrhage after trauma. However, there is a general paucity of clinical data for intra-cavity haemostatic agent use, with the majority of data being based on animal models and case reports. Further clinical evidence, ideally including comparative studies between different agents, would be beneficial in helping guide surgeon choice to the most appropriate products to use in trauma settings.

### PMID 26008922 (2015) — Archivos de la Sociedad Espanola de Oftalmologia
TITLE: "Dry Lake" technique for the treatment of hypertrophic bleb following XEN(&#xae;) Gel Stent placement.
DOI: 10.1016/j.oftal.2015.03.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: CASE REPORT: The case of a patient with previous uncomplicated XEN(&#xae;) drainage glaucoma surgery is described, who presented with hypertrophic bleb and mechanical ectropion. Treatment consisted of the &#xab;Dry Lake&#xbb; procedure to drain the hypertrophic bleb following blockage with viscoelastic of the ab-interno stent and bleb sealing with a tissue adhesive.
DISCUSSION: Proposals for the management of this type of bleb include therapeutic strategies, sutures or even autologous blood. The use of Tissucol(&#xae;), already described in glaucoma surgery, may be appropriate to treat this complication of XEN(&#xae;) placement.

### PMID 25602488 (2015) — Tissue engineering. Part A
TITLE: Engineering vascularized adipose tissue using the stromal-vascular fraction and fibrin hydrogels.
DOI: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2014.0299 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The development of vascularized and functional adipose tissue substitutes is required to improve soft tissue augmentation. In this study, vascularized adipose tissue constructs were generated using uncultured cells from the stromal-vascular fraction (SVF) of adipose tissue as an alternative cell source to adipose-derived stem cells. SVF cell behavior and tissue formation were compared in a stable fibrin formulation developed by our group and a commercial fibrin sealant (TissuCol; Baxter) upon direct subcutaneous implantation in a nude mouse model. Further, the effect of in vitro adipogenic induction on SVF cell development was investigated by implanting stable fibrin constructs after 1 week of precultivation (adipogenic vs. noninduced control). Constructs were thoroughly analyzed before implantation regarding adipogenic differentiation status, cell viability, and distribution as well as the presence of endothelial cells. Before implantation, in vitro precultivation strongly promoted adipogenesis (under adipogenic conditions) and the formation of CD31(+) prevascular structures by SVF cells (under nonadipogenic conditions). Tissue development in vivo was determined after 4 weeks by histology (hematoxylin and eosin, human vimentin) and quantified histomorphometrically. In stable fibrin gels, adipogenic precultivation was superior to noninduced conditions, resulting in mature adipocytes and the formation of distinct vascular structures of human origin in vivo. Strong neovascularization by the implanted cells predominated in noninduced constructs. Without pretreatment, the SVF in stable fibrin gels displayed only a weak differentiation capability. In contrast, TissuCol gels strongly supported the formation of coherent and well-vascularized adipose tissue of human origin, displaying large unilocular adipocytes. The developed native-like tissue architecture was highlighted by a whole mount staining technique. Taken together, SVF cells from human adipose tissue were shown to successfully lead to adipose tissue formation in fibrin hydrogels in vivo. The results render the SVF a promising cell source for subsequent studies both in vitro and in vivo with the aim of engineering clinically applicable soft tissue substitutes.

### PMID 25241243 (2015) — Osteoarthritis and cartilage
TITLE: Arthroscopic airbrush assisted cell implantation for cartilage repair in the knee: a controlled laboratory and human cadaveric study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.joca.2014.09.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to investigate the feasibility of arthroscopic airbrush assisted cartilage repair.
METHODS: An airbrush device (Baxter) was used to spray both human expanded osteoarthritic chondrocytes and choncrocytes with their pericellular matrix (chondrons) at 1&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;10(6)&#xa0;cells/ml fibrin glue (Tissucol, Baxter) in&#xa0;vitro. Depth-dependent cell viability was assessed for both methods with confocal microscopy. Constructs were cultured for 21 days to assess matrix production. A controlled human cadaveric study (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;8) was performed to test the feasibility of the procedure in which defects were filled with either arthroscopic airbrushing or needle extrusion. All knees were subjected to 60&#xa0;min of continuous passive motion and scored on outline attachment and defect filling.
RESULTS: Spraying both chondrocytes and chondrons in fibrin glue resulted in a homogenous cell distribution throughout the scaffold. No difference in viability or matrix production between application methods was found nor between chondrons and chondrocytes. The cadaveric study revealed that airbrushing was highly feasible, and that defect filling through needle extrusion was more difficult to perform based on fibrin glue adhesion and gravity-induced seepage. Defect outline and coverage scores were consistently higher for extrusion, albeit not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: Both chondrons and chondrocytes can be evenly distributed in a sprayed fibrin glue scaffold without affecting viability while supporting matrix production. The airbrush technology is feasible, easier to perform than needle extrusion and allows for reproducible arthroscopic filling of cartilage defects.

### PMID 26341573 (2015) — Urology
TITLE: The Tunica Vaginalis Flap as an Adjunct to Epispadias Repair: A Preliminary Report.
DOI: 10.1016/j.urology.2015.08.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To report our preliminary institutional experience of incorporating a tunica vaginalis flap (TVF) as an adjunct into primary or secondary epispadias repair.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A prospectively maintained institutionally approved database of exstrophy-epispadias complex patients was used to identify and retrospectively review male patients who underwent epispadias repair from September 2010 to October 2014 at the authors' institution. Patients who underwent epispadias repair with TVF were identified and their clinical outcomes were measured.
RESULTS: A total of 49 male patients were identified as meeting inclusion criteria, of which 15 (2 isolated epispadias, 13 classic bladder exstrophy) underwent epispadias repair incorporating a TVF. Median age at time of repair was 12 months (interquartile range [IQR] 10-15.5). A median of 4 layers (IQR 4-5) was incorporated into each repair closure, applying EVICEL Fibrin Sealant as an additional layer in all patients. All patients received preoperative testosterone injection therapy of 2 mg/kg 5 and 2 weeks before surgery for penile growth. There were no intraoperative complications. Median follow-up of 19 months (IQR 12-23) revealed 5 patients who underwent epispadias revision, 3 (20%) of which developed a urethrocutaneous fistula. All patients had a successful repair without recurrence.
CONCLUSION: The authors have found the utilization of a TVF with epispadias repairs to be beneficial but no better than the repair with our routine soft-tissue coverage in primary epispadias repair. However, in patients presenting with complex anatomy and limited tissue reserves, a TVF is an important adjunct to epispadias repair and/or revision and may lead to improved outcomes.

### PMID 26162825 (2015) — Trials
TITLE: Determination of the efficacy of EVICEL&#x2122; on blood loss in orthopaedic surgery after total knee replacement: study protocol for a randomised controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1186/s13063-015-0822-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: After total knee replacement, overall blood loss is often underestimated, although it exceeds the visible blood loss caused by bleeding into the tissues or into the joint. The use of fibrin sealants during surgery has been suggested to reduce perioperative blood loss and transfusion rates and may be beneficial for patient recovery and the postoperative function of the joint.
METHODS/DESIGN: This will be a single-centre, single-blinded, randomised controlled trial with a parallel design, for which 68 patients undergoing total knee replacement will be recruited and followed up at 3, 6 and 12 months; 34 will be control patients who will receive the standard orthopaedic surgery treatment (electrocoagulation), and the other 34 will receive the same treatment plus 5 ml EVICEL&#x2122; applied during surgery and used according to the manufacturer's instructions. The primary objective is to test the null hypothesis that the effect of EVICEL&#x2122; for controlling haemostasis and reducing postoperative blood loss in patients undergoing total knee replacement is not superior to the use of electrocoagulation alone. The secondary objective is to show that EVICEL&#x2122; reduces the need for transfusion, increases range of motion, improves clinical outcome and wound healing, and reduces the need for analgesics. The tertiary objective is to show that EVICEL&#x2122; reduces the costs of total knee replacement treatment.
DISCUSSION: So far, studies on the effect of fibrin sealants in total knee replacement have delivered inconsistent and ambivalent results, indicating that there is still a need for high-evidence studies as proposed in the presented study protocol.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: German registration number DRKS00007564; date of registration: 26 November 2014.

### PMID 26055033 (2015) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Role of EVICEL Fibrin Sealant to Assist Hemostasis in Cranial and Spinal Epidural Space: A Neurosurgical Clinical Study.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A variety of techniques have been used to stop venous bleeding from the cranial and spinal epidural space. These generally consist of packing with oxidized regenerated cellulose, fibrillar collagen, and so forth, and in cranial surgery, tack-up sutures. Bipolar coagulation may also be used to control bleeding from spinal venous plexus, but it may bear the risk of healthy nervous tissue injury: dissipation of heat from the tips of the bipolar forceps may induce thermal injury to adjacent neural structures. Quick and safe hemostasis reduces the duration of surgery. Efficient control of bleeding is also a prerequisite for the realization of the planned therapeutic procedure, that is, the result of surgery, and can thereby reduce perioperative morbidity. Fibrin sealant is safely used to increase hemostasis and to treat cerebrospinal leakage. Between January 2014 and March 2015, the authors used injection of fibrin sealant (EVICEL&#xae;, Johnson &amp; Johnson Wound Management, Somerville, NJ) into the cranial and spinal epidural space to assist in hemostasis in 97 patients. EVICEL injection was used in 81 cases of cranial surgery and 16 cases of spinal surgery. When the venous bleeding continued from the epidural space after packing with classical hemostatic agents, fibrin sealant was used to stop venous bleeding. When arterial bleeding was present, fibrin sealant was not used. In all cases, the results were judged to be excellent with stoppage of epidural bleeding, or good with mild persistent oozing. During the 10-minute observation period, no patients treated with EVICEL required additional hemostatic measures. No complications related to the fibrin glue were encountered.

### PMID 25684620 (2015) — Transfusion clinique et biologique : journal de la Societe francaise de transfusion sanguine
TITLE: [Medical and economic impact of a haemostatic sealant on the rate of transfusion after total knee arthroplasty].
DOI: 10.1016/j.tracli.2015.01.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Blood loss reduction in total knee arthroplasty (TKA) contributes to the prevention of morbidity and mortality and in the management of health care costs. Fibrin haemostatic sealant have controversial effectiveness in reducing postoperative blood loss and transfusion requirements. Our study evaluated the medical and economic benefits of this treatment with the assumption that it decreases the frequency of blood transfusion after TKA.
METHODS AND PATIENTS: Our single-center and randomized study included 60 patients pose unilateral primary TKA for osteoarthritis. Distribution was done in 2 groups of 30 patients each. Group 1 patients treated with a dose of 5 mL Evicel&#xae;, compared to untreated group 2. Were collected the number of patients transfused. The treatment cost was compared to the sealant cost.
RESULTS: Results are not statistically significant. Two patients were transfused in group 1 and 3 in group 2 (P=0.64). The treatment cost for 30 patients is 13,500 &#x20ac;, for a savings of cells packed at 187 &#x20ac;, an additional cost of 13,313 &#x20ac; in group 1.
CONCLUSION: The use of fibrin haemostatic sealant in TKA did not induce a significant difference in terms of blood or transfusion savings, with a significant cost. We do not recommend its routine use in TKA.

### PMID 25596939 (2015) — Obesity surgery
TITLE: Minimizing Hemorrhagic Complications in Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy--a Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s11695-015-1580-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) has gained worldwide popularity in recent years. Hemorrhagic complications (HC) are usually the result of stapler line bleeding and are probably underreported. The previous incidence of HC in our department including minor bleeding and late hematomas was 15.0 %. The objective of this study is to assess the impact of stapler line reinforcement (SLR) and intraoperative blood pressure control on HC after LSG.
METHODS: Between February 2013 and March 2014, patients who were admitted to our department for LSG were randomly assigned to one of three arms: stapler line application of biologic glue--Evicel&#x2122; (E), over suture of the stapler line (S) or control (C). Surgical technique in all arms included blood pressure elevation to 140 mmHg before termination of the procedure. Data is presented as mean &#xb1; SD or median (IQR 25-75).
RESULTS: One hundred sixty-five patients were randomized: 49 to E, 49 to S, and 67 to C. There were no demographic differences between arms. Operative time was significantly longer in S than in E and C arms (74 &#xb1; 21 vs. 64 &#xb1; 23 and 54 &#xb1; 19 min, respectively). &#x2206;Hb was significantly lower in the S group. Packed cells were used in two from E and one from C arms. Late infected hematoma occurred in three (1.8 %) patients: one from E and two from C arms. Leak rate was 1.2 %: one from S and one from C arms. LOS was the same. No patients were re-operated due to bleeding.
CONCLUSIONS: In this randomized trial, routine elevation of systolic blood pressure to 140 mmHg and over suture of the staple line in LSG minimized HC, with reasonable prolongation of the procedure.

### PMID 25112563 (2015) — British journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: A multicentre, prospective, randomized, controlled study to evaluate the use of a fibrin sealant as an adjunct to sutured dural repair.
DOI: 10.3109/02688697.2014.948808 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Obtaining intra-operative watertight closure of the dura is considered important in reducing post-operative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak. The purpose of this study was to evaluate a fibrin sealant as an adjunct to sutured dural repair to obtain intra-operative watertight closure in cranial neurosurgery.
METHODS: This randomized, controlled multicenter study compared a fibrin sealant (EVICEL&#xae; Fibrin Sealant [Human]) to sutured dural closure (Control). Subjects underwent supratentorial or posterior fossa procedures. Following primary dural repair by sutures, the closure was evaluated for intra-operative CSF leak by moderately increasing the intracranial pressure. If present, subjects were randomized to EVICEL&#xae; or additional sutures (2:1 ratio), stratified by surgical approach. Following treatment, subjects were successful if no CSF leaks were present during provocative challenge. Safety was assessed to 30 days post-surgery, including incidence of CSF leakage.
RESULTS: One hundred and thirty-nine subjects were randomized: 89 to EVICEL&#xae; and 50 to Control. Intra-operative watertight closure was achieved in 92.1% EVICEL&#xae;-treated subjects versus 38.0% controls; a treatment difference of 54.1% (p &lt; 0.001). The treatment differences in the supratentorial and posterior fossa strata were 49.1% and 75.7%, respectively (p &lt; 0.001). The incidence of adverse events was similar between treatment groups. No deaths or unexpected serious adverse drug reactions were reported. CSF leakage within 30 days post-operatively was 2.2% and 2.0% in EVICEL&#xae; and control groups, respectively. In addition, 2 cases of CSF rhinorrhoea were observed in the EVICEL&#xae; group. Although not associated with the suture line where EVICEL&#xae; was applied, when combined with the other CSF leaks, the observed leak rate in the EVICEL&#xae; group was 4.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that EVICEL&#xae; is effective as an adjunct to dural sutures to provide watertight closure of the dura mater in cranial surgery. The study confirmed the safety profile of EVICEL&#xae;.

### PMID 25339155 (2015) — Obesity surgery
TITLE: The use of a fibrin glue with a low concentration of thrombin decreases seroma formation in postbariatric patients undergoing circular abdominoplasty.
DOI: 10.1007/s11695-014-1467-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The serum collection under the abdominal flap is the most common complication after a lipo-abdominoplasty. The frequency of seroma increases further among obese patients, who have achieved massive weight loss after bariatric surgery. The purpose of this study is to demonstrate the effectiveness of fibrin glues with a low concentration of thrombin in reducing seroma formation after a lipo-abdominoplasty.
METHODS: Thirty patients, that had achieved a significant weight loss after an intervention of laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB), underwent a circular lipo-abdominoplasty at our bariatric surgery department. Patients were divided into two groups of 15 subjects each: group A underwent traditional surgery; in group B, we applied a slow-clotting variant of fibrin glue (ARTISS, Baxter) under the abdominal flap. All subjects were evaluated clinically using an ultrasound device on postoperative day 15. We considered positive for seroma, those cases with a liquid collection greater than 20 cc.
RESULTS: The groups were homogeneous for age, BMI, male/female ratio, and diabetic or smoker patients. The mean hospital stay was significantly longer in group A than in group B. We found eight cases of serum collection &gt;20 cc in group A and only one case in group B. Hematoma, umbilicus necrosis, and surgical site infection occurred in both groups, but overall complication rate was lower in group B.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of a fibrin glue with a low concentration of thrombin could be useful during wound closure and may decrease seroma formation in postbariatric patients undergoing lipo-abdominoplasty.

### PMID 25984391 (2015) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat(&#xae;)) in the neurosurgical practice: Part I: Intracranial surgical procedure.
DOI: 10.4103/2152-7806.156871 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemorrhages, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fistula and infections are the most challenging postoperative complications in Neurosurgery. In this study, we report our preliminary results using a fully autologous fibrin sealant agent, the Vivostat(&#xae;) system, in achieving hemostasis and CSF leakage repair during cranio-cerebral procedures.
METHODS: From January 2012 to March 2014, 77 patients were studied prospectively and data were collected and analyzed. Autologous fibrin sealant, taken from patient's blood, was prepared with the Vivostat(&#xae;) system and applied on the resection bed or above the dura mater to achieve hemostasis and dural sealing. The surgical technique, time to bleeding control and associated complications were recorded.
RESULTS: A total of 79 neurosurgical procedures have been performed on 77 patients. In the majority of cases (98%) the same autologous fibrin glue provided rapid hemostasis and dural sealing. No patient developed allergic reactions or systemic complications in association with its application. There were no cases of cerebral hematoma, swelling, infection, or epileptic seizures after surgery whether in the immediate or in late period follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: In this preliminary study, the easy and direct application of autologous fibrin sealant agent helped in controlling cerebral bleeding and in providing prompt and efficient dural sealing with resolution of CSF leaks. Although the use of autologous fibrin glue seems to be safe, easy, and effective, further investigations are strongly recommended to quantify real advantages and potential limitations.

### PMID 25104061 (2015) — European archives of oto-rhino-laryngology : official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS) : affiliated with the German Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
TITLE: Vivostat&#xae;: an autologous fibrin sealant as useful adjunct in endoscopic transnasal CSF-leak repair.
DOI: 10.1007/s00405-014-3230-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The benefit of fibrin glue for reduction of postoperative CSF-leaks after endoscopic skull base surgery is not clearly evident in literature. However, its use is supposed to be beneficial in fixing grafting material. As of today there is no specific data available for otolaryngological procedures. A retrospective data analysis at a tertiary care referral center on 73 patients treated endoscopically transnasally for CSF-leaks at the ENT-department Graz between 2009 and 2012 was performed. Primary closure rate between conventional fibrin glue and autologous fibrin glue were analyzed. The Vivostat(&#xae;) system was used in 33 CSF-leak closures and in 40 cases conventional fibrin glue was used. Comparing the two methods the primary closure rate using the autologous Vivostat(&#xae;) system was 75.8 and 85.0 % with conventional fibrin glue. The secondary closure the rates were 90.9 % with Vivostat(&#xae;) 92.5 % with conventional fibrin glue. The Vivosat(&#xae;) system is a useful adjunct in endoscopic CSF-leak closure. Its advantages over conventional fibrin glue are its application system for fixation of grafting material particularly in underlay techniques. Despite this advantage it cannot replace grafting material or is a substitute for proper endoscopic closure which is reflected by the closure rates.

### PMID 26267401 (2015) — Plastic and reconstructive surgery
TITLE: Risk of Thromboembolus after Application of Different Tissue Glues during Microvascular Anastomosis.
DOI: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000001808 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tissue glues are a useful tool for hemostasis and a potential tool for microvascular anastomosis. The hemostatic power and thrombotic risk of these surgical aids have been the subject of debate, but studies regarding thromboembolic risks of tissue glues are lacking.
METHODS: The authors compared the thromboembolic risk of three different tissue glues (six interrupted sutures complemented with fibrin, FloSeal, or TachoSil) against a control group (12 interrupted sutures) in the aorta-filter model in the rat. Each group consisted of 10 rats, examined 4 hours and 14 days postoperatively (total n = 80) using a structured protocol to assess the patency and condition of the filter, amount of thromboembolic material, and histologic appearance of the vessel wall.
RESULTS: In total, 160 anastomoses were performed in 80 rats. The overall patency rate for the groups was 90 percent (control), 35 percent (fibrin glue), 25 percent (FloSeal), and 10 percent (TachoSil). All experimental groups had significantly faster mean anastomotic times and less blood loss compared with the control group. Patency rates were reduced and thromboembolic material was significantly increased in all experimental groups. Histologically, the use of tissue glue reduced the incidence of irritation of the internal elastic lamina and was associated with an increased incidence of fibrocyte infiltration of the media, hypercellularity of the adventitia, and adventitial neovascularization and lymphangiogenesis.
CONCLUSION: The application of tissue glues in microvascular anastomosis reduces the time needed for anastomosis but was associated with a statistically significant increase in thromboembolism.

### PMID 25046623 (2015) — The Journal of urology
TITLE: A combination of hemostatic agents may safely replace deep medullary suture during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy in a pig model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.juro.2014.07.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We assessed whether a combination of the fibrin tissue adhesive Tisseel&#xae; (human fibrinogen and thrombin) plus the hemostatic matrix FloSeal&#xae; (bovine derived gelatin matrix/human thrombin) could safely replace the conventional deep medullary suture without compromising outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Laparoscopic mid pole and one-third partial nephrectomy was performed on the right kidney of 12 female pigs. The only difference between the 2 groups of 6 pigs each was the use of a fibrin tissue adhesive plus hemostatic matrix combination in group 2 instead of the deep medullary running suture in control group 1. Renal scans and angiograms were performed at baseline and before sacrifice at 5-week followup. Retrograde in vivo pyelogram was also done.
RESULTS: No significant difference was seen in operative parameters or postoperative course between the groups. Renal scans revealed a statistically insignificant trend toward greater uptake loss in group 1 and angiograms showed 3 major vessel occlusions in that group. No active bleeding was detected. Those 3 kidneys had significantly poorer postoperative uptake on renal scan than that of other kidneys (18.6% vs 39.4%, p = 0.013). Only 1 small asymptomatic pseudoaneurysm was noted in group 1. No urine leakage was found in either group. No major vessel occlusion, pseudoaneurysm or urinary complications developed in group 2.
CONCLUSIONS: Even after deep one-third partial nephrectomy FloSeal with concurrent Tisseel appeared sufficient to control major medullary vascular injuries and replace the deep medullary conventional suture without compromising operative outcomes. The potential advantages seen during functional and vascular examinations by decreasing the risk of unnecessary segmental vessel occlusion need further clinical evaluation.

### PMID 25795683 (2015) — Asian cardiovascular &amp; thoracic annals
TITLE: Bronchopleural fistula closed with cellulose patch and fibrin glue.
DOI: 10.1177/0218492315577725 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe a bronchoscopic technique for closing small postoperative bronchopleural fistulas, using an oxidized regenerated cellulose patch and fibrin glue. The patch is mounted on the end of endoscopic forceps and introduced into the fistula to cover it. Intracavitary and submucosal injections of fibrin glue fill the bronchial stump and achieve apposition of the fistula edges. Closure was obtained in 3 of 4 patients; the 4th had complete bronchial dehiscence and empyema.

### PMID 26060599 (2015) — Surgical neurology international
TITLE: Efficacy of arachnoid plasty with collagen sheets and fibrin glue: An in vitro experiment and a case review.
DOI: 10.4103/2152-7806.157792 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative subdural fluid collection sometimes occurs after clipping of cerebral aneurysms. Arachnoid plasty is used to prevent such postoperative complications; however, the optimal materials for arachnoid plasty remain unclear. In this study, we aimed to clarify the optimal materials for arachnoid plasty and report our experience of arachnoid plasty after clipping of unruptured aneurysms.
METHODS: In an in vitro experiment, adhesive strengths of three materials permitted for use in the intradural space, such as collagen sheets, gelatin sponge, and oxidized cellulose sheets, were measured by assessing their water pressure resistance. Then, 80 consecutive cases surgically treated unruptured cerebral aneurysms were retrospectively reviewed to examine the occurrence rate of postoperative subdural fluid collection.
RESULTS: The collagen sheet exhibited the greatest adhesive strength, so we used collagen sheets for the arachnoid plasty procedures. In all of these cases, arachnoid plasty was performed with fibrin glue-soaked collagen sheets. No postoperative subdural fluid collection, inflammation, or allergic reactions occurred in any case.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that collagen sheet might be one of the optimal materials for arachnoid plasty. This technique is simple and may be effective to prevent subdural fluid collection after clipping.

### PMID 25704860 (2015) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Controlling air leaks using free pericardial fat pads as surgical sealant in pulmonary resection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.11.040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the feasibility and efficacy of a new operative method for controlling intraoperative air leaks using free pericardial fat pads as a covering sealant in pulmonary resection.
METHODS: To manage air leaks that must be controlled in pulmonary resection at the first water sealing test, collected free pericardial fat was used as a covering sealant and sewn on by the suture closing the lesion. In cases of uncontrolled air leaks at the second sealing test, fibrin glue was used to fill the residual lesion between the fat and visceral pleura. Fifty-one eligible patients were enrolled in this study to evaluate the duration of postoperative air leaks and the condition of the implanted fat on chest computed tomography (CT) 6 months later.
RESULTS: The mean duration of postoperative air leaks was 1.05 &#xb1; 1.84 days in the 39 cases that received the pericardial fat covering technique only and 2.66 &#xb1; 3.42 days in the 12 cases that received the pericardial fat covering technique combined with fibrin glue. Prolonged alveolar air leaks occurred in 1 case and 2 cases, respectively. No cases required conversion to conventional methods, and there were no further adverse events. On follow-up chest CT approximately 62.7% of obvious engrafted fat survived.
CONCLUSIONS: Using free pericardial fat pads as a sealant to control air leaks in pulmonary resection is safe and has good feasibility and potent efficacy. This new method can be an innovative technique for preventing prolonged air leaks.

### PMID 25720112 (2015) — Polski przeglad chirurgiczny
TITLE: Successful endoscopic treatment of a postoperative tracheomediastinal fistula caused by anastomotic insufficiency after esophageal resection with fibrin glue.
DOI: 10.2478/pjs-2014-0095 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fistula development after esophageal resection is considered as one of the most serious postoperative complications. The authors reported a case on clinical experiences in the postoperative diagnostic and successful therapeutic management of a tracheomediastinal fistula after esophageal resection, using endoscopic application of fibrin glue. The early approach of an anastomotic insufficiency after esophageal resection because of a squamous cell carcinoma (pT3pN0M0G2) below the tracheal bifurcation including transposition of a re-modelled gastric tube and end-to-side anastomosis 24 hours postoperatively in a 55-year old patient combined i) surgical re-intervention from the periesophageal site (reanastomosis, gastroplication, lavage, local and mediastinal drainage) and, later on, ii) extensive rinsing with consecutive endoscopic fibrin glue application into the tracheal mouth of the subsequently developed tracheomediastinal fistula as a consequence of the inflammatory changes within the surrounding tissue. In conclusion, this approach was successful and beneficial for the patient's further postoperative course, which was associated with other complications such as pneumonia and acute myocardial infarction. The fistula closed sufficiently and permanently with no further surgical intervention at the tracheal as well as mediastinal site and allowed patient's later discharge with no further complaints or problems.

### PMID 26254451 (2015) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Randomized trial of a dry-powder, fibrin sealant in vascular procedures.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2015.05.038 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Topical hemostats are important adjuncts for stopping surgical bleeding. The safety and efficacy of Fibrocaps, a dry-powder, fibrin sealant containing human plasma-derived thrombin and fibrinogen, was evaluated in patients undergoing vascular surgical procedures.
METHODS: In this single-blind trial (clinicaltrials.gov: NCT01527357), adult patients were randomized 2:1 to Fibrocaps plus gelatin sponge (Fibrocaps) vs gelatin sponge alone. Results are presented for the patient subset undergoing vascular procedures with suture hole bleeding. The primary efficacy endpoint compared time to hemostasis (TTH) over 5&#xa0;minutes. Safety follow-up continued to day&#xa0;29.
RESULTS: A total of 175 patients were randomized and treated (Fibrocaps, 117; gelatin sponge, 58). Patients were predominately male (69%) and underwent arterial bypass (81%), arteriovenous graft formation (9%), or carotid endarterectomy (9%). Fibrocaps significantly reduced TTH compared with gelatin sponge (hazard ratio [HR], 2.1; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.5-3.1; median TTH, 2&#xa0;minutes; 95% CI, 1.5-2.5 vs 4&#xa0;minutes; 95% CI, 3.0-5.0; P&#xa0;&lt; .002). Significant reductions were also observed in patients receiving concomitant antiplatelet agents alone (HR, 2.8; 95% CI, 1.0-7.4; P&#xa0;= .03; n&#xa0;= 33), anticoagulants alone (HR, 2.0; 95% CI, 1.0-4.0; P&#xa0;= .04; n&#xa0;= 43), or both antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants (Fibrocaps vs gelatin sponge, HR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.2-4.3; P&#xa0;= .008; n&#xa0;= 65). Incidences of common adverse events (procedural pain, nausea, constipation) were generally comparable between treatment arms. Anti-thrombin antibodies developed in 2% of Fibrocaps-treated patients and no-gelatin-sponge patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrocaps, a ready-to-use, dry-powder fibrin sealant, was well-tolerated and reduced TTH in patients undergoing vascular procedures, including those receiving antiplatelet agents and/or anticoagulants, demonstrating its safety and usefulness as an adjunct to hemostasis.

### PMID 25458801 (2015) — Journal of the American College of Surgeons
TITLE: The FINISH-3 trial: a phase 3, international, randomized, single-blind, controlled trial of topical fibrocaps in intraoperative surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2014.09.019 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This Phase 3, international, randomized, single-blind, controlled trial (FINISH-3) compared the efficacy and safety of Fibrocaps, a ready-to-use, dry-powder fibrin sealant containing human plasma-derived thrombin and fibrinogen, vs gelatin sponge alone for use as a hemostat for surgical bleeding in 4 indications (ie, spinal, hepatic, vascular, soft tissue dissection).
STUDY DESIGN: Adults with mild to moderate surgical bleeding (randomized 2:1; Fibrocaps vs gelatin sponge) were treated at a single bleeding site (day 1). Time to hemostasis (TTH) during 5 minutes was compared (log-rank statistic) within each indication. Safety follow-up continued to day&#xa0;29.
RESULTS: Patients were treated (Fibrocaps, n&#xa0;= 480; gelatin sponge, n&#xa0;= 239) when undergoing spinal (n&#xa0;= 183), vascular (n&#xa0;= 175), hepatic (n&#xa0;= 180), or soft-tissue (n&#xa0;= 181) procedures. Fibrocaps was applied by spray device in 53% of all procedures (94% of hepatic and soft-tissue procedures). Fibrocaps significantly reduced TTH compared with gelatin sponge; estimated hazard ratios were 3.3, 2.1, 2.3, and 3.4 for the 4 surgical indications, respectively (each p &lt; 0.001; primary end point). Fibrocaps significantly reduced median TTH for each indication (p &lt; 0.001) and was superior for secondary efficacy end points of restricted mean TTH (p &lt; 0.001) and probability of hemostasis at 3 (p &lt; 0.001) and 5 (p &#x2264; 0.002) minutes. Adverse event incidences were generally similar between treatment arms. Non-neutralizing, anti-thrombin antibodies developed in 2% of Fibrocaps-treated and 3% of gelatin sponge-treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrocaps was well tolerated and significantly reduced TTH relative to gelatin sponge alone in all 4 surgical indications. These findings demonstrate the broad utility of Fibrocaps as a hemostatic agent for mild to moderate surgical bleeding.

### PMID 24384831 (2014) — European spine journal : official publication of the European Spine Society, the European Spinal Deformity Society, and the European Section of the Cervical Spine Research Society
TITLE: The use of surgical sealants in the repair of dural tears during non-instrumented spinal surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00586-013-3138-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare the success in repair of dural tears (DTs) using two different surgical sealants in non-instrumented lumbar spinal surgery and evaluate the incidence of associated short- and long-term complications.
METHODS: Twenty-three patients undergoing non-instrumented spinal surgery with intraoperative DTs were included both retrospectively and prospectively in this study. External signs of CSF leakage, neurological deficits, and infection-related complications were investigated postoperatively. The persistence of low-back pain was also evaluated and postoperative MRI was performed in all patients. DTs were repaired intraoperatively using suture with or without a dural patch. Eleven patients received an application of fibrin glue (Tissucol(&#xae;); Baxter, Inc., IL, USA) and 12 patients received an application of bovine serum albumin glutaraldehyde surgical adhesive (BioGlue(&#xae;) Surgical Adhesive; CryoLife, GA, USA). These patients were followed up at 3 months and 1 year postoperatively.
RESULTS: Successful intraoperative DT repair was obtained in all cases. Three patients in the Tissucol group presented with CSF leakage in the early postoperative period. There were no complications observed in the patients treated with BioGlue. At 3-month follow-up, no incidences of neurological or infection-related complications were observed in either group. There was no statistically significant difference in VAS between the two treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Intraoperative DTs can be easily repaired by many effective techniques. However, in our experience, the use of BioGlue is an effective adjunct to immediate dural repair, being comparable in terms of efficacy and safety to the use of fibrin glue, potentially decreasing the incidence of associated short- and long-term complications.

### PMID 25255850 (2014) — International journal of colorectal disease
TITLE: The prevention of colorectal anastomotic leakage with tissue adhesives in a contaminated environment is associated with the presence of anti-inflammatory macrophages.
DOI: 10.1007/s00384-014-2012-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Colorectal anastomoses created in a contaminated environment result in a high leakage rate. This study investigated whether using anastomotic sealants (TissuCol(&#xae;), Histoacryl(&#xae;) Flex, and Duraseal(&#xae;)) prevents leakage in a rat peritonitis model.
STUDY DESIGN: Sixty-seven Wistar rats were divided into control and experimental groups (TissuCol, Histoacryl, and Duraseal groups). Peritonitis was induced 1 day before surgery with the cecal ligation puncture model. On day 0, colonic anastomosis was constructed with sutures and then sealed with no adhesive (control group) or one select adhesive (experimental groups). Bursting pressure, abscess formation, and adhesion severity were evaluated on day 3 or day 14. Hematoxylin and eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining for CD4, CD8, CD206, and iNOS were performed.
RESULTS: On day 3, bursting pressures of the TissuCol group (120.1&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;25.3 mmHg), Histoacryl group (117.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;20.2 mmHg), and Duraseal group (123.6&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;35.4 mmHg) were significantly higher than the that of the control group (24.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;31.7 mmHg, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001). Abscesses around the anastomosis were found in the control group (6/7) and Duraseal group (2/9) but not in the TissuCol group or Histoacryl group. A higher number of CD206+ cells (M2 macrophages), a lower number of iNOS+ cells (M1 macrophages), a higher M2/M1 index, and a higher CD4+/CD8+ index were seen at the anastomotic site in all experimental groups compared with the control group on day 3. On day 14, abscesses were only found in the control group. Adhesion severity in the Duraseal group was significantly lower than that in the control group (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Anastomotic sealing using TissuCol(&#xae;), Histoacryl(&#xae;) Flex, or Duraseal(&#xae;) seems to be an effective and safe option to prevent leakage in contaminated colorectal surgery. The presence of large numbers of anti-inflammatory macrophages seems to be involved in preventing the leakage.

### PMID 24305019 (2014) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Delayed cerebrospinal fluid leak after watertight dural closure with a polyethylene glycol hydrogel dural sealant in posterior fossa surgery: case report.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.cr2013-0010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: A polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel sealant recently has been approved as an adjunct to sutured dural closure in Japan. We treated consecutive six patients with PEG hydrogel sealant in posterior fossa operation. Three of six cases suffered delayed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak after watertight dural closure with the PEG hydrogel sealant, although there was no leak case which was treated with fibrin glue, before 2 years until the adoption of the new material. These patients underwent posterior fossa craniotomy and discharged without remarkable CSF leak. The pseudomeningocele under the occipital wound caused the CSF leak occurr from 5th to 7th week postoperatively. All CSF leak cases needed surgical repair. At the repair, the PEG hydrogel was liquefied and almost absorbed. A fistula on the closure line and a dead space after the absorption of the PEG hydrogel was observed. When the absorbable PEG hydrogel sealant plugs in small gaps of sutured dura, its properties to prevent adhesion might suppress healing process of dural closure, so that CSF could leak through the gaps and collect as a pseudomeningocele in the dead space after absorption of the PEG hydrogel. In posterior fossa surgery a PEG hydrogel sealant should be applied when dural edges are closed tightly without any gaps.

### PMID 25250622 (2014) — PloS one
TITLE: Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles function as a long-term, multi-modal imaging label for non-invasive tracking of implanted progenitor cells.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108695 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The purpose of this study was to determine the ability of superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) nanoparticles to function as a long-term tracking label for multi-modal imaging of implanted engineered tissues containing muscle-derived progenitor cells using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and X-ray micro-computed tomography (&#x3bc;CT). SPIO-labeled primary myoblasts were embedded in fibrin sealant and imaged to obtain intensity data by MRI or radio-opacity information by &#x3bc;CT. Each imaging modality displayed a detection gradient that matched increasing SPIO concentrations. Labeled cells were then incorporated in fibrin sealant, injected into the atrioventricular groove of rat hearts, and imaged in vivo and ex vivo for up to 1 year. Transplanted cells were identified in intact animals and isolated hearts using both imaging modalities. MRI was better able to detect minuscule amounts of SPIO nanoparticles, while &#x3bc;CT more precisely identified the location of heavily-labeled cells. Histological analyses confirmed that iron oxide particles were confined to viable, skeletal muscle-derived cells in the implant at the expected location based on MRI and &#x3bc;CT. These analyses showed no evidence of phagocytosis of labeled cells by macrophages or release of nanoparticles from transplanted cells. In conclusion, we established that SPIO nanoparticles function as a sensitive and specific long-term label for MRI and &#x3bc;CT, respectively. Our findings will enable investigators interested in regenerative therapies to non-invasively and serially acquire complementary, high-resolution images of transplanted cells for one year using a single label.

### PMID 24867211 (2014) — Journal of neurosurgery. Spine
TITLE: Management of intended durotomy in minimally invasive intradural spine surgery: clinical article.
DOI: 10.3171/2014.3.SPINE13719 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECT: Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) has been increasingly used for the treatment of various intradural spinal pathologies in recent years. Although MIS techniques allow for successful treatment of intradural pathology, primary dural closure in MIS can be technically challenging due to a limited surgical corridor through the tubular retractor system. The authors describe their experience with 23 consecutive patients from a single institution who underwent MIS for intradural pathologies, along with a review of pertinent literature.
METHODS: A retrospective review of a prospectively collected surgical database was performed to identify patients who underwent MIS for intradural spinal pathologies between November 2006 and July 2013. Patient demographics, preoperative records, operative notes, and postoperative records were reviewed. Primary outcomes include operative duration, estimated blood loss, length of bed rest, length of hospital stay, and postoperative complications, which were recorded prospectively.
RESULTS: Twenty-three patients who had undergone MIS for intradural spinal pathologies during the study period were identified. Fifteen patients (65.2%) were female and 8 (34.8%) were male. The mean age at surgery was 54.4 years (range 30-74 years). Surgical pathologies included neoplastic (17 patients), congenital (3 patients), vascular (2 patients), and degenerative (1 patient). The most common spinal region treated was lumbar (11 patients), followed by thoracic (9 patients), cervical (2 patients), and sacral (1 patient). The mean operative time was 161.1 minutes, and the mean estimated blood loss was 107.2 ml. All patients were allowed full activity less than 24 hours after surgery. The median length of stay was 78.2 hours. Primary sutured dural closure was achieved using specialized MIS instruments with adjuvant fibrin sealant in all cases. The rate of postoperative headache, nausea, vomiting, and diplopia was 0%. No case of cutaneous CSF fistula or symptomatic pseudomeningocele was identified at follow-up, and no patient required revision surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Primary dural closure with early mobilization is an effective strategy with excellent clinical outcomes in the use of MIS techniques for intradural spinal pathology. Prolonged bed rest after successful primary dural closure appears unnecessary, and the need for watertight dural closure should not prevent the use of MIS techniques in this specific patient population.

### PMID 23180147 (2014) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Beneficial effects of fibrin glue (Quixil) versus Lichtenstein conventional technique in inguinal hernia repair: a randomized clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-012-1020-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: In inguinal hernia repair, many complications are due to mesh fixation technique. Therefore, new types of atraumatic methods of fixation have been proposed. In this article, we present the results of a prospective multicentric parallel randomized controlled trial aiming to compare two mesh fixation techniques: fibrin sealant (QUIXIL(&#xae;), Omrix Biopharmaceuticals S.A., Belgium) and Lichtenstein technique.
METHOD: Adult patients with primary uncomplicated inguinal hernia were randomized in two groups: fibrin sealant group (FSG) and Lichtenstein group (LTG). The two groups underwent a follow-up of 15 months. Operative time is the primary outcome. Intraoperative and postoperative outcomes were analyzed. Moreover, a differential cost analysis was performed. Patients and evaluators (with exception of the surgeon who treated the patient) were blinded.
RESULTS: A total of 102 patients, 50 in FSG and 52 in LTG, were enrolled from January 2009 to June 2010, and two patients were lost to follow-up at the twelfth month. No significant differences in baseline and clinical characteristics were observed in the two groups. Operative time was longer in LTG (median/ interquartile range: 35 min/30-42.5 min vs. 31 min/28-35 min; effect size: 0.65/95% CI 0.50-0.91; p &lt; 0.05). No differences in intraoperative complications were observed. No significant differences were observed in early complication rate (RR = 0.62; p &gt; 0.05). Numbness rate was lower in the FSG at 1 week (RR = 0.43; p &lt; 0.01) and at 1 month (RR = 0.17; p &lt; 0.05). No significant differences were observed after 6 months. Postoperative pain was lower in the FSG at 1 week (0/0-1 vs. 1/0-2; p &lt; 0.05) and at 1 month (0/0-0 vs. 0/0-1; p &lt; 0.05). Pain disappeared in all patients after 6 months. Analgesic assumption rate was lower in the FSG (RR = 0.42; p &lt; 0.05). Twenty per cent of FSG and 9.62% of LTG patients were discharged within 12 h; 78% of FSG and 90.38% of LTG patients were discharged within 24 h. The only one recurrence we observed was in FSG group. About costs, although fibrin sealant needed for one mesh fixation is about 10 times more costly than the needed sutures, the total costs of the two procedures did not change significantly. This was mainly due to reduction in operative time.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of fibrin sealant determined a significant reduction in short-term numbness rate and postoperative pain. There was no relevant difference in total costs per patient between the two procedures.

### PMID 25367586 (2014) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Experimental study on the viscosity and adhesive performance of exogenous liquid fibrin glue.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.oa.2014-0203 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Exogenous fibrin glue (FG) is highly suitable for neurosurgical procedures, because of its viscosity and adhesive properties. Several FGs are commercially available, but only few reports detail their differences. In the present study, we investigated the viscosity and adhesive performance of two types of FG: one is derived from blood donated in Europe and the United States (CSL Behring's Beriplast(&#xae;), BP) and the other is derived from blood donated in Japan (the Chemo-Sero-Therapeutic Research Institute's Bolheal(&#xae;), BH). The viscosity test that measured fibrinogen viscosity revealed that BP had significantly higher viscosity than BH. Similarly, the dripping test showed that BP traveled a significantly shorter drip distance in the vertical direction than BH, although the transverse diameter of the coagulated FG did not differ statistically significantly. In the tensile strength test, BP showed superior adhesion performance over BH. The histological study of the hematoxylin-eosin-stained specimens in both groups showed favorable adhesion. Although further studies are required on its manufacturing and usage methods, FG shows differences in viscosity and adhesive performance according to the blood from which it is derived. We conclude that it is desirable to select the type and usage method of FG according to the characteristics of the surgical operation in question. Our findings suggest that FG produced from the blood donated in Europe and the United States might be more suitable for use in surgical procedures that demand an especially high degree of viscosity and rapid adhesive performance.

### PMID 24889273 (2014) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Post-operative benefits of Tisseel(&#xae;)/Tissucol (&#xae;) for mesh fixation in patients undergoing Lichtenstein inguinal hernia repair: secondary results from the TIMELI trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-014-1263-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The Tisseel/Tissucol for mesh fixation in Lichtenstein hernia repair (TIMELI) study showed that mesh fixation with human fibrin sealant during inguinal hernia repair significantly reduced moderate-severe complications of pain 12&#xa0;months post-operatively compared with sutures. Further analyses may assist surgeons by investigating predictors of post-surgical complications and identifying patients that may benefit from Tisseel/Tissucol intervention.
METHODS: Univariate and multivariate analyses identified risk factors for combined pain, numbness and groin discomfort (PND) visual analogue scale (VAS) score 12&#xa0;months post-operatively. Variables tested were: fixation method, age, employment status, physical activity, nerve handling, PND VAS score at pre-operative visit and 1&#xa0;week post-operatively. The effect of fixation technique on separate PND outcomes 12&#xa0;months post-surgery was also assessed. Analyses included the intention-to-treat (ITT) population and a subpopulation with pre-operative PND VAS&#xa0;&gt;&#xa0;30&#xa0;mm.
RESULTS: 316 patients were included in the ITT, with 130 patients in the subpopulation with pre-operative PND VAS&#xa0;&gt;&#xa0;30. Multivariate analysis identified mesh fixation with sutures, worsening pre-operative PND and worsening PND 1&#xa0;week post-surgery as significant predictors of 12-month PND in the ITT population; mesh fixation with sutures was a significant predictor of 12-month PND in the pre-operative PND VAS&#xa0;&gt;&#xa0;30 subpopulation (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05). Mesh fixation with Tisseel/Tissucol resulted in significantly less numbness and a lower intensity of groin discomfort compared with sutures at 12&#xa0;months; there was no difference in pain between the treatment groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Pre-operative discomfort may be an important predictor of post-operative pain, numbness and discomfort. Tisseel/Tissucol may improve long-term morbidity over conventional sutures in these patients.

### PMID 24647564 (2014) — Lung
TITLE: Stem cells protect the bronchial stump in rat, increasing Sox6, Col2a1, and Agc1 expression.
DOI: 10.1007/s00408-014-9569-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Post-pneumonectomy bronchopleural fistulas (BPFs) are associated with high morbidity and mortality. Currently, since the management of BPFs is difficult to assess, the best therapeutic approach is prevention. Our objective was to evaluate the effects of adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) on the healing of the bronchial stump in an experimental animal model.
METHODS: Left pneumonectomy was performed in 37 Sprague-Dawley rats. Animals were randomly assigned to a control group (n = 13), an ASC group (n = 12), and an ASC plus Tissucol(&#xae;) group (ASCT) (n = 12). The ASCs and ASCTs were locally administered at the bronchial stump after surgical pneumonectomy. Animals were killed at 10 and 20 days. We analyzed histological changes and changes in the expression of relevant genes involved in wound repair in the bronchial stump.
RESULTS: Two control animals, one animal from the ASC group, and one from the ASCT group died from early BPF. All the remaining animals had an adequate postoperative outcome. ASCs and ASCTs significantly decreased the necrosis and ulcerations of the bronchial stump at 10 and 20 days. ASCs significantly decreased mRNA expression of Igf1 at 10 days and Igf1, Tgfb1, Vegfa, and Col2a1 at 20 days, whereas there was increased expression of Agc1 and Col2a1 at 10 days and Sox6 at 20 days.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that local ASCs protected the bronchial stump after pneumonectomy and induced local changes in gene expression related to their protective action. These results could lead to a potential new therapeutic modality for the prevention of BPF.

### PMID 24269398 (2014) — Archivos de la Sociedad Espanola de Oftalmologia
TITLE: [Intracameral fibrin glue in spontaneous corneal perforation].
DOI: 10.1016/j.oftal.2012.09.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: CASE REPORT: A 70-year-old male was referred to our department due to a herpetic corneal perforation in the left eye. The perforation was healed with intracameral fibrin tissue sealant (Tissucol(&#xae;)), an amniotic membrane, and a large diameter soft contact lens. Postoperatively there were complete dissolution of the fibrin sealant and closure of the perforation without endothelial damage.
DISCUSSION: Intracameral fibrin glue may be effective in the closure of corneal perforations.

### PMID 23942812 (2014) — European archives of oto-rhino-laryngology : official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS) : affiliated with the German Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
TITLE: Temporary removal of the posterior bony canal wall with reconstruction using microplate osteosynthesis in cholesteatoma surgery: a case series and description of the technique.
DOI: 10.1007/s00405-013-2601-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe the surgical technique of temporary removal of the posterior auditory canal wall with reconstruction and report the outcome of using this technique as a treatment method for cholesteatoma in a case series. In 32 cases of cholesteatoma surgery a technique of temporary removal of the posterior bony wall was applied. During primary surgery the posterior auditory canal wall was removed using an oscillating saw. For the purpose of reconstruction, the canal wall was repositioned and fixed using two titanium microplates (n = 26). In case the canal wall could not be reconstructed with osteosynthesis, either glass-ionomeric cement (BioCem&#x2122;) was used for fixation (n = 4) or fibrin glue (Tissucol&#x2122;) (n = 2) to support the posterior wall. The outcome includes the healing process in the first postoperative month, the absence of residual or recurrent disease and the successful reconstruction of the posterior auditory canal wall as evaluated during second-look surgery. When microplates where used, we saw healing problems of the canal skin in about 4% of patients. Recurrent cholesteatoma was found in 4 cases (14%), residual cholesteatoma in 8 ears (25%). In the osteosynthesis group, successful reconstruction was achieved in 25 patients (96%). In 3 out of 4 patients of the glass-ionomeric cement group (75%) excessive granulation tissue developed with extensive bony lysis. Temporary removal of the posterior auditory canal wall offers potential for the control of cholesteatoma. Our first results suggest that osteosynthesis allows for a good anatomical and functional reconstruction.

### PMID 25419954 (2014) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: (EVICEL) for Augmentation of Dural Closure: Results of a Preliminary Clinical Study.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors prospectively evaluated the safety and efficacy of a new fibrin sealant in patients undergoing emergency and elective cranial/spinal surgery with documented cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage after sutured dural repair. This study was designed as a prospective, nonrandomized clinical trial. EVICEL&#xae; Fibrin Sealant (Johnson &amp; Johnson, Somerville, NJ) was used in 72 patients with documented intraoperative CSF leakage after neurosurgical dural repair for a variety of pathologies. Intraoperative CSF leakage was either spontaneous or induced by a Valsalva maneuver. Patients were monitored for 1 month postoperatively with physical examinations, clinical laboratory analyses, and diagnostic imaging (CT or MRI). The sealant was effective in closing intraoperative CSF leakage in all patients but one. There were no sealant-related adverse events, and all clinical outcomes were consistent with expectations for seriously ill patients undergoing prolonged neurosurgical procedures. EVICEL&#xae; Fibrin Sealant provides a safe and effective watertight closure when used as an adjunct to sutured dural repair during cranial surgery.

### PMID 24674732 (2014) — The Journal of arthroplasty
TITLE: Is the newest fibrin sealant an effective strategy to reduce blood loss after total knee arthroplasty? A randomized controlled study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.arth.2014.02.024 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: An RCT was conducted to ascertain whether, compared to control management, topical application of a novel fibrin sealant (Evicel, J&amp;J) in patients undergoing primary TKA reduces peri-operative blood loss. Sixty-two patients were randomized to receive topical application of Evicel (N = 31) or not (N = 31). The mean total blood loss was 1.9L(&#xb1; 0.7) in the control group and 1.8L(&#xb1; 0.5) in the treatment group (P = 0.4). The transfusion rate was 32.3% in the control group and 25.8% in the treatment group (P = 0.5). The transfusion rate decreased linearly with increasing preoperative Hb levels in the treatment group (P = 0.005). The results of this study suggest that topical application of this novel fibrin sealant doesn't reduce perioperative blood loss and the need for allogeneic blood transfusion.

### PMID 24190654 (2014) — Archives of orthopaedic and trauma surgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealants or cell saver eliminate the need for autologous blood donation in anemic patients undergoing primary total knee arthroplasty.
DOI: 10.1007/s00402-013-1876-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Reducing allogeneic blood transfusions remains a challenge in total knee arthroplasty. Patients with preoperative anemia have a particularly high risk for perioperative blood transfusions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: 176 anemic patients (Hb &lt; 13.5 g/dl) undergoing total knee replacement were prospectively evaluated to compare the effect of a perioperative cell saver (26 patients), intraoperative fibrin sealants (5 ml Evicel, Johnson &amp; Johnson Wound Management, Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) (45 patients), preoperative autologous blood donation (PABD) (21 patients), the combination of fibrin sealants and preoperative autologous blood donation (44) and no intervention (40 patients) on perioperative blood loss and transfusion requirements.
RESULTS: All protocols resulted in significant reduction of allogeneic blood transfusions. Transfusion rates were similar with the use of PABD (19%), Evicel (18%), and cell saver (19%), all significantly lower than the control group (38 %, p &lt; 0.05). Combining Evicel with PABD resulted in significantly higher wastage of autologous units (p &lt; 0.05) with no significant reduction in allogeneic transfusion rate (14%). The use of fibrin sealant resulted in a significant reduction of blood loss compared to the PABD group (603 vs. 810 ml, p &lt; 0.005) as well as the control group (603 vs. 822 ml, p &lt; 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: While PABD proved to be the most cost-effective treatment option in anemic patients, fibrin sealants and cell saver show similar reduction in allogeneic transfusion rates compared to controls. The combination of fibrin sealants and PABD is not cost-effective and increases the number of wasted units.

### PMID 25462702 (2014) — International journal of surgery (London, England)
TITLE: The effects of low-thrombin fibrin sealant on wound serous drainage, seroma formation and length of postoperative stay in patients undergoing axillary node dissection for breast cancer. A randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2014.10.005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Breast cancer surgery with axillary lymphadenectomy may be associated with prolonged stay of the drain in the axilla due to high wound output, which may require further treatments and prolong the length of stay, impairing quality of life. No definitive data are available concerning how to prevent this complication. Our aim was to assess the efficacy of a new low-thrombin fibrin glue in reducing the serous output from the axillary surgical wound in patients undergoing axillary node dissection for breast cancer, and its long-term effects on lymphedema.
METHODS: Sixty patients undergoing surgery between September 2012 and June 2013 were enrolled. Thirty patients received Artiss&#xae;(Baxter, UK) fibrin glue plus drainage, and 30 drainage alone. A multivariate analysis was performed to identify predictors of seroma, and subgroup analyses were performed. Lymphedema was assessed 12 months after surgery.
RESULTS: Patients who received fibrin glue had reduced serum output collected in the drain after surgery (94.3 &#xb1; 22.4 vs 176 &#xb1; 24.6 ml p &lt; 0.001) and shorter length of postoperative hospital stay (p = 0.001). Incidence of seroma at 4-week follow-up did not differ between groups. At multivariate analysis, BMI &#x2265; 30 kg/m(2) was the only independent predictor of seroma formation (OR = 2.7, 95%CI 1.4-5.3; p = 0.002). Overweight patients receiving Artiss&#xae; had fewer seroma at 4-week follow-up compared with control overweight patients (0% vs 55.6%, p = 0.03). No differences were observed in lymphedema between groups (6.7% vs 10%, p &gt; 0.99).
CONCLUSIONS: Low-thrombin fibrin glue reduced the amount of fluid produced in the axilla after breast surgery. Overweight patients may be the ideal candidates for this treatment. Such sealant did not increase the rates of lymphedema.

### PMID 24745385 (2014) — Facial plastic surgery clinics of North America
TITLE: Adjunctive procedures to neck rejuvenation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.fsc.2014.01.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Rejuvenation of the neck often requires more than just a neck lift. Various steps and procedures exist to enhance the surgical technique or overall result. Fibrin sealants can be used to improve the recovery process and obviate the need for drain placement. Chin augmentation can be a critical part of creating a more refined neckline. Submandibular gland excision has been put forth as helpful to the overall aesthetic result. A low and anteriorly positioned hyoid bone creates an unattractive neckline that is difficult to treat. This article focuses on techniques beyond lifting and resurfacing that may enhance neck rejuvenation.

### PMID 25002331 (2014) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Polyglycolic acid sheet with fibrin glue potentiates the effect of a fibrin-based haemostat in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-9-121 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemorrhage from the left ventricle can be critical and sutureless repair using a fibrin-based haemostat (TachoComb) is one effective option. When active hemorrhage is not controlled by the haemostat, we have used a polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheet and fibrin glue in addition. Here we investigated whether the PGA sheet and fibrin glue combined with TachoComb had stronger adhesive properties than TachoComb alone in two experimental models.
METHODS: Experiment 1. An airtight circuit that included rabbit skin with holes covered by each type of sealant was gradually pressurized and the burst pressure was recorded automatically (n =&#x2009;10). Experiment 2. A suture loop was attached to a porcine heart by each sealant, and the peel-off pressure was measured (n =&#x2009;12).
RESULTS: The PGA sheet and fibrin glue combined with TachoComb showed significantly higher adhesive strength than TachoComb alone in both experiments (p &lt;&#x2009;0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Adding a PGA sheet and fibrin glue increased the adhesive strength of TachoComb in two experimental models, suggesting that this method might be effective for achieving haemostasis in difficult clinical situations.

### PMID 23445798 (2014) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Bronchial stump coverage with fibrin glue-coated collagen fleece in lung cancer patients who underwent pneumonectomy.
DOI: 10.5761/atcs.oa.12.02166 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Bronchopleural fistula (BPF) is a serious complication following pneumonectomy in lung cancer patients. The aim of this retrospective study is to investigate the efficacy of bronchial stump reinforcement with a collagen fleece coated with fibrin glue(TachoComb&#xae;).
METHODS: The bronchial stumps of 43 lung cancer patients who underwent pneumonectomy between January 1998 and January 2003 were covered with pericardial fat pad.From February 2003 to the March 2011, we used TachoComb to cover the bronchial stumps of all lung cancer patients undergoing pneumonectomy (20 cases). Several preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative variables were recorded retrospectively.
RESULTS: Univariate analysis of comorbidities and risk factors did not show any significant differences between the two groups except for neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Postpneumonectomy BPF occurred in three of the 43 (7%) patients who had pericardial fat pad coverage and in none of the patients treated by TachoComb.
CONCLUSION: Reinforcement of the bronchial stump with TachoComb is a simple procedure, comparable to coverage with viable tissue, and should be considered in the prevention of postpneumonectomy BPF.

### PMID 23263299 (2014) — Surgery today
TITLE: Traumatic left ventricular free-wall laceration by a gunshot: report of a case.
DOI: 10.1007/s00595-012-0457-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This report describes the case of a 47-year-old man who shot himself in the left side of the chest in an attempted suicide, and was transferred to the hospital. Two gunshot wounds were found in the left side of the chest and the back. CT scans revealed left hemopneumothorax, the accumulation of pericardial blood, and lacerations of the heart and the spleen. Emergency thoracotomy and laparotomy were performed. There was a contusion of the left lung and lacerations of the left ventricular free wall, the diaphragm, and the spleen. The laceration of the heart was repaired by 3 pairs of mattress sutures with felt strips, and covered with fibrin glue and a TachoComb(&#xae;) tissue sealing sheet without the use of cardiopulmonary bypass. The patient was discharged on foot on the 18th postoperative day. Such patients can only be saved with an efficient emergency medical-care system including quick transportation, and close cooperation of the hospital staff.

### PMID 24320875 (2014) — Vox sanguinis
TITLE: Growth factor and proteinase profile of Vivostat&#xae; platelet-rich fibrin linked to tissue repair.
DOI: 10.1111/vox.12120 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Autologous platelet-rich fibrin (PRF(&#xae;)) is prepared by the automatic Vivostat(&#xae;) system. Conflicting results with Vivostat PRF in acute wound healing prompted us to examine its cellular and biomolecular composition. Specifically, platelets, selected growth factors and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 were quantified using novel analytical methods.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ten healthy non-thrombocytopenic volunteers donated blood for generation of intermediate fibrin-I and final PRF. Anticoagulated whole blood and serum procured in parallel served as baseline controls. Leucocyte, erythrocyte and platelet counts in whole blood and fibrin-I were determined by automated haematology analyser. Platelet concentration in PRF was quantified manually by stereologic analysis of Giemsa-stained tissue sections, and the total content of five growth factors and MMP-9 by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays.
RESULTS: The number of leucocytes and erythrocytes was reduced (P &lt; 0&#xb7;001), whereas platelets increased (P &lt; 0&#xb7;001) in fibrin-I versus whole blood. PRF contained 982 &#xb1; 206 &#xd7; 10(9) platelets/l representing 3&#xb7;9-fold (P &lt; 0&#xb7;001) enrichment relative to whole blood. Growth factor abundance in Vivostat PRF and serum was in descending order: transforming growth factor-&#x3b2;1 [5&#xb7;1-fold higher in PRF than serum, P &lt; 0&#xb7;001] &gt; platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-AB [2&#xb7;5-fold, P &lt; 0&#xb7;01] &gt; PDGF-BB [1&#xb7;6-fold, P &lt; 0&#xb7;05] &gt; vascular endothelial growth factor &gt; basic fibroblast growth factor [75-fold, P &lt; 0&#xb7;001]. MMP-9 was reduced 139-fold (P &lt; 0&#xb7;001) compared with serum, reflecting leucocyte depletion in PRF.
CONCLUSION: The gained knowledge on platelet enrichment and biomolecular constituents may guide clinicians in their optimal use of Vivostat PRF for tissue regenerative applications.

### PMID 23399357 (2014) — Blood transfusion = Trasfusione del sangue
TITLE: Bio-modulators in platelet-rich plasma: a comparison of the amounts in products from healthy donors and patients produced with three different techniques.
DOI: 10.2450/2012.0128-12 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Platelet-rich plasma consists of platelets concentrated in a small volume of plasma and constitutes a reservoir of bio-modulators potentially useful in tissue repair. The amounts of bio-modulators detectable in platelet-rich plasma prepared with various commercial or "in house" methods have been reported, but virtually all the analyses described have been performed on platelet-rich plasma derived from healthy donors. Since leucocyte contamination is technically unavoidable, we investigated whether platelet-rich plasma prepared from patients could contain different amounts of bio-modulators because of a possible activated status of the leucocytes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We evaluated platelet-rich plasma prepared with three different techniques (the commercial Vivostat and Biomet recover GPS II systems and an "in house" method) starting from whole blood from healthy donors and patients. Specifically, we compared the levels of sHLA-I, sFasL, platelet-derived growth factor, transforming growth factors-beta and vascular endothelial growth factor in the platelet-rich plasma releasates according to the method of preparation and to the immune system activation status of the subjects.
RESULTS: With the exception of sHLA-I levels, no differences were found in the surrogate indices of lymphocyte activation between healthy donors and patients. No significant differences were found in sHLA-I, sFasL, platelet-derived growth factor, transforming growth factors-beta and vascular endothelial growth factor levels detectable in platelet-rich plasma produced with the three different methods in either healthy donors or patients.
DISCUSSION: On the whole our findings indicate that the overall content of bio-modulators in autologous platelet-rich plasma is not influenced by T-lymphocyte activation status, at least in patients with uncomplicated femoral fractures. The amounts of sFasL and sHLA-I detected in all the platelet-rich plasma releasates studied were very small, far below the amounts detectable in all clinically available blood derivatives and absolutely insufficient to induce sHLA-I and/or sFasL mediated immunomodulation.

### PMID 25245578 (2014) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Real-world outcomes of hemostatic matrices in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2014.05.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: While hemostatic matrices are efficacious in achieving hemostasis, outcomes research is limited; therefore, this study analyzed clinical outcomes of flowable hemostatic matrices in a real-world cardiac surgical population.
DESIGN: Retrospective database analysis of cardiac surgical cases from 2006 to 2012.
SETTING: Data were extracted from Premier's United States (US) Perspective Database, developed for quality and utilization benchmarking and containing approximately 25% of US hospital discharges.
PARTICIPANTS: Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), aortic, valve, or valvular with CABG surgery cases in which FLOSEAL or SURGIFLO was included.
INTERVENTIONS: Three study groups were formed, given usage of hemostatic matrices: (1) FLOSEAL or SURGIFLO, exclusively; (2) FLOSEAL or SURGIFLO, with fibrin sealants, sealants, or powder hemostats; and (3) FLOSEAL or SURGIFLO, with nonflowable hemostats with or without thrombin. Outcomes included complications, transfusions, surgical revisions, mortality, length of stay (LOS) and surgery time.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Group A included 4,480 FLOSEAL and 326 SURGIFLO cases. Results suggested SURGIFLO cases were associated with significantly higher risk of multiple adverse outcomes, including major (odds Ratio [OR] 2.12; 95% CI 1.34-3.35; p = 0.001) and minor complications (OR 1.84; 95% CI 1.33-2.55; p&lt;0.001); surgical revisions (OR 2.01; 95% CI 1.03- 3.94; p = 0.042); transfusions for any blood products (OR 4.90; 95% CI 3.50-6.87; p&lt;0.001); and longer surgery times (adjusted mean difference = 64 minutes, p&lt;0.001) than the FLOSEAL group. There were no significant differences in mortality and LOS. Results were similar in groups B and C.
CONCLUSIONS: These retrospective outcomes suggested FLOSEAL was associated with fewer negative consequences than SURGIFLO in this surgical population.

### PMID 25125317 (2014) — The Cochrane database of systematic reviews
TITLE: Interventions to reduce haemorrhage during myomectomy for fibroids.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD005355.pub5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Benign smooth muscle tumours of the uterus, known as fibroids or myomas, are often symptomless. However, about one-third of women with fibroids will present with symptoms that are severe enough to warrant treatment. The standard treatment of symptomatic fibroids is hysterectomy (that is surgical removal of the uterus) for women who have completed childbearing, and myomectomy for women who desire future childbearing or simply want to preserve their uterus. Myomectomy, the surgical removal of myomas, can be associated with life-threatening bleeding. Excessive bleeding can necessitate emergency blood transfusion. Knowledge of the effectiveness of the interventions to reduce bleeding during myomectomy is essential to enable evidence-based clinical decisions. This is an update of the review published in The Cochrane Library (2011, Issue 11).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness, safety, tolerability and costs of interventions to reduce blood loss during myomectomy.
SEARCH METHODS: In June 2014, we conducted electronic searches in the Cochrane Menstrual Disorders and Subfertility Group Specialised Register, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL and PsycINFO, and trial registers for ongoing and registered trials.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We selected randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that compared potential interventions to reduce blood loss during myomectomy to placebo or no treatment.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: The two authors independently selected RCTs for inclusion, assessed the risk of bias and extracted data from the included RCTs. The primary review outcomes were blood loss and need for blood transfusion. We expressed study results as mean differences (MD) for continuous data and odds ratios for dichotomous data, with 95% confidence intervals (CI). We assessed the quality of evidence using GRADE methods.
MAIN RESULTS: Eighteen RCTs with 1250 participants met our inclusion criteria. The studies were conducted in hospital settings in low, middle and high income countries.Blood lossWe found significant reductions in blood loss with the following interventions: vaginal misoprostol (2 RCTs, 89 women: MD -97.88 ml, 95% CI -125.52 to -70.24; I(2) = 43%; moderate-quality evidence); intramyometrial vasopressin (3 RCTs, 128 women: MD -245.87 ml, 95% CI -434.58 to -57.16; I(2) = 98%; moderate-quality evidence); intramyometrial bupivacaine plus epinephrine (1 RCT, 60 women: MD -68.60 ml, 95% CI -93.69 to -43.51; low-quality evidence); intravenous tranexamic acid (1 RCT, 100 women: MD -243 ml, 95% CI -460.02 to -25.98; low-quality evidence); gelatin-thrombin matrix (1 RCT, 50 women: MD -545.00 ml, 95% CI -593.26 to -496.74; low-quality evidence); intravenous ascorbic acid (1 RCT, 102 women: MD -411.46 ml, 95% CI -502.58 to -320.34; low-quality evidence); vaginal dinoprostone (1 RCT, 108 women: MD -131.60 ml, 95% CI -253.42 to -9.78; low-quality evidence); loop ligation of the myoma pseudocapsule (1 RCT, 70 women: MD -305.01 ml, 95% CI -354.83 to -255.19; low-quality evidence); and a fibrin sealant patch (1 RCT, 70 women: MD -26.50 ml, 95% CI -44.47 to -8.53; low-quality evidence). We found evidence of significant reductions in blood loss with a polyglactin suture (1 RCT, 28 women: MD -1870.0 ml, 95% CI -2547.16 to 1192.84) or a Foley catheter (1 RCT, 93 women: MD -240.70 ml, 95% CI -359.61 to -121.79) tied around the cervix. However, pooling data from these peri-cervical tourniquet RCTs revealed significant heterogeneity of the effects (2 RCTs, 121 women: MD (random) -1019.85 ml, 95% CI -2615.02 to 575.32; I(2) = 95%; low-quality evidence). There was no good evidence of an effect on blood loss with oxytocin, morcellation or clipping of the uterine artery.Need for blood transfusion We found significant reductions in the need for blood transfusion with vasopressin (2 RCTs, 90 women: OR 0.15, 95% CI 0.03 to 0.74; I(2) = 0%; moderate-quality evidence); peri-cervical tourniquet (2 RCTs, 121 women: OR 0.09, 95% CI 0.01 to 0.84; I(2) = 69%; low-quality evidence); gelatin-thrombin matrix (1 RCT, 100 women: OR 0.01, 95% CI 0.00 to 0.10; low-quality evidence) and dinoprostone (1 RCT, 108 women: OR 0.17, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.81; low-quality evidence), but no evidence of effect on the need for blood transfusion with misoprostol, oxytocin, tranexamic acid, ascorbic acid, loop ligation of the myoma pseudocapsule and a fibrin sealant patch.There were insufficient data on the adverse effects and costs of the different interventions.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: At present there is moderate-quality evidence that misoprostol may reduce bleeding during myomectomy, and low-quality evidence that bupivacaine plus epinephrine, tranexamic acid, gelatin-thrombin matrix, a peri-cervical tourniquet, ascorbic acid, dinoprostone, loop ligation and a fibrin sealant patch may reduce bleeding during myomectomy. There is no evidence that oxytocin, morcellation and temporary clipping of the uterine artery reduce blood loss. Further well designed studies are required to establish the effectiveness, safety and costs of different interventions for reducing blood loss during myomectomy.

### PMID 24742352 (2014) — Journal of laparoendoscopic &amp; advanced surgical techniques. Part A
TITLE: "Off-clamp, non-renorrhaphy" laparoscopic partial nephrectomy with perirenal fat and Gerota's fascia reapproximation: initial experience and perioperative outcomes.
DOI: 10.1089/lap.2013.0333 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To describe our initial experience of "off-clamp, non-renorrhaphy" laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (OCNR-LPN) with perirenal fat and Gerota's fascia reapproximation technique.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between August 2012 and March 2013, 24 consecutive patients underwent OCNR-LPN at our institution. After the renal mass excision, biologic hemostatics such as FLOSEAL&#x2122; and TISSEEL&#x2122; (both from Baxter Healthcare Corp., Deerfield, IL) were used, and the perirenal fat and Gerota's fascia were sutured for reapproximation.
RESULTS: All 24 consecutive patients underwent OCNR-LPN successfully. The warm ischemic time for all cases was 0 minute. Thirteen patients were noted to have a low (4-6) RENAL nephrometry score (RNS), and 11 patients had a moderate (7-9) RNS. The mean tumor size among this cohort was 2.9 (range, 1.2-6.0) cm, and the mean estimated blood loss was 243 (range, 50-700) mL. The mean hospital stay was 6.9 (range, 5-10) days. The mean percentage of postoperative estimated glomerular filtration rate change increased by 0.9%. No positive surgical margins were noted, and 2 patients with Grade III complication by the Clavien-Dindo classification were treated by endoscopic or radiological intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: OCNR-LPN with the perirenal fat and Gerota's fascia reapproximation technique is feasible. Our initial experience with OCNR-LPN demonstrates encouraging results of minimal renal function loss and complications.

### PMID 25335706 (2014) — Gan to kagaku ryoho. Cancer &amp; chemotherapy
TITLE: [A case of lung cancer in an elderly patient with malignant pleural effusion and pneumothorax treated with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and bevacizumab].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case of an elderly patient with non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer who was successfully treated with chemotherapy using carboplatin(CBDCA), pemetrexed(PEM), and bevacizumab(Bev). The patient was an 84-year-old man who presented with a chief complaint of dyspnea. The right lung was completely collapsed due to malignant pleural effusion, and the mediastinum was shifted to the left. Right thoracic drainage was performed, but this was complicated by pneumothorax and a thoracotomy was performed. An absorbent tissue reinforcing agent was attached to the site of the air leakage and fibrin glue was applied. After discharge, the patient was administered 500mg/m / 2 PEM plus 15 mg/kg Bev for the first course of chemotherapy and experienced no serious side effects. CBDCA(area under the curve[AUC]4)was added from the second course. After the administration of seven courses, pleural effusion had almost disappeared and the primary tumor in the upper right lobe was observed to have shrunk. Administration of PEM+Bev was continued thereafter. The right pleural effusion was well controlled for up to 12 months(14 courses)from the start of the administration of chemotherapy, and shrinkage of the primary tumor was maintained. The side effects were mild and chemotherapy was administered safely. After the administration of 16 courses, a left malignant pleural effusion was observed, and the patient died 15 months after the initiation of chemotherapy.

### PMID 24292855 (2014) — Journal of artificial organs : the official journal of the Japanese Society for Artificial Organs
TITLE: Comprehensive evaluation of fibrin glue as a local drug-delivery system-efficacy and safety of sustained release of vancomycin by fibrin glue against local methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection.
DOI: 10.1007/s10047-013-0746-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Infection of prosthetic grafts, especially with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), often becomes critical. Although topical administration of antibiotics has been applied empirically, no comprehensive data are available showing long-lasting effects and safety of local antibiotic usage. By means of animal experiments we assessed fibrin glue (FG) as a slow-release vehicle for vancomycin (VCM) against local MRSA infection. Preliminary in-vitro experiments were performed to confirm that the FG-VCM mixture maintained viscosity as a sealant and led to slow-release of VCM. We next created a subcutaneous pocket in a rodent back and implanted a 1 cm (2) woven graft with 1 ml FG alone, or with serial concentrations of VCM (0-120 mg/ml. n = 3 for each group). MRSA of 1 &#xd7; 10(7) colony-forming units (CFU) was injected into the pocket after wound closure. The graft was explanted 7 days later and was submitted for culture ("Culture-graft"). Blood samples were obtained for regular blood work, serum VCM concentration measurements, and blood culture ("Culture-blood"). The pocket tissue was also submitted for measurement of local VCM concentration. There was a remarkable infectious response in the group without vancomycin; however, no other groups developed any sign of infection. "Culture-graft" resulted in MRSA growth for V0 only. "Culture-blood" was negative in all groups, and only minimal serum concentrations of vancomycin were detected. One-dose topical administration of VCM via FG was effective against localized MRSA graft infection without systemic VCM administration. Topical administration of antibiotics may help treat difficult graft infections and reduce systemic use of potent antibiotics.

### PMID 23764314 (2013) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Prevention of leakage by sealing colon anastomosis: experimental study in a mouse model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2013.04.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: In colorectal surgery, anastomotic leakage (AL) is the most significant complication. Sealants applied around the colon anastomosis may help prevent AL by giving the anastomosis time to heal by mechanically supporting the anastomosis and preventing bacteria leaking into the peritoneal cavity. The aim of this study is to compare commercially available sealants on their efficacy of preventing leakage in a validated mouse model for AL.
METHODS: Six sealants (Evicel, Omnex, VascuSeal, PleuraSeal, BioGlue, and Colle Chirurgicale Cardial) were applied around an anastomosis constructed with five interrupted sutures in mice, and compared with a control group without sealant. Outcome measures were AL, anastomotic bursting pressure, and death.
RESULTS: In the control group there was a 40% death rate with a 50% rate of AL. None of the sealants were able to diminish the rate of AL. Furthermore, use of the majority of sealants resulted in failure to thrive, increased rates of ileus, and higher mortality rates.
CONCLUSIONS: If sealing of a colorectal anastomosis could achieve a reduction of incidence of clinical AL, this would be a promising tool for prevention of leakage in colorectal surgery. In this study, we found no evidence that sealants reduce leakage rates in a mouse model for AL. However, the negative results of this study make us emphasize the need of systemic research, investigating histologic tissue reaction of the bowel to different sealants, the capacity of sealants to form a watertight barrier, their time of degradation, and finally their results in large animal models for AL.

### PMID 23860428 (2013) — Cornea
TITLE: Comparison of synthetic glues and 10-0 nylon in rabbit lamellar keratoplasty.
DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0b013e31829a3760 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSES: To evaluate changes in mean keratometry and to compare wound repair with corneal lamellar grafts in rabbit eyes using human synthetic tissue adhesives and 10-0 nylon.
METHODS: Corneal grafts were made using a 6.0-mm-diameter trephine and blades in the eyes of 15 New Zealand white rabbits. Human fibrin tissue adhesive (Tisseel) was used in group 1, human fibrin tissue adhesive (Beriplast P) was used in group 2, polyethylene glycol adhesive (Coseal) was used in group 3, and 8 bite sutures with 10-0 nylon were used in group 4 (control) for lamellar keratoplasty. Four bite sutures were made with 10-0 nylon in groups 1, 2, and 3. Slit-lamp microscopy and keratometry were performed at 3 days and 1, 2, and 4 weeks after the surgery. Histopathologic and electromicroscopic examinations were performed 4 weeks after the surgery.
RESULTS: No inflammation or corneal toxicity was seen in groups 1 and 2. Histologically, a few inflammatory cells were seen in groups 3 and 4. Groups 1, 2, and 3 showed no statistically significant changes in mean keratometry at 4 weeks postoperatively compared with preoperative mean keratometry (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, P = 0.178, 0.208, and 0.889, respectively). The control group showed significant changes in mean keratometry at 4 weeks postoperatively (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, P = 0.018).
CONCLUSIONS: Human fibrin tissue adhesives were well tolerated in rabbit eyes, with no apparent corneal toxicity. Polyethylene glycol adhesive showed more inflammation and insufficient wound repair compared with human fibrin tissue adhesives. Therefore, human fibrin tissue adhesives can be used as an alternative to sutures in lamellar keratoplasty.

### PMID 24074508 (2013) — Journal of neurosurgery. Spine
TITLE: Comparative study of fibrin and chemical synthetic sealant on dural regeneration and brain damage.
DOI: 10.3171/2013.8.SPINE12998 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECT: Several materials, such as polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel and fibrin glue, have been used to seal dural incisions after brain and spinal surgeries. Although the use of PEG sealant is gaining popularity, it can be associated with postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage and infection. However, the reasons for this association are currently unknown. The present study aimed to investigate the effects of PEG sealant and fibrin glue on wound healing and brain damage in vivo.
METHODS: Oval-shaped bone defects and dural defects were created bilaterally over the parietal lobes of 22 Japanese white rabbits. The dural defects were covered with 0.5 ml of fibrin glue on one side and 0.5 ml of PEG sealant on the other side. Dural regeneration and brain damage were investigated in each harvested brain and dura mater using light microscopy.
RESULTS: Dural regeneration was more effective in the presence of fibrin glue than it was with PEG sealant (p = 0.014). Of the 22 rabbits, 11 showed thick (Grades ++ and +++) dural regeneration by 28 days postsurgery in the hemisphere where fibrin glue was used, whereas Grade +++ dural regeneration was not observed in the PEG hydrogel hemisphere, and only 4 rabbits showed Grade ++ regeneration. Abscess and granulation formation also tended to be more severe when PEG hydrogel sealant was used. No Grade ++ granulation/abscess formation was observed with fibrin glue, and Grade + was only observed in 13 of 22 rabbits. Conversely, with PEG hydrogel sealant, only 2 rabbits did not show granulation/abscess formation, and Grade +, ++, and +++ granulation/abscess formation was observed in 8, 7, and 5 rabbits, respectively. The extent of cortical damage was significantly greater in rabbits with abscesses and granulations, compared with rabbits without these lesions (p = 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: Dural regeneration tended to occur more rapidly with fibrin glue, whereas granulation was more likely with PEG hydrogel sealant, which led to postoperative complications. Histological analysis indicated that PEG hydrogel sealant inhibited the normal tissue healing process and that outcomes were improved by the use of fibrin glue.

### PMID 23109470 (2013) — International forum of allergy &amp; rhinology
TITLE: Determining the best graft-sealant combination for skull base repair using a soft tissue in vitro porcine model.
DOI: 10.1002/alr.21085 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The purpose of this work was to compare the absolute breaking strength of various soft tissue skull base (SB) repairs in an in vitro porcine model.
METHODS: A burst pressure (BP) testing system was designed using an axial loading force to create increasing hydraulic pressure. Defects measuring 0.5 &#xd7; 0.5 cm were created in fascia lata samples. Defects were repaired using various grafts (pericranium and 2 different dural substitutes, Alloderm(&#xae;) and Durasis(&#xae;)) measuring 1.0 &#xd7; 1.0 cm to cover the deficient area. Grafts were further reinforced onto the fascia background with either fibrin glue (Tisseel(&#xae;)) or hydrogel sealant (DuraSeal&#x2122;). Each combination of graft and sealant was conducted 6 times and tested 24 hours after the repair.
RESULTS: The mean BP (&#xb1;standard deviation [SD]) were as follows: DuraSeal&#x2122;-Alloderm, 12.5 &#xb1; 5.8 mmHg; DuraSeal&#x2122;-Durasis, 21.8 &#xb1; 20.7 mmHg; DuraSeal&#x2122;-pericranium, 44.7 &#xb1; 30.1 mmHg; Tisseel-Alloderm, 30.6 &#xb1; 26.3 mmHg; Tisseel-Durasis, 15.8 &#xb1; 18.6 mmHg; and Tisseel-pericranium, 95.5 &#xb1; 86 mmHg. One-way analysis of variance showed that the strongest type of repair was Tisseel-pericranium when adjusting for the others (p &lt; 0.0001). The difference in mean BP of repair with DuraSeal&#x2122; vs Tisseel(&#xae;) was not statistically significant (p = 0.22). Comparing sealants, the use of Alloderm(&#xae;) or Durasis(&#xae;) decreased the strength of the repair in comparison to pericranium (p &lt; 0.0001). Bonferroni analysis showed a significant difference between pericranium and Alloderm(&#xae;) (p &lt; 0.05) and between pericranium and Durasis(&#xae;) (p &lt; 0.05) but not between Alloderm(&#xae;) and Durasis(&#xae;) (p &gt; 0.05).
CONCLUSION: In this model, the strongest type of repair (pressure 6 times higher than normal intracranial pressure) was the combination of Tisseel(&#xae;)-pericranium. Our data will help guide surgeons who repair SB defects to choose the best graft and sealant.

### PMID 24193288 (2013) — Minerva chirurgica
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of fibrin sealant patch in the treatment of air leakage in thoracic surgery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: AIM: Air leakage represents a major problem in lung surgery. Absorbable fibrin sealant patch (AFSP), a collagen sponge coated with human fibrinogen and thrombin, can be used as an adjunct to primary stapling or suturing. This study compared the efficacy of AFSP with manual suturing after primary stapling.
METHODS: This was a prospective, multicenter, randomized study. Patients undergoing lobectomy, bilobectomy, anatomical segmentectomy for lung cancer or wedge resection for pulmonary metastasis with air leakage grade 1 or 2 according to Macchiarini scale after stapler suture were randomized to receive AFSP or standard surgical treatment (ST). The primary endpoint was the reduction of intraoperative air leakage intensity. Duration of postoperative air leakage and number of days until removal of last chest drain were secondary endpoints. Safety was recorded for all patients.
RESULTS: A total of 346 patients were enrolled in 14 centres, 179 of whom received AFSP and 167 ST. Intraoperative air leak intensity was reduced in 90.5% of AFSP patients and 82% of ST patients (P=0.03). A significant reduction in postoperative air leakage duration was observed in the AFSP group (P=0.0437). The median number of days until removal of last drainage was 6 (3-37) in the AFSP group and 7 (2-27) in the ST (P=0.38). Occurrence of adverse events was comparable in both groups.
CONCLUSION: AFSP was more efficacious than standard ST as an adjunct to primary stapling in reducing intraoperative air leakage intensity and duration of postoperative air leakage in patients undergoing pulmonary surgery. AFSP was well tolerated.

### PMID 23957708 (2013) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealant patch for repair of acute type a aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1111/jocs.12208 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The use of glues to repair disrupted tissue during acute type-A aortic dissection (TAD) surgery may be discontinuous, and cause embolization and cell necrosis. We report a method of fibrin sealant patch (FSP) to reinforce dissected aortic tissue with a collagen double layer coated with fibrinogen/thrombin on either side (TachoSil&#xae;; Takeda, Konstanz, Germany).
METHODS: In 12 patients (seven male, 66.9 &#xb1; 11.7 years) with acute TAD we performed FSP of the intima-media disruption at the proximal and distal anastomosis of the aorta. We analyzed the perioperative course and echocardiographical, radiological, and clinical outcomes up to one year. Additionally, we investigated the adhesive potential of the FSP in vitro.
RESULTS: In vitro, the adhesive strength of the FSP was 60 N/cm(2). In-hospital mortality was 8.3% (n = 1), recovery was satisfactory with no major neurologic events, mean ICU stay was 13.6 &#xb1; 6.0 days, mean hospital stay was 20.7 &#xb1; 4.4 days. A total of 7.0 &#xb1; 2.6 RBC, 3.4 &#xb1; 1.5 platelets, and 8.0 &#xb1; 4.3 FFP were transfused. One-year survival was 83.3%. In 6/6 DeBakey II dissections the intimal tear was completely resected, in 2/6 DeBakey I dissections the false lumen in the descending aorta completely collapsed. No redissections and no relevant aortic valve insufficiencies were seen during follow-up.
CONCLUSION: This analysis shows that FSP using a collagen matrix double layer coated with fibrinogen/thrombin is feasible, safe, and effective in repairing the dissected aortic tissue. It results in continuous reinforcement of aortic tissue and completely avoids the need for conventional glues.

### PMID 23578196 (2013) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Use of fibrin sealants in cardiovascular surgery: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1111/jocs.12099 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants are used for hemostasis and tissue adherence.
AIM OF STUDY: This systematic review summarizes published clinical data for fibrin sealant use in cardiovascular surgery.
METHODS: A literature search for the following terms was conducted using PubMed and EMBASE: (TISSEEL or Tissucol or Beriplast P or Evicel or Quixil or Crosseal or Reliseal or Fibringluraas or Bolheal or Tachosil or Vivostat or Vitagel or Artiss or "fibrin glue" or "fibrin sealant" or "fibrin tissue adhesive") and (cardiac or cardiovascular or vascular or heart or coronary or surgery). Case reports and series were excluded; although reports of controlled trials were preferred, uncontrolled trial data were also considered.
RESULTS: Clinical trials and chart review analyses of fibrin sealants were identified and summarized. Although clinical trial data were available for other agents, the majority of published studies examined TISSEEL. Overall, TISSEEL and other fibrin sealants showed improvements over standard of care or control groups for a variety of predefined endpoints. Safety findings are also summarized.
CONCLUSIONS: Data from these studies showed that fibrin sealants were well tolerated and provided effective hemostasis in a range of cardiac and aortic surgeries.

### PMID 23458162 (2013) — HPB : the official journal of the International Hepato Pancreato Biliary Association
TITLE: A multicentre, randomized clinical trial comparing the Veriset&#x2122; haemostatic patch with fibrin sealant for the management of bleeding during hepatic surgery.
DOI: 10.1111/hpb.12009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Bleeding during hepatic surgery is associated with prolonged hospitalization and increased morbidity and mortality. The Veriset&#x2122; haemostatic patch is a topical haemostat comprised of an absorbable backing made of oxidized cellulose and self-adhesive hydrogel components. It is designed to achieve haemostasis quickly and adhere to tissues without fixation.
METHODS: A prospective, randomized, multicentre, single-blinded study (n = 50) was performed to compare the use of a Veriset&#x2122; haemostatic patch with a fibrin sealant patch (TachoSil(&#xae;) ) (control) in the management of diffuse bleeding after hepatic surgery. Patients were randomized following the confirmation of diffuse bleeding requiring the use of a topical haemostat. Time to haemostasis was assessed at preset intervals until haemostasis was achieved.
RESULTS: Both groups were similar in comorbidities and procedural techniques. The median time to haemostasis in the group using the Veriset&#x2122; haemostatic patch was 1.0&#x2009;min compared with 3.0&#x2009;min in the control group (P &lt; 0.001; 3-min minimum application time for the control patch). This result was independent of bleeding severity and surface area. Both products had similar safety profiles and no statistical differences were observed in the occurrence of adverse or device-related events.
CONCLUSIONS: Regardless of bleeding severity or surface area, the Veriset&#x2122; haemostatic patch achieved haemostasis in this setting significantly faster than the control device in patients undergoing hepatic resection. It was safe and easy to handle in open hepatic surgery.

### PMID 23295444 (2013) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Protective constriction of coronary vein grafts with knitted nitinol.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezs670 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Different flow patterns and shear forces were shown to cause significantly more luminal narrowing and neointimal tissue proliferation in coronary than in infrainguinal vein grafts. As constrictive external mesh support of vein grafts led to the complete suppression of intimal hyperplasia (IH) in infrainguinal grafts, we investigated whether mesh constriction is equally effective in the coronary position.
METHODS: Eighteen senescent Chacma baboons (28.8 &#xb1; 3.6 kg) received aorto-coronary bypass grafts to the left anterior descending artery (LAD). Three groups of saphenous vein grafts were compared: untreated controls (CO); fibrin sealant-sprayed controls (CO + FS) and nitinol mesh-constricted grafts (ME + FS). Meshes consisted of pulse-compliant, knitted nitinol (eight needles; 50 &#x3bc;m wire thickness; 3.4 mm resting inner diameter, ID) spray attached to the vein grafts with FS. After 180 days of implantation, luminal dimensions and IH were analysed using post-explant angiography and macroscopic and histological image analysis.
RESULTS: At implantation, the calibre mismatch between control grafts and the LAD expressed as cross-sectional quotient (Qc) was pronounced [Qc = 0.21 &#xb1; 0.07 (CO) and 0.18 &#xb1; 0.05 (CO + FS)]. Mesh constriction resulted in a 29 &#xb1; 7% reduction of the outer diameter of the vein grafts from 5.23 &#xb1; 0.51 to 3.68 &#xb1; 0 mm, significantly reducing the calibre discrepancy to a Qc of 0.41 &#xb1; 0.17 (P &lt; 0.02). After 6 months of implantation, explant angiography showed distinct luminal irregularities in control grafts (ID difference between widest and narrowest segment 74 &#xb1; 45%), while diameter variations were mild in mesh-constricted grafts. In all control grafts, thick neointimal tissue was present [600 &#xb1; 63 &#x3bc;m (CO); 627 &#xb1; 204 &#x3bc;m (CO + FS)] as opposed to thin, eccentric layers of 249 &#xb1; 83 &#x3bc;m in mesh-constricted grafts (ME + FS; P &lt; 0.002). The total wall thickness had increased by 363 &#xb1; 39% (P &lt; 0.00001) in CO and 312 &#xb1; 61% (P &lt; 0.00001) in CO + FS vs 82 &#xb1; 61% in ME + FS (P &lt; 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: In a senescent non-human primate model for coronary artery bypass grafts, constrictive, external mesh support of saphenous veins with knitted nitinol prevented focal, irregular graft narrowing and suppressed neointimal tissue proliferation by a factor of 2.5. The lower degree of suppression of IH compared with previous infrainguinal grafts coincided with a lesser reduction of calibre mismatch in the coronary grafts.

### PMID 23260090 (2013) — Cytotherapy
TITLE: Human adipose stromal vascular cell delivery in a fibrin spray.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2012.10.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AIMS: Adipose tissue represents a practical source of autologous mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) and vascular-endothelial progenitor cells, available for regenerative therapy without in vitro expansion. One of the problems confronting the therapeutic application of such cells is how to immobilize them at the wound site. We evaluated in vitro the growth and differentiation of human adipose stromal vascular fraction (SVF) cells after delivery through the use of a fibrin spray system.
METHODS: SVF cells were harvested from four human adult patients undergoing elective abdominoplasty, through the use of the LipiVage system. After collagenase digestion, mesenchymal and endothelial progenitor cells (pericytes, supra-adventitial stromal cells, endothelial progenitors) were quantified by flow cytometry before culture. SVF cells were applied to culture vessels by means of the Tisseel fibrin spray system. SVF cell growth and differentiation were documented by immunofluorescence staining and photomicrography.
RESULTS: SVF cells remained viable after application and were expanded up to 3 weeks, when they reached confluence and adipogenic differentiation. Under angiogenic conditions, SVF cells formed endothelial (vWF+, CD31+ and CD34+) tubules surrounded by CD146+ and &#x3b1;-smooth muscle actin+ perivascular/stromal cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Human adipose tissue is a rich source of autologous stem cells, which are readily available for regenerative applications such as wound healing, without in vitro expansion. Our results indicate that mesenchymal and endothelial progenitor cells, prepared in a closed system from unpassaged lipoaspirate samples, retain their growth and differentiation capacity when applied and immobilized on a substrate using a clinically approved fibrin sealant spray system.

### PMID 23088903 (2013) — International journal of surgery case reports
TITLE: Off pump repair of left ventricular rupture following mitral valve replacement: The crucial assistance of the IntraAortic Balloon Pump.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2012.09.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Left ventricular (LV) rupture is a not as frequent, but potentially lethal complication of mitral valve replacement or repair.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: We report a case of a 67-year-old man who underwent mitral valve replacement and Cox Maze IV procedure. A massive bleed from the LV rupture was noted postoperatively while the patient was extubated. The control of bleeding was impossible until an IntraAortic Balloon Pump (IABP) was inserted. A bovine pericardial patch was applied, overlapping an extensive epicardial area, perimetrically of the hematoma. Between the epicardium and the pericardial patch we applied an autologous fibrin sealant.
DISCUSSION: The off-pump technique used to repair the LV rupture after a MVR, is more feasible when the patient is supported by an IABP that subsequently decreases the tension of the myocardial suture site.
CONCLUSION: The IABP, is a necessary device, that decreases the tension along the suture site post a left ventricular rupture following a MVR.

### PMID 23998752 (2013) — Regenerative medicine
TITLE: Pronounced biomaterial dependency in cartilage regeneration using nonexpanded compared with expanded chondrocytes.
DOI: 10.2217/rme.13.44 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: AIM: We aimed to investigate freshly isolated compared with culture-expanded chondrocytes with respect to early regenerative response, cytokine production and cartilage formation in response to four commonly used biomaterials.
MATERIALS &amp; METHODS: Chondrocytes were both directly and after expansion to passage 2, incorporated into four biomaterials: Polyactive&#x2122;, Beriplast&#xae;, HyStem&#xae; and a type II collagen gel. Early cartilage matrix gene expression, cytokine production and glycosaminoglycan (GAG) and DNA content in response to these biomaterials were evaluated.
RESULTS: HyStem induced more GAG production, compared with all other biomaterials (p &#x2264; 0.001). Nonexpanded cells did not always produce more GAGs than expanded chondrocytes, as this was biomaterial-dependent. Cytokine production and early gene expression were not predictive for final regeneration.
CONCLUSION: For chondrocyte-based cartilage treatments, the biomaterial best supporting cartilage matrix production will depend on the chondrocyte differentiation state and cannot be predicted from early gene expression or cytokine profile.

### PMID 23971267 (2013) — Clinical and experimental obstetrics &amp; gynecology
TITLE: Cesarean section scar pregnancy treatment--case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This is a case report of a 36-year-old patient with an ectopic pregnancy located in the previous cesarean section scar following in vitro fertilization (IVF). The patient was treated by 50 mg of intrasacular methotrexate locally under ultrasound guidance. Transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS) confirmed that the pregnancy was no longer vital within 24 hours, dilatation and aspiration of the ovular tissue were performed after seven days and it was sent for pathohistological analysis. Eight hours after the procedure, the patient began bleeding abundantly and was consequently treated locally by 1 ml of Beriplast P Combi set, human fibrinogen, and human thrombin set (CSL Behring). After the treatment, the patient was discharged in good health, with normal laboratory values. Her menstrual period resumed 35 days after the procedure.

### PMID 23831891 (2013) — The American journal of sports medicine
TITLE: Single-stage cell-based cartilage regeneration using a combination of chondrons and mesenchymal stromal cells: comparison with microfracture.
DOI: 10.1177/0363546513494181 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Autologous chondrocyte implantation (ACI) is traditionally a 2-step procedure used to repair focal articular cartilage lesions. With use of a combination of chondrons (chondrocytes in their own territorial matrix) and mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs), ACI could be innovated and performed in a single step, as sufficient cells would be available to fill the defect within a 1-step surgical procedure. Chondrons have been shown to have higher regenerative capacities than chondrocytes without such a pericellular matrix.
PURPOSE: To evaluate cartilage formation by a combination of chondrons and MSCs in vitro and in both small and large animal models.
STUDY DESIGN: Controlled laboratory study.
METHODS: Chondrons and MSCs were cultured at different ratios in vitro containing 0%, 5%, 10%, 20%, 50%, or 100% chondrons (n = 3); embedded in injectable fibrin glue (Beriplast); and implanted subcutaneously in nude mice (n = 10; ratios of 0%, 5%, 10%, and 20% chondrons). Also, in a 1-step procedure, a combination of chondrons and MSCs was implanted in a freshly created focal articular cartilage lesion (10% chondrons) in goats (n = 8) and compared with microfracture. The effect of both treatments, after 6-month follow-up, was evaluated using biochemical glycosaminoglycan (GAG) and GAG/DNA analysis and scored using validated scoring systems for macroscopic and microscopic defect repairs.
RESULTS: The addition of MSCs to chondron cultures enhanced cartilage-specific matrix production as reflected by a higher GAG production (P &lt; .03), both in absolute levels and normalized to DNA content, compared with chondrocyte and 100% chondron cultures. Similar results were observed after 4 weeks of subcutaneous implantation in nude mice. Treatment of freshly created cartilage defects in goats using a combination of chondrons and MSCs in Beriplast resulted in better microscopic, macroscopic, and biochemical cartilage regeneration (P &#x2264; .02) compared with microfracture treatment.
CONCLUSION: The combination of chondrons and MSCs increased cartilage matrix formation, and this combination of cells was safely applied in a goat model for focal cartilage lesions, outperforming microfracture.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: This study describes the bench-to-preclinical development of a new cell-based regenerative treatment for focal articular cartilage defects that outperforms microfracture in goats. In addition, it is a single-step procedure, thereby making the expensive cell expansion and reimplantation of dedifferentiated cells, as in ACI, redundant.

### PMID 24257657 (2013) — The Journal of bone and joint surgery. American volume
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of fibrin glue and tranexamic acid to prevent postoperative blood loss in total knee arthroplasty: a randomized controlled clinical trial.
DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.L.01182 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative blood loss in patients after total knee arthroplasty may cause local and systemic complications and influence clinical outcome. The aim of this study was to assess whether fibrin glue or tranexamic acid reduced blood loss compared with routine hemostasis in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty.
METHODS: A randomized, single-center, parallel, open clinical trial was performed in adult patients undergoing primary total knee arthroplasty. Patients were divided into four groups. Group 1 received fibrin glue manufactured by the Blood and Tissue Bank of Catalonia, Group 2 received Tissucol (fibrinogen and thrombin), Group 3 received intravenous tranexamic acid, and Group 4 (control) had no treatment other than routine hemostasis. The primary outcome was total blood loss collected in drains after surgery. Secondary outcomes were the calculated hidden blood loss, transfusion rate, preoperative and postoperative hemoglobin, number of blood units transfused, adverse events, and mortality.
RESULTS: One hundred and seventy-two patients were included. The mean total blood loss (and standard deviation) collected in drains was 553.9 &#xb1; 321.5 mL for Group 1, 567.8 &#xb1; 299.3 mL for Group 2, 244.1 &#xb1; 223.4 mL for Group 3, and 563.5 &#xb1; 269.7 mL for Group 4. In comparison with the control group, Group 3 had significantly lower total blood loss (p &lt; 0.001), but it was not significantly lower in Groups 1 and 2. The overall rate of patients who had a blood transfusion was 21.1% (thirty-five of 166 patients analyzed per protocol). Two patients required transfusion in Group 3 compared with twelve patients in Group 4 (p = 0.015). No significant difference was observed between the two fibrin glue groups and the control group with regard to the need for transfusion. There was no difference between groups with regard to the percentage of adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: Neither type of fibrin glue was more effective than routine hemostasis in reducing postoperative bleeding and transfusion requirements, and we no longer use them. However, this trial supports findings from previous studies showing that intravenous tranexamic acid can decrease postoperative blood loss.

### PMID 24222983 (2013) — Clinical, cosmetic and investigational dermatology
TITLE: Comparison of commercial fibrin sealants in facelift surgery: a prospective study.
DOI: 10.2147/CCID.S45233 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to compare the effects of two types of fibrin glue in patients undergoing facelift surgery.
METHODS: A prospective, controlled "right-left side" study was carried out in 20 patients. The two fibrin sealants used were Quixil&#xae; and Tissucol&#xae;. The two sealants were used at the same time, ie, one on one side of the face and the other on the contralateral side. Comparisons were made with regard to rates of hematoma and seroma, degree of induration, edema, ecchymosis, pain levels, and patient satisfaction.
RESULTS: The results were almost equivalent. The only exception was a significant (40 mL) hematoma in a patient treated with Quixil. Bleeding was most likely due to a sudden rise in blood pressure during the immediate postoperative period. However, it must be emphasized that, while Tissucol actually seals the undermined area, thus virtually eliminating the dead space, Quixil acts differently, in that its effectiveness in preventing hematoma is linked mainly to its hemostatic effect.
CONCLUSION: The two fibrin sealants used were nearly identical with regard to patient safety and quality of the result. Nevertheless, it is noted that, while Tissucol has both hemostatic and "gluing" effects, Quixil is mainly effective in securing hemostasis.

### PMID 24037572 (2013) — The British journal of surgery
TITLE: In vitro effects of proteases in human pancreatic juice on stability of liquid and carrier-bound fibrin sealants.
DOI: 10.1002/bjs.9243 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants are used in pancreatic surgery to prevent leakage of pancreatic fluid and reduce associated complications. The efficacy of this approach is unclear.
METHODS: Fibrin clots were generated in vitro from two commercially available liquid fibrin sealants (Tissucol Duo&#xae; and Evicel&#xae;) and the carrier-bound fibrin sealant Tachosil&#xae;, and exposed to normal saline or human pancreatic fluid. Stability of the sealants was assessed by release of the fibrin and collagen degradation products, D-dimer and hydroxyproline. The effect of protease inhibitors on sealant breakdown was assessed.
RESULTS: Clots generated from liquid fibrin sealants degraded rapidly in pancreatic fluid, but not in normal saline. D-dimer release from fibrin clots by pancreatic fluid was approximately 1700&#x2009;&#xb5;g/ml after 24&#x2009;h and less than 20&#x2009;&#xb5;g/ml by saline. Pancreatic fluid, but not normal saline, degraded both the fibrin and collagen component of Tachosil&#xae;. After 6&#x2009;h, mean(s.e.m.) D-dimer levels in pancreatic fluid exposed to Tachosil&#xae; were 850(183)&#x2009;ng/ml, compared with 60(6)&#x2009;ng/ml in normal saline. The mean(s.e.m.) hydroxyproline concentration in pancreatic fluid was 497(17)&#x2009;&#xb5;g/ml after a 24-h exposure to Tachosil&#xae;, compared with 26(12)&#x2009;&#xb5;g/ml in normal saline. Protease inhibitors significantly inhibited breakdown of liquid sealants (D-dimer levels less than 50&#x2009;&#xb5;g/ml after 24&#x2009;h) and Tachosil&#xae; (D-dimer release 179(12)&#x2009;ng/ml at 6&#x2009;h; hydroxyproline release 181(29)&#x2009;&#xb5;g/ml at 24&#x2009;h).
CONCLUSION: Proteases in pancreatic juice effectively degrade both liquid and carrier-bound fibrin sealants in vitro. The use of these products in pancreatic surgery with the aim of preventing leakage of pancreatic fluid is not supported by this experimental study.

### PMID 23414895 (2013) — Journal of pediatric surgery
TITLE: Congenital chylous ascites: a report of a case treated with hemostatic cellulose and fibrin glue.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2012.11.031 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a case of an infant with recurrent chylous ascites who was unresponsive to conventional medical treatment. An exploratory laparotomy revealed no macroscopically visible sites of lymph leakage that could be ligated. Lymph exudation was noted in areas near the subhepatic recess and in the lesser sac surrounding the pancreas, which was not amenable to suture. The treatment consisted of the placement of a hemostatic mesh composed of oxidized cellulose (Surgicel) on these areas, with a thin layer of fibrinogen/thrombin glue over the mesh (Tissucol). The cellulose mesh allowed for greater adhesion of the fibrin glue to the diseased tissues. The patient had no recurrence of ascites and is currently 20 months old, with good weight-height gain, and free of ascites.

### PMID 22551449 (2013) — Acta ophthalmologica
TITLE: Use of a fibrin adhesive for conjunctival closure in trabeculectomy.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-3768.2012.02436.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To assess the safety and efficacy of a fibrin tissue adhesive (Tissucol Duo(&#xae;) ) used to close the conjunctiva in trabeculectomy.
METHODS: A nonrandomized prospective study including 57 patients with chronic simple glaucoma who underwent trabeculectomy surgery. All the trabeculectomies were conducted by the same surgeon using the same surgical technique with the exception that conjunctival closure was achieved by either running Nylon 10/0 suture (n = 29) or using the fibrin glue (n = 28). Preoperative and postoperative data were obtained on intraocular pressure (IOP), number of hypotensive medications used, self-reported discomfort and complications arising during and after surgery.
RESULTS: No differences were detected between the two patient groups regarding the intraocular pressure reduction achieved during follow-up. In the first 2 weeks of follow-up, reported discomfort assessed using a visual analogue scale was significantly lower in the Tissucol Duo(&#xae;) group. Two patients in the Tissucol Duo(&#xae;) group suffered conjunctival dehiscence and suturing was required at 24 hours postsurgery. Remaining complications were similar in the two groups.
CONCLUSION: The use of Tissucol Duo(&#xae;) seems to be a safe and efficient option for conjunctival closure in trabeculectomy that simplifies the surgical procedure and reduces patient discomfort in the immediate postoperative period.

### PMID 23883149 (2013) — Journal of endourology
TITLE: Do fibrin sealants impact negative outcomes after robot-assisted partial nephrectomy?
DOI: 10.1089/end.2013.0136 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Contemporary rates of postoperative hemorrhage after partial nephrectomy (PN) are low. Commercially available hemostatic agents are commonly used during this surgery to reduce this risk despite a paucity of data supporting the practice. We assessed the impact of fibrin sealant hemostatic agents, a costly addition to surgeries, during robot-assisted partial nephrectomy (RAPN).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between 2007 and 2011, 114 consecutive patients underwent RAPN by a single surgeon (MEA). Evicel fibrin sealant was used in the first 74 patients during renorraphy. The last 40 patients had renorraphy performed without the use of any hemostatic agents. Clinicopathologic, operative, and complication data were compared between groups. Multivariate and univariate logistic regression analysis was performed to test the association between the use of fibrin sealants and operative outcomes.
RESULTS: Patient demographic data and clinical tumor characteristics were similar between groups. The use of fibrin sealant did not increase operative time (166.3 vs 176.1 minutes, P=0.28), warm ischemia time (WIT) (14.4 vs 16.1 minutes, P=0.18), or length of hospital stay (2.6 vs 2.4 days, P=0.35). The omission of these agents did not increase estimated blood loss (116.6 vs 176.1&#x2009;mL, P=0.8) or postoperative blood transfusion (0% vs 2.5%, P=0.17). Univariate analysis demonstrated no association between use of fibrin sealants and increased complications (P&gt;0.05). Multivariable logistic regression showed no statistically significant predictive value of omission of hemostatic agents for perioperative outcomes (P&gt;0.05).
CONCLUSION: Perioperative hemorrhage and other major complications after contemporary RAPN are rare in experienced hands. In our study, the use of fibrin sealants during RAPN does not decrease the rate of complications, blood loss, or hospital stay. Furthermore, no impact is seen on operative time, WIT, or other negative outcomes. Omitting these agents during RAPN could be a safe, effective, cost-saving measure.

### PMID 23386172 (2013) — Surgical laparoscopy, endoscopy &amp; percutaneous techniques
TITLE: EVICEL glue-induced small bowel obstruction after laparoscopic gastric bypass.
DOI: 10.1097/SLE.0b013e318275b2cb | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Small bowel obstruction is a complication of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (LRYGB) frequently caused by adhesions and internal hernia. In addition, anastomotic leak that complicates LRYGB surgery contributes to the mortality of this procedure. Fibrin glue is commonly used intraoperatively for prevention of anastomotic leak and to secure hemostasis. We describe 2 cases of morbidly obese women who underwent LRYGB surgery for weight loss and developed early postoperative small bowel obstruction related to the use of the "EVICEL" fibrin sealant. Of note is that both patients required surgical intervention for this complication.

### PMID 23350579 (2013) — Acta orthopaedica
TITLE: No effect of fibrin sealant on drain output or functional recovery following simultaneous bilateral total knee arthroplasty: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
DOI: 10.3109/17453674.2013.769082 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Blood loss after total knee arthroplasty (TKA) may lead to anemia, blood transfusions, and increased total costs. Also, bleeding into the periarticular tissue may cause swelling and a reduction in quadriceps strength, thus impairing early functional recovery. In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, we analyzed the possible effect of fibrin sealant on blood loss and early functional recovery in a fast-track setting.
METHODS: 24 consecutive patients undergoing bilateral simultaneous TKA were included. 10 mL of fibrin sealant (Evicel) was sprayed onto one knee whereas the contralateral knee had saline. Drain output, the primary outcome, was measured from knee drains removed exactly 24 h after surgery. Secondary outcomes (knee swelling, pain, strength of knee extension, and range of movement (ROM)) were evaluated up to 21 days after surgery.
RESULTS: The drain output in knees treated with fibrin sealant and placebo was similar (582 mL and 576 mL, respectively). Likewise, no statistically significant differences were found between groups regarding swelling, pain, strength of knee extension, and ROM.
INTERPRETATION: Fibrin sealant as a local hemostatic in TKA showed no benefit in reducing drain output or in facilitating early functional recovery when used with a tourniquet, tranexamic acid, and a femoral bone plug.

### PMID 23064973 (2013) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Biomechanical properties of (semi-) synthetic glues for mesh fixation in endoscopic inguinal hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-012-1000-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: In endoscopic inguinal hernia repair, the use of fibrin glues for mesh fixation instead of staples and sutures can demonstrably reduce postoperative morbidity without increasing the recurrence rate. Various fibrin glues differ in terms of their mesh fixation strength. As an alternative to fibrin glue, there is an increasing trend toward using synthetic glues for mesh fixation in both open and endoscopic inguinal hernia surgery. To date, no studies have been conducted comparing the fixation strength of (semi-) synthetic glues with that of fibrin glues. Here, using a biomechanical model, we compared the adhesive strength of two glues (BioGlue and Glubran) used in surgery with a fibrin glue.
METHODS: We used light-weight polypropylene meshes (TiMesh light). In each case, the biomechanical stability of five meshes in each group was tested with 2 ml fibrin glue (Evicel), 2 ml BioGlue or 2 ml Glubran (cyanoacrylate). The defect in the muscle tissue used was 4.5 cm in diameter for a mesh size of 10 &#xd7; 15 cm. Measurements were taken using a standardized stamp penetration test while aiming not to remain under a minimum fixation strength of 32 N.
RESULTS: Using Evicel for mesh fixation, an adhesive strength of 64.3 N was achieved. This was significantly greater than that obtained in the absence of fixation (2.9 N, p &lt; 0.001) and higher than the requisite value of 32 N. Using Glubran, it was possible once again to significantly improve the adhesive strength (105.4 N, p = 0.008). The use of BioGlue improved the adhesive strength to 131.7 N, but not significantly so compared with Glubran (p = 0.110).
CONCLUSIONS: In terms of adhesive strength, (semi-) synthetic glues can be used for mesh fixation instead of fibrin glue and even achieve significantly better adhesive strength than fibrin glue. However, further clinical studies are needed to identify the role of (semi-) synthetic glues compared with fibrin glues in endoscopic inguinal hernia surgery.

### PMID 23566443 (2013) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Transporous hernia mesh fixation with fibrin sealant in an in vitro model of spray application.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2013.03.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The spray application of fibrin sealant (FS) is widely used for atraumatic mesh fixation in open and laparoscopic hernia surgery. Studies focusing on the optimization of sealant distribution are rare. This study elucidates the impact of spray distance and pressure, the thrombin concentration of the FS, as well as the mesh design on the spray process and the resulting sealant distribution. Furthermore, the effect of interrupting the spray process on sealant distribution was investigated.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Three different meshes were sprayed in a vertical test arrangement with 0.4 mL FS. Fibrin sealants containing 4 and 500 IU/mL thrombin (Tisseel and Artiss; Vienna, Austria) provided by Baxter Biosciences were used. The application distances varied from 5 to 8 cm. The relative fibrin sealant distribution on the individual mesh surfaces was evaluated and compared, as well as loss of FS and patterns of clot formation.
RESULTS: Spray distances between 5 and 8 cm led to a homogenous sealant distribution. Lower thrombin concentrations led to significant losses of FS due to slower polymerization. Differences of the fibrin sealant distribution and mesh pore sizes were found. No differences between continuous and discontinuous application were observed.
CONCLUSION: The spray application of FS provides a uniform sealant film in a defined range of distances. However, design and pore size of different meshes substantially impact sealant distribution. These findings should be considered when selecting prosthesis for hernia repair. In general, the amount of sealant should not exceed 0.08 mL per cm(2) to avoid obstruction of mesh pores.

### PMID 23563904 (2013) — Aesthetic surgery journal
TITLE: Randomized, controlled, phase 3 study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of fibrin sealant VH S/D 4 s-apr (Artiss) to improve tissue adherence in subjects undergoing rhytidectomy.
DOI: 10.1177/1090820X13479969 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Suction drains are commonly placed after rhytidectomy to avoid seroma formation that may result from dead spaces between skin layers. Fibrin sealants promote tissue adherence by crosslinking with extracellular matrix proteins, which may reduce the dead space under skin flaps.
OBJECTIVES: The authors evaluate the safety and efficacy of the fibrin sealant (FS) VH S/D 4 s-apr (Artiss; Baxter Healthcare Corp, Deerfield, Illinois), added to standard-of-care (SoC) treatment, in improving flap adherence and reducing dead space in patients undergoing rhytidectomy.
METHODS: Patients with planned facial rhytidectomy were enrolled in this phase 3, prospective, controlled, randomized, patient-blinded, multicenter trial. They received SoC treatment on 1 side of the face and adjunctive FS VH S/D 4 s-apr on the other.
RESULTS: Seventy-five patients completed the trial. The mean (SD) drainage volume was 7.7 (7.4) mL from the sides treated with sealant and 20.0 (11.3) mL from the SoC-only sides (P &lt; .0001). Rates of hematoma and seroma were similar for the 2 treatments, as were changes in postoperative skin sensitivity. Adverse events generally were mild; 2 serious adverse events were reported (wound abscess, dehydration).
CONCLUSIONS: Adjunct use of FS VH S/D 4 s-apr in rhytidectomy was proven safe in this study. It significantly reduced drainage volumes without increasing the incidence of hematoma or seroma, which suggests that it eliminates dead space through improved flap adherence.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 2.

### PMID 23515377 (2013) — Aesthetic surgery journal
TITLE: Exploratory, randomized, controlled, phase 2 study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of adjuvant fibrin sealant VH S/D 4 S-Apr (ARTISS) in patients undergoing rhytidectomy.
DOI: 10.1177/1090820X13477860 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017427">Clinical Trial, Phase II, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Suction drains are commonly placed after rhytidectomy surgery to avoid seroma formation that may result from dead spaces between skin layers. Fibrin sealants promote tissue adherence by cross-linking with extracellular matrix proteins, which may reduce the dead space under skin flaps.
OBJECTIVES: The authors evaluate the safety and preliminary efficacy of the fibrin sealant (FS) VH S/D 4 s-apr (ARTISS; Baxter Healthcare Corp, Deerfield, Illinois), added to standard-of-care (SoC) treatment, on tissue plane adherence and local hemostasis in rhytidectomy patients.
METHODS: In this phase 2, prospective, controlled, randomized, evaluator- and patient-blinded, multicenter study, 45 patients (of 56 possible enrollees) received SoC treatment on 1 side of the face and adjunctive FS VH S/D 4 s-apr treatment on the other side. Outcomes measures included visual assessments of ecchymosis (by blinded reviewers), grading of ecchymosis and edema, drainage volumes, occurrence of hematoma/seroma, safety evaluations, and patient-reported assessments of pain, numbness, and treatment preferences postoperatively.
RESULTS: Mean patient age was 55.1 years. Rates and grades of ecchymosis and edema were similar for the 2 treatments. The mean (SD) drainage volume 24 hours after surgery was 11.5 (13.7) mL from the FS VH S/D 4 s-apr-treated sides of the face and 26.8 (24.0) mL from the SoC-only sides (P &lt; .0001). Patient assessments of pain, numbness, and preference favored treatment with FS VH S/D 4 s-apr. Adverse events were mild to moderate in severity.
CONCLUSIONS: Adjuvant use of FS VH S/D 4 s-apr appears to be safe and results in lower drainage volumes than SoC treatment alone.

### PMID 23547511 (2013) — Acta orthopaedica Belgica
TITLE: Platelet-rich fibrin in arthroscopic repair of massive rotator cuff tears: a prospective randomized pilot clinical trial.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The objective of this study was to prospectively evaluate the feasibility of a large- scale project on the influence of local application of Platelet Rich Fibrin (PRF) on the functional outcome and integrity of the arthroscopically repaired tendons in patients with massive tears of the rotator cuff. A prospective, randomized pilot clinical trial was performed on 28 patients (22 females, 6 males) with an average age of 65 years (range: 53 to 77) undergoing complete arthroscopic repair of a massive rotator cuff tear. After the repair was completed, 6 ml PRF (Vivostat) was locally applied to the repair site in 14 patients; no similar action was done in the other 14 patients. All patients underwent a clinical examination and an arthro-MRI to evaluate the integrity of the repair, one year after the operation. They were followed clinically for a minimum of 2 years. Functional outcome was evaluated with the Constant and DASH scores. There were no reported complications in either group. None of the patients was lost to follow-up. Globally, the Constant score improved from 45 preoperatively (range: 25 to 65) to 64 at one year (range: 20 to 79) (p &lt; 0.001), with no significant change at two years (mean 63, range: 20 to 77). The VAS for pain improved from 5.6/10 preoperatively to 1.7/10 at the most recent examination (p &lt; 0.001). All but two patients were satisfied. With the numbers of patients available, we could not detect a significant difference in the preoperative (46 vs. 43; p = 037) or postoperative Constant score (61 vs. 68; p = 0.125) between the control group and the PRF group. On arthro-MRI, 19 of the 28 patients (68%) were found to have a large re-tear : 10/14 in the PRF group and 9/14 in the control group. Local application of autologous PRF to the repair site of massive rotator cuffs fully reconstructed arthroscopically failed to improve the clinical outcome and the healing rate, compared with a standard repair. However, a large-scale study would be necessary to confirm these results.

### PMID 22819491 (2013) — Actas urologicas espanolas
TITLE: [Haemostasis control during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy without parenchymal renorrhaphy: the VIVOSTAT(&#xae;) experience].
DOI: 10.1016/j.acuro.2012.03.014 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To present our experience using an autologous fibrin sealant prepared with the Vivostat system(&#xae;) to control haemostasis without any renal parenchymal reconstruction.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We performed 45 laparoscopic partial nephrectomies using this haemostatic agent. The surgical steps were: colon mobilization, identification of ureter, renal vessels and renal tumor, renal artery control with Rummel tourniquet, tumor excision with harmonic scalpel, application of fibrin glue to the resection bed twice (before and after kidney reperfusion). Patients were evaluated for acute or delayed bleeding.
RESULTS: Mean age was 63.9 years (33-80); mean tumor size was 2.5cm (1.5-4); mean operative time was 136.1min (90-180). Mean warm ischemia time was 19.2min (10-30). Mean blood loss was 97ml (50-300). Individual haemostatic stitches were performed before application of the sealant if acute bleeding was observed (14 cases). We did not achieve any case of postoperative bleeding from resection bed or renal failure. 1 patient required transfusion due to an abdominal wall haematoma. 65% were clear cell carcinoma, 10% were papillary carcinoma, 20% were oncocitoma. Free margin rate was 100%. Mean hospital stay was 4 days (2-6). Mean follow-up was 14 months (5-45).
CONCLUSIONS: Excluding renorrhaphy during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy is feasible and safe. Our initial experience with the vivostat system in laparoscopic partial nephrectomy has been encouraging, but longer follow-up is needed to determine the real benefit of this surgical technique in laparoscopic partial nephrectomy.

### PMID 23107020 (2013) — Asian journal of endoscopic surgery
TITLE: Thoracoscopic surgery for refractory cases of secondary spontaneous pneumothorax.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1758-5910.2012.00161.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax (SSP) can be life threatening because patients often have severe lung disease with other coexisting diseases such as heart disease. In this study, we evaluate the feasibility of thoracoscopic surgery to treat SSP and discuss thoracoscopic techniques for managing complicated cases.
METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated the outcome of thoracoscopic surgeries in 21 SSP patients.
RESULTS: Fifteen patients had chronic emphysema, four had interstitial pneumonia, and two had inflammatory lung disease. All patients presented with persistent air leaks, and their median preoperative hospital stay was 11 days. All patients underwent thoracoscopic surgery. In 12 patients, the leaking bullae were excised by endoscopic stapling. Fibrin glue was used in 16 cases and polyglycolic acid sheets in 17. Polyglycolic acid sheets and fibrin glue without bullectomy were used in three cases. Air leaks were treated by simple stapling in four cases and by gelatin-resorcin formaldehyde glue in five. Median postoperative hospital stay was 8 days. No patients required conversion to open surgery. Postoperative complications such as persistent air leaks, pneumonia, and acute respiratory failure were observed in six patients. Four recurrences of pneumothorax were observed during the median postoperative follow-up period of 19.3 months.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that thoracoscopic surgery is feasible and less invasive than open surgery for high-risk patients, and it improves patient quality of life. Various techniques to stop air leaks enabled us to treat patients with refractory SSP.

### PMID 23801262 (2013) — Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift (1946)
TITLE: [Successful closure of a postoperative esophagobronchial fistula following esophageal resection using fibrin glue].
DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1343238 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: HISTORY AND INTERVENTION: A 52-year-old female patient underwent open abdominothoracic cardia and esophageal resection with gastric transposition because of histologically diagnosed Barrett metaplasia with "high-grade" intraepithelial neoplasia (HGIEN) and parts of an invasive adenocarcinoma. The anastomotic insufficiency on the 10th postoperative day including an esophagobronchial fistula prompted to a subsequent surgical re-intervention with suture of the fistula, lavage and additional drainage, an endoscopic stenting of the fistula from esophageal site, as well as repeated (n = 22) bronchoscopic applications of fibrin glue (1-3 ml each) into the lumen of the fistula after each bronchoscopic lavage of the fistula until the complete closure was achieved. The changeful clinical course of 77 days on the surgical ICU was characterized by secondary complications such as pneumonia, mediastinitis and respiratory insufficiency with long-term artificial respiration and creation of a percutaneous dilatation tracheotomy.
CONCLUSION: The application of fibrin glue can be considered a promising, minimally invasive therapeutic option in the management of postoperative fistula after esophageal resection, which requires expertise in decision-making and the finding-specific approach, in particular, if indicated inital steps of the sequential complication management such as surgical re-intervention and conventional endoscopic measures (stenting, Endo-VAC[-sponge]) do not provide great therapeutic potential any more due to the prolonged postoperative time course and the unfavorable local findings. In the presented case, modes of an assisted artificial respiration with low pressure and short phases of apnoe after fibrin glue application were the crucial predictions for an initial and favorable adhesion of this glue and finally for a successful sealing resulting in a sufficient closure of the fistula.

### PMID 23232299 (2013) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Esophageal perforation caused by a fish bone treated with surgically indwelling drainage and fibrin glue injection for fistula formation.
DOI: 10.5761/atcs.cr.12.01906 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We herein report a case of thoracic esophageal perforation caused by a fish bone. The patient was a 68-year-old female who presented with a persistent sore throat after eating sea bream four days previously. She was diagnosed with an esophageal perforation and posterior mediastinal abscess formation by chest computed tomography and inflammatory findings in her blood test. Surgically indwelling drainage was able to effectively control the leakage of contaminants and infection. Endoscopic injection of fibrin glue into the long-standing thoracic-esophageal fistula promoted closure of the esophageal wall defect and enabled her to restart oral intake. This case report suggests that effective drainage and the use of fibrin glue sealant may be one of the treatment options for esophageal perforation.

### PMID 23339601 (2013) — Current medical research and opinion
TITLE: Systematic review and meta-analysis of application of fibrin sealant after liver resection.
DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2013.768216 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealant (FS) has been increasingly used on the raw surface after liver resection but its clinical value has not been established to date. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the employment of FS after liver resection.
METHODS: PubMed, Cochrane Library, Embase, CNKI, CBM and VIP were searched for randomized trials comparing the effect of FS with no FS or any other intervention for patients undergoing liver resection. Primary outcomes included time to hemostasis, hemostatic success, amount of drainage and drainage duration.
RESULTS: Eleven randomized controlled trials were included. Meta-analysis suggested that the amount of drainage (standard mean difference -0.30; 95% confidence interval [CI] -0.82 to 0.23) and drainage duration (mean difference [MD] -0.46, 95% CI -0.61 to -1.53) were similar between FS group and no FS group. Compared with topical hemostatic agents, FS could significantly reduce time to hemostasis (MD -208.46, 95% CI -228.22 to -188.70) and increase hemostasis success rate (relative risk 1.35, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.57). Two trials compared FS with argon beam coagulation (ABC), which both suggested that FS could significantly decrease the time to hemostasis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated a modest benefit of FS over no FS, topical hemostatic agents and ABC in controlling intraoperative bleeding from the raw liver surface after liver resection. But there is no evidence that FS is beneficial to patients in reducing amount of drainage and drainage duration.

### PMID 22460340 (2012) — AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology
TITLE: The appearance of dural sealants under MR imaging.
DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A3078 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Dural sealants are an adjunct to obtain watertight closure after intradural procedures. This study aims to characterize the appearance on MR imaging of 3 commonly employed dural sealants: fibrin glue, PEGH, and BSAG. To this end, patients who underwent spinal intradural procedures that included the use of dural sealant during closure were identified retrospectively. Post-operative data on 15 patients, including complications such as pseudomeningocele formation and infection, were gathered. The appearance of dural sealants on follow-up MR imaging scans within 3 days of surgery was analyzed. Fifteen patients were identified (5 with fibrin glue, 5 with PEGH, and 5 with BSAG applied during closure) with appropriately timed post-operative MR imaging scans. All 3 substances were identifiable based on anatomic location and imaging characteristics on post-operative MR imaging in standard T1, T1 PGFS, and T2 FSE. Definite differentiation between CSF and fibrin glue or PEGH was not possible with the T1 or T1 PGFS, or with the T2 FSE. Differences in intensity between CSF and BSAG were also not significant on either T1 sequence, but they were statistically significant on the T2 FSE. All patients had an uneventful post-operative course, and no patients developed post-operative pseudomeningocele at 30 days. This study concludes that water-based dural sealants such as fibrin glue and PEGH are difficult to differentiate from CSF on standard T1, T1 PGFS and T2 FSE, while BSAG is easily recognized on the T2 FSE. Recognition of water-based sealants therefore requires communication between the neurosurgeon and the neuroradiologist to avoid post-operative misidentification.

### PMID 22381303 (2012) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: A multicenter, single-blind, prospective randomized trial to evaluate the safety of a polyethylene glycol hydrogel (Duraseal Dural Sealant System) as a dural sealant in cranial surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2011.12.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Incisional cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage after cranial surgery is a significant cause of morbidity due to poor wound healing and infection, meningitis, and pseudomeningocele formation. Many common dural closure techniques, such as sutures, autologous grafts, gelatin or collagen sponges, and fibrin glues, are used to achieve watertight closure, although none are US Food and Drug Administration approved for this use. DuraSeal Dural Sealant System is a polyethylene glycol (PEG) hydrogel approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for obtaining watertight dural closure when applied after standard dural suturing. This multicenter, prospective randomized study further evaluated the safety of a PEG hydrogel compared with common dural sealing techniques.
METHODS: A total of 237 patients undergoing elective cranial surgery at 17 institutions were randomized to dural closure augmented with the PEG hydrogel or a control "standard of care" dural sealing technique after Valsalva maneuver demonstrated an intraoperative nonwatertight dural closure. Data were collected on complications resulting in unplanned postoperative interventions or reoperations, surgical site infections, CSF leaks, and other neurological complications within 30 days. Surgeons also provided data on the ease of use of the dural sealing techniques, as well as preparation and application times.
RESULTS: The incidences of neurosurgical complications, surgical site infections, and CSF leaks were similar between treatment and control groups, with no statistically significant difference between the measures. In the PEG hydrogel group (n = 120), the incidence of neurosurgical complications was 5.8% (n = 7), the incidence of surgical site infections was 1.7% (n = 2), and the incidence of CSF leak was 0.8% (n = 1). In the control group (n = 117), the incidence of neurosurgical complications was 7.7% (n = 9), the incidence of surgical site infection was 2.6% (n = 3), and the incidence of CSF leak was 1.7% (n = 2). Sealant preparation time was less than 5 minutes in 96.6% of the PEG hydrogel group compared with 66.4% of controls (P &lt; 0.001). The dural augmentation was applied in less than 1 minute in 85.7% of the PEG hydrogel group compared with 66.4% of the control group (P &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The PEG hydrogel dural sealant used in this study has a similar safety profile to commonly used dural sealing techniques when used as dural closure augmentation in cranial surgery. The PEG hydrogel dural sealant demonstrated faster preparation and application times than other commonly used dural sealing techniques.

### PMID 22740732 (2012) — Texas Heart Institute journal
TITLE: Hemostatic modifications of the Bentall procedure: imbricated proximal suture and fibrin sealant reduce postoperative morbidity and mortality rates.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bleeding is an important predictor of morbidity and mortality rates after the Bentall operation. This study reports our recent experience with composite aortic root replacement via a slightly modified button-Bentall operation. Fifty-six consecutive patients underwent a Bentall operation on an elective basis from January 2008 through December 2009. In all cases, we used 2 modifications: we imbricated the pledgeted 2-0 polyester interrupted U stitches of the proximal suture line, and at that same suture line we sealed with fibrin glue the possible sources of oozing. The series featured high proportions of associated procedures (25%) and reoperations (23%). The mean cardiopulmonary bypass and aortic cross-clamp times were 166 &#xb1; 50 and 113 &#xb1; 27 min, respectively. No case of operative or hospital (30-day) death was observed. Postoperative drainage amounted to 705 mL (median) on the first postoperative day and 377 mL (mean) on the second. Surgical re-exploration for bleeding was needed in only 1 patient (1.8%). Postoperative acute kidney injury was observed in 5 patients, neurologic complications in 3, and respiratory insufficiency requiring prolonged mechanical ventilation in another 3. Both respiratory and renal complications were significantly associated with greater consumption of blood products (P=0.03 and P=0.001, respectively). We conclude that the combined use of imbricated proximal suture-line stitches and subsequent fibrin-sealant spraying were associated with no deaths and with low rates of bleeding and other adverse postoperative sequelae in our 2-year experience with the Bentall operation in an elective series of patients characterized by a difficult mixture of prognoses.

### PMID 22633423 (2012) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: A prospective randomized study comparing fibrin sealant to manual compression for the treatment of anastomotic suture-hole bleeding in expanded polytetrafluoroethylene grafts.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2012.01.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The ideal hemostatic agent for treatment of suture-line bleeding at vascular anastomoses has not yet been established. This study evaluated whether the use of a fibrin sealant containing 500 IU/mL thrombin and synthetic aprotinin (FS; marketed in the United States under the name TISSEEL) is beneficial for treatment of challenging suture-line bleeding at vascular anastomoses of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) grafts, including those further complicated by concomitant antiplatelet therapies.
METHODS: Over a 1-year period ending in 2010, ePTFE graft prostheses, including arterio-arterial bypasses and arteriovenous shunts, were placed in 140 patients who experienced suture-line bleeding that required treatment after completion of anastomotic suturing. Across 24 US study sites, 70 patients were randomized and treated with FS and 70 with manual compression (control). The primary end point was the proportion of patients who achieved hemostasis at the study suture line at 4 minutes after start of application of FS or positioning of surgical gauze pads onto the study suture line.
RESULTS: There was a statistically significant difference in the comparison of hemostasis rates at the study suture line at 4 minutes between FS (62.9%) and control (31.4%) patients (P &lt; .0001), which was the primary end point. Similarly, hemostasis rates in the subgroup of patients on antiplatelet therapies were 64.7% (FS group) and 28.2% (control group). When analyzed by bleeding severity, the hemostatic advantage of FS over control at 4 minutes was similar (27.8% absolute improvement for moderate bleeding vs 32.8% for severe bleeding). Logistic regression analysis (accounting for gender, age, intervention type, bleeding severity, blood pressure, heparin coating of ePTFE graft, and antiplatelet therapies) found a statistically significant treatment effect in the odds ratio (OR) of meeting the primary end point between treatment groups (OR, 6.73; P &lt; .0001), as well as statistically significant effects for intervention type (OR, 0.25; P = .0055) and bleeding severity (OR, 2.59; P = .0209). The safety profile of FS was excellent as indicated by the lack of any related serious adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings from this phase 3 study confirmed that FS is safe and its efficacy is superior to manual compression for hemostasis in patients with peripheral vascular ePTFE grafts. The data also suggest that FS promotes hemostasis independently of the patient's own coagulation system, as shown in a representative population of patients with vascular disease under single- or dual-antiplatelet therapies.

### PMID 22419181 (2012) — General thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Experimental study on effective application of fibrin glue.
DOI: 10.1007/s11748-011-0864-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Fibrin glue is effective for maintaining hemostasis after anastomosis and for filling needle holes after cardiothoracic and vascular surgery, but few experimental studies concerning methods of application to obtain more effective hemostasis have been reported.
METHODS: Bolheal was used as the fibrin glue. Fibrinogen solution (A, 0.3 ml) and thrombin solution (B, 0.3 ml), components of fibrin glue, were applied to the needle holes by the following four methods: group 1 (n = 8), drip method; group 2 (n = 8), spray method; group 3 (n = 8), rub-and-spray method; group 4 (n = 8), rub-andrub method. Additional studies were done in groups 3 and 4 to evaluate the hemostatic effect with different curing times and temperatures.
RESULTS: The pressure at which the fibrin sealant ruptured were significantly higher in group 3 (109 &#xb1; 16 mmHg) and group 4 (113 &#xb1; 7) (for both groups: P &lt; 0.05 vs. group 1 (22 &#xb1; 8) and group 2 (64 &#xb1; 10)). The pressure increased with prolongation of the curing time, and significant differences were noted between the pressures at &#x2265; 2 min and that at 30 s (both groups: P &lt; 0.05 vs. 30 s). The curing temperature had no significant influence in the two groups. Microscopically, the glue effectively plugged the needle holes in groups 3 and 4.
CONCLUSION: Compared with the current drip and spray methods, more effective hemostasis was obtained by rubbing on the fibrin glue.

### PMID 22269729 (2012) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealant provides superior hemostasis for sternotomy compared with bone wax.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.08.087 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the hemostatic efficacy and feasibility of direct injection of fibrin sealant into the sternal marrow cavity in senior patients undergoing on-pump coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
DESCRIPTION: A total of 82 senior patients undergoing on-pump CABG were randomized to the bone wax group (n=40) or the fibrin sealant group (n=42) for the period July 2010 to January 2011.
EVALUATION: The fibrin sealant-treated group had less chest drainage in the first 24 hours (186.67&#xb1;49.53 versus 333.75&#xb1;60.49 mL), less total chest drainage (326.19&#xb1;67.24 versus 516&#xb1;88.46 mL), less packed red blood cell (PRBC) administration (3.6&#xb1;1.25 versus 7.4&#xb1;2.13 U), less fresh frozen plasma (FFP) administration (5.52&#xb1;1.64 versus 8.95&#xb1;1.77 U), shorter intubation time (40.36&#xb1;8.62 versus 46.25&#xb1;10.46 hours), and shorter hospital stay (10.45&#xb1;1.17 versus 11.03&#xb1;1.37 days) compared with the bone wax group. No significant difference in the incidence of postoperative complications was found.
CONCLUSIONS: Direct injection of fibrin sealant into the sternal marrow cavity significantly reduces the amount of postoperative blood loss and offers an attractive new treatment alternative for senior patients undergoing on-pump CABG.

### PMID 22219405 (2012) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Adverse effects of fibrin sealants in thoracic surgery: the safety of a new fibrin sealant: multicentre, randomized, controlled, clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1093/ejcts/ezr083 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017427">Clinical Trial, Phase II, Clinical Trial, Phase III, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The safety of fibrin sealants (FS) has been questioned in the light of recent reports of adverse effects. We evaluated the safety of a new FS in a randomized controlled trial (RCT).
METHODS: Multicentre, open-label Phase II/III RCT to evaluate the safety of the new FS. The trial was approved by the Ethic Committee of each three participating Centre. FS includes two components (component 1: fibrinogen; component 2: thrombin), each of them subjected to two viral inactivation procedures. Out of 200 screened patients, 185 eligible patients (49 females, 136 males), aged between 18 and 75 years, undergoing major thoracic surgery were randomized to receive FS (#91 patients) as an adjuvant for air leak control or no treatment (#94 patients, control group). Safety variables were: percentage of subjects with adverse events associated with the therapy; formation of antibodies against bovine aprotinin; vital signs (blood pressure, body temperature, heart and respiratory rate); laboratory parameters.
RESULTS: Overall operative mortality was 3.2% (6/185), 1.1% in the FS group and 5.3% in the control group, respectively. Twenty patients (22%) had adverse events in the FS group and 22 (23.4%) in the control group. Atrial fibrillation (five patients in the FS group and four in the control group) and hyperpyrexia (five and seven patients, respectively, in the two groups) were the most common adverse events. No patient reported thromboembolic events (pulmonary embolism or deep vein thrombosis) during the in hospital stay or within 1 month from discharge. None of the adverse events was considered as treatment related. The formation of bovine aprotinin antibodies was reported in a total of 34 patients (37.4%) in the FS group and was not related to any adverse effect.
CONCLUSIONS: The present RCT did not show any increased risk of adverse events, and of surgical complications, related to the use of the new FS.

### PMID 23671806 (2012) — American journal of stem cells
TITLE: Experimental model for coadjuvant treatment with mesenchymal stem cells for aortic aneurysm.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: Many factors are possibly involved in the inflammatory process which causes the degeneration of the arterial wall in the formation of Abdominal Aortic Aneurysms. During the last years different experimental models have been published to treat this fault of the arterial walls. Parallel the clinical treatment has evolved. With this work we have tried to develop an animal model basing on the clinical current treatment. Finally, we propose a treatment based on mesenchymal cells to disable local immune response, preventing excessive fibrosis, apoptosis, and inducing intrinsic cellular progenitors.
OBJECTIVE: To present a reproducible superior animal model of experimentation, intending to show that mesenchymal stem cells inserted in the sac of an artificial aneurysm are able to survive, so that they can be made accountable for a subsequent beneficial effect upon this condition.
METHODS: Six Landrace-White pigs, weighing around 25Kg. We generate 2 aneurysms of abdominal aorta (2x1cm) with Dacron's patches. Later we treat the aneurysms endoscopic with a covered endograft. Finally, in one of the aneurysmal sac we introduce 1cc fibrin sealant and in another 1 cc of fibrin sealant with 10 million MSC. Animals were sacrificed at 24 hs and 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9 weeks. Samples of aneurysms were processed histologically (H&amp;E and Masson). The injected cells were located by immunofluorescence (GFP market).
RESULTS: The surgical technique is reproducible and similar to those conducted in common clinical practice. Histological cross-section samples of cases treated with MSC and analyzed by a blind researcher present a lower inflammation reaction, or with longer evolution time than in controls. Immunofluorescence studies have detected cells marked with GFP up to three weeks after treatment.
CONCLUSION: This reproducible animal model is similar to common clinical treatment. MSC can stand alive at least for three weeks since their implantation within an aneurysm sac. This may improve the results of conventional endovascular treatment by the stabilization of the aneurysmal sac.

### PMID 21237548 (2012) — Annales de chirurgie plastique et esthetique
TITLE: [Fibrin sealant significantly decrease postoperative drainage in breast reconstruction by deep inferior epigastric perforator (DIEP) flap].
DOI: 10.1016/j.anplas.2010.10.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Serosanguinous drainage after breast reconstruction by deep inferior epigastric perforator (DIEP) flap constitute with the microsurgical monitoring, the main limiting factors for patient discharge. Fibrin sealant has already been studied to reduce post breast surgery drainage. The authors are presenting their experience in secondary breast reconstruction by DIEP flap with the use of sprayed fibrin sealant.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty-one female patients aged 28 to 63 years old who underwent secondary breast reconstruction after mastectomy for cancer between October 2004 and June 2007 have been reviewed. These patients were separated into two groups. In group 1, patients (n=9) received two drains placed under the flap and in the axillary area. In group 2, (n=12) the DIEP flaps and thoracic areas were sprayed with fibrin sealant (Tissucol(&#xae;)) before the two drains inset.
RESULTS: No adverse effect were reported, with a 36-month median follow-up. Drainages volumes or durations were not correlated to the patients' Body Mass Index (BMI). Lower drained volumes were collected from the thoracic region (372ml versus 629mL) and thoracic drains were removed earlier (5.5 days versus 6.9 days) in group 2. The length of stay was also significantly reduced after fibrin sealant use (5.5 days versus 7.22 days with P=0.0305 by log rank test).
CONCLUSION: This study is a rare clinical one on fibrin sealant use to decrease postoperative drainage in breast reconstruction by DIEP flap. Fibrin sealant significantly decreased the postoperative drainage volume and duration.

### PMID 23139989 (2012) — JPMA. The Journal of the Pakistan Medical Association
TITLE: Endoscopic repair of cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhoea in a developing country.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The objectives of the study was to determine the causes and outcome of endoscopic repair of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak in a developing country. A total of five patients were recruited in the study. The age of patients ranged from 8 to 65 years. Four patients were male and one was female. In two cases of iatrogenic injury, the first was in the sphenoid sinus. The second was following functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS). Fascia lata was used to repair all cases. Beriplast was used as sealing agent in four cases and clotted blood was used in remaining case. Despite the small number, CSF rhinor rhoea was resolved in all cases. The patients were followed up for 2.5 to 6.5 years. Endoscopic repair is a viable option even in developing countries. It is cost effective and has a very low morbidity rate with no mortality at all.

### PMID 22977861 (2012) — Bulletin of experimental biology and medicine
TITLE: Experimental study of the effects of highly intense laser exposure on hepatic tissue.
DOI: 10.1007/s10517-012-1757-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Irreversible changes in the liver tissue after high-intensity laser exposure develop at a depth of no more than 200 &#x3bc;. Inflammatory reaction in the wounds does not depend on laser source and is characterized by predominance of proliferative processes leading by day 15 after surgery to the formation of a fine cicatrix. Hermetic sealing of the parenchymatous hepatic wound by laser welding to xenogenous peritoneum is no less effective than TahoComb and Beriplast P drugs and deserves further studies and clinical use.

### PMID 22576289 (2012) — Blood coagulation &amp; fibrinolysis : an international journal in haemostasis and thrombosis
TITLE: Composition of fibrin glues significantly influences axial vascularization and degradation in isolation chamber model.
DOI: 10.1097/MBC.0b013e3283540c0f | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: In this study, different fibrin sealants with varying concentrations of the fibrin components were evaluated in terms of matrix degradation and vascularization in the arteriovenous loop (AVL) model of the rat. An AVL was placed in a Teflon isolation chamber filled with 500 &#x3bc;l fibrin gel. The matrix was composed of commercially available fibrin gels, namely Beriplast (Behring GmbH, Marburg, Germany) (group A), Evicel (Omrix Biopharmaceuticals S.A., Somerville, New Jersey, USA) (group B), Tisseel VH S/D (Baxter, Vienna, Austria) with a thrombin concentration of 4&#x200a;IU/ml and a fibrinogen concentration of 80 mg/ml [Tisseel S F80 (Baxter), group C] and with an fibrinogen concentration of 20 mg/ml [Tisseel S F20 (Baxter), group D]. After 2 and 4 weeks, five constructs per group and time point were investigated using micro-computed tomography, and histological and morphometrical analysis techniques. The aprotinin, factor XIII and thrombin concentration did not affect the degree of clot degradation. An inverse relationship was found between fibrin matrix degradation and sprouting of blood vessels. By reducing the fibrinogen concentration in group D, a significantly decreased construct weight and an increased generation of vascularized connective tissue were detected. There was an inverse relationship between matrix degradation and vascularization detectable. Fibrinogen as the major matrix component showed a significant impact on the matrix properties. Alteration of fibrin gel properties might optimize formation of blood vessels.

### PMID 22341344 (2012) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Tensile strength of biological fibrin sealants: a comparative study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2011.11.1017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants are commonly used in liver surgery, although their effectiveness in routine clinical practice remains controversial. Individual sealant characteristics are based on hemostatic effects and adhesion properties that can be experimentally measured using the 'rat skin test' or the 'pig skin test'. This study used a more relevant and realistic experimental canine model to compare the differences in the adhesive properties of four fibrin sealants in hepatectomy: Tisseel/Tissucol, Tachosil, Quixil, and Beriplast.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A partial hepatectomy was performed in beagle dogs under general anesthesia to obtain liver cross-sections. Fibrin sealants were allocated to dog livers using a Youden square design. The tensile strength measurement was performed using a traction system to measure the rupture stress point of a small wooden cylinder bonded to the liver cross-section.
RESULTS: Significantly greater adhesion properties were observed with Tisseel/Tissucol compared with Quixil or Beriplast (P = 0.002 and 0.001, respectively). Similarly, Tachosil demonstrated significantly greater adhesive properties compared with Beriplast (P = 0.009) or Quixil (P = 0.014). No significant differences were observed between Tisseel/Tissucol and Tachosil or between Beriplast and Quixil.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this comparative study demonstrate that different fibrin sealants exhibit different adhesive properties. Tisseel/Tissucol and Tachosil provided greatest adhesion to liver cross-section in our canine model of hepatectomy. These results may enable the optimal choice of fibrin sealants for this procedure in clinical practice.

### PMID 23117611 (2012) — Acta cirurgica brasileira
TITLE: Comparative study between fibrin glue and platelet rich plasma in dogs skin grafts.
DOI: 10.1590/s0102-86502012001100008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Compare fibrin glue (Tissucol(&#xae;)) and platelet-rich plasma in full-thickness mesh skin grafts in dogs.
METHODS: Eighteen dogs were used, divided into two groups: fibrin glue (FG) and platelet-rich plasma (PRP). In all the animals, a full-thickness 3x3 cm mesh skin graft was implanted. In the left limb, the biomaterial was place between the graft and the receptor bed, according to the group, while the right limb served as the control group. All the animals were evaluated clinically every 48 hours until the 14th day, using the variables of exudation, coloration, edema and cosmetic appearance. Three animals were evaluated histologically, on the third, seventh and tenth postoperative days, using the variables of fibroblasts, collagen, granulation tissue, microscopic integration-adherence and acute inflammation.
RESULTS: Clinical evaluations showed that the group CF showed better scores for all variables compared to PRP group. On the histological evaluations PRP group had a higher presence of fibroblasts in the seventh and fourteenth days.
CONCLUSION: The fibrin glue group was clinically superior to the platelet-rich group when used on full-thickness skin grafts in dogs.

### PMID 23109074 (2012) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Reducing postoperative pain: the use of Tisseel for mesh fixation in inguinal hernia repair.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The new objective in primary hernia surgery should be the reduction of disabling chronic pain. This article will discuss the safety, efficacy, and reduction of pain of a sutureless glue mesh procedure for primary uncomplicated inguinal hernia repair.
METHODS: We began performing sutureless glue mesh repairs in 2004 for primary uncomplicated inguinal hernias with good results. After reduction of the hernia sac, polypropylene medium-weight preshaped flat mesh is fixed to the posterior inguinal wall with 0.5 mL of fibrin glue on the pubic tubercle; another 1.5 mL is sprayed on the entire mesh surface. The cord is positioned in subcutaneous space. The TI.ME.LI (Tissucol/Tisseel for MEsh fixation in LIchtenstein hernia repair) trial was planned and conducted based on this experience.
RESULTS: In two years, we treated more than 600 primary inguinal hernias with fibrin glue mesh fixation repair. At follow-up (2 to 96 months after surgery), no patients presented with severe pain, 2.7% of patients complained of moderate pain.
CONCLUSION: Fibrin sealant for mesh fixation in open repair is well tolerated and it should be considered as a first-line option for mesh fixation in open inguinal hernia repair.

### PMID 22648108 (2012) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Differences in biomechanical stability using various fibrin glue compositions for mesh fixation in endoscopic inguinal hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-012-2339-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: In hernia surgery, mesh fixation with fibrin glue instead of tacks and sutures can demonstrably reduce postoperative morbidity without increasing recurrence rates. In some cases there are significant differences in the biomechanical properties, depending on the functional structure of the meshes. Furthermore, there are various fibrin glue products on the market and these are used for mesh fixation. This study compared the fixation strength of fibrin glues in combination with various meshes.
METHODS: Three different lightweight polypropylene meshes (TiMESH&#x2122; light, ULTRAPRO&#x2122;, Optilene(&#xae;) LP) were tested. All meshes were fixed using 2 ml of each of the three different fibrin glues (TISSUCOL(&#xae;), QUIXIL(&#xae;), EVICEL(&#xae;)) and tested for their biomechanical stability. The defect in the muscle tissue used was 45 mm for a mesh size of 10 &#xd7; 15 cm. Measurements were conducted using a standardized stamp penetration test, while aiming not to use a fixation strength of less than 32 N.
RESULTS: With TISSUCOL, the fixation of Optilene LP proved to be significantly better than that of TiMESH or ULTRAPRO (97.3 vs. 47.9 vs. 34.9 N, p &lt; 0.001). With EVICEL, it was possible to also achieve good tissue fixation for the ULTRAPRO mesh, while the results obtained for Optilene and TiMESH were relatively poorer [114.7 vs. 92.4 N (p = 0.056), vs. 64.3 N (p &lt; 0.001)]. With QUIXIL, satisfactory results were obtained only for Optilene LP (43.6 N).
CONCLUSION: This study showed that there were significant differences in the fixation strength of different polypropylene meshes in combination with various fibrin glues. Experiments demonstrated that for each mesh there is an optimum combination with a particular fibrin glue with respect to the fixation strength. It must now be verified whether these results can be extrapolated to clinical practice.

### PMID 22395092 (2012) — Annals of surgery
TITLE: Randomized, controlled, blinded trial of Tisseel/Tissucol for mesh fixation in patients undergoing Lichtenstein technique for primary inguinal hernia repair: results of the TIMELI trial.
DOI: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e31824b32bf | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Test the hypothesis that fibrin sealant mesh fixation can reduce the incidence of postoperative pain/numbness/groin discomfort by up to 50% compared with sutures for repair of inguinal hernias using the Lichtenstein technique.
BACKGROUND: Inguinal hernia repair is the most common procedure in general surgery, thus improvements in surgical techniques, which reduce the burden of undesirable postoperative outcomes, are of clinical importance.
METHODS: A randomized, controlled, patient- and evaluator-blinded study (Tissucol/Tisseel for MEsh fixation in LIchtenstein hernia repair [TIMELI]; trial NCT00306839) was conducted among patients eligible for Lichtenstein repair of uncomplicated unilateral primary inguinal small-medium sized hernia. Patients were subject to mesh fixation with either fibrin sealant or sutures. Main outcome measures were visual analogue scale (VAS) assessments for "pain," "numbness," and "groin discomfort" on a scale of 0 = best and 100 = worst outcome. The primary endpoint was a composite that evaluated the prevalence of chronic disabling complications (VAS score &gt;30 for pain/numbness/groin discomfort) at 12 months after surgery.
RESULTS: In total, 319 patients were randomized between January 2006 and April 2007 (159 fibrin sealant, 160 sutures). At 12 months, the prevalence of 1 or more disabling complication was significantly lower in the fibrin sealant group than in the sutures group (8.1% vs 14.8%; P = 0.0344). Less pain was reported in the fibrin sealant group than in the sutures group at 1 and 6 months (P = 0.0132; P = 0.0052), as reflected by a lower proportion of patients using analgesics in the fibrin group over the study duration (65.2% vs 79.7%; P = 0.0009). Only 3 of 316 patients (0.9%) experienced recurrence. The incidences of wound-healing complications and other adverse events were comparable between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant for mesh fixation in Lichtenstein repair of small-medium sized inguinal hernias is well tolerated and reduces the rate of pain/numbness/groin discomfort by 45% relative to sutures without increasing hernia recurrence (NCT00306839).

### PMID 22278103 (2012) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Use of fibrin sealant (Tisseel/Tissucol) in hernia repair: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-012-2156-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Abdominal wall and inguinal hernia repair are the most frequently performed surgical procedures in the United States and Europe. However, traditional methods of mesh fixation are associated with a number of problems including substantial risks of recurrence and of postoperative and chronic pain. The aim of this systematic review is to summarize the clinical safety and efficacy of Tisseel/Tissucol fibrin sealant for hernia mesh fixation.
METHODS: A PubMed title/abstract search was conducted using the following terms: (fibrin glue OR fibrin sealant OR Tisseel OR Tissucol) AND hernia repair. The bibliographies of the publications identified in the search were reviewed for additional references.
RESULTS: There were 36 Tisseel/Tissucol studies included in this review involving 5,993 patients undergoing surgery for hernia. In open repair of inguinal hernias, Tisseel compared favorably with traditional methods of mesh fixation, being associated with shorter operative times and hospital stays and a lower incidence of chronic pain. Similarly, after laparoscopic/endoscopic inguinal hernia repair, Tisseel/Tissucol was associated with less use of postoperative analgesics and less acute and chronic postoperative pain than tissue-penetrating mesh-fixation methods. Other end points of concern to surgeons and patients are the risks of inguinal hernia recurrence and of complications such as hematoma formation and intraoperative bleeding. Comparative studies show that Tisseel/Tissucol does not increase the risk of these outcomes and may, in fact, decrease the risk compared with tissue-penetrating fixation methods. When used in the repair of incisional hernias, Tisseel/Tissucol significantly decreased both postoperative morbidity and duration of hospital stay.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical evidence published to date supports the use of Tisseel/Tissucol as an option for mesh fixation in open and laparoscopic/endoscopic repair of inguinal and incisional hernias. Guidelines of the International Endohernia Society recommend fibrin sealant mesh fixation, especially in inguinal hernia repair. Nonfixation is reserved for selected cases.

### PMID 21935622 (2012) — International orthopaedics
TITLE: Initial stability of two different adhesives compared to suture repair for acute Achilles tendon rupture--a biomechanical evaluation.
DOI: 10.1007/s00264-011-1357-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Treatment of acute subcutaneous Achilles tendon rupture remains challenging. Whereas the results of conservative and operative treatment are inconsistent, early mobilisation treatment seems to be beneficial. Besides suture repair, operative treatment using adhesives reveals promising results. Our hypothesis was that a gluing technique provides initial stability comparable to sutures.
METHODS: In a biomechanical study, 18 fresh frozen sheep Achilles tendons were used to compare the biomechanical properties of suture repair using PDS&#xae; II and Bunnell's technique to tendon gluing using BioGlue&#xae; and Tissucol&#xae;. Load to failure testing was performed.
RESULTS: Ultimate failure loads of sutures (146.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;30.8 N) are significantly superior to the techniques using BioGlue&#xae; (38.4&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;18.3 N; p &lt;0.0001) or Tissucol&#xae; (4.7&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.5 N; p &lt;0.0001). Interestingly, no significant differences in stiffness were found between the application of BioGlue&#xae; and PDS&#xae; II.
CONCLUSIONS: Suture repair provides significantly superior biomechanical properties compared to the use of both tested adhesives BioGlue&#xae; and Tissucol&#xae;. Based on the presented data we recommend the use of suture material for open Achilles tendon repair.

### PMID 21840102 (2012) — Journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery : official journal of the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
TITLE: Application of platelet-rich plasma for enhanced bone regeneration in grafted sinus.
DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2011.04.027 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D018848">Controlled Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The present study was conducted to evaluate the effect of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) on new bone formation and remodeling after grafting of the maxillary sinus with an algae-derived hydroxyapatite AlgOss/C Graft/Algipore.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fourteen consecutive patients with severely atrophic maxillae underwent uni- or bilateral grafting of the maxillary sinus with a mixture of collected bone, algae-derived hydroxyapatite AlgOss/C Graft/Algipore (ratio 1:10), and a combined addition of PRP and thrombin (Tissucol Kit; Baxter, Vienna, Austria) to allow for fast clotting. After an average healing period of 7.1 months bone samples were retrieved. Patients from a former consecutive series treated without PRP served as control group. Statistical analysis was done by Welch 2-sample t test and mixed linear model testing.
RESULTS: In the coronal specimen portions, mean values for newly formed bone area, biomaterial area and marrow space of 32.2% &#xb1; 10.4%, 20.1% &#xb1; 13.0%, and 47.7% &#xb1; 8.5% were found with PRP, respectively. In the control group the corresponding values were 27.6% &#xb1; 13.4%, 20.3% &#xb1; 12.9%, and 52.1% &#xb1; 9.3%. In the apical specimen portions in the PRP group, the newly formed bone area, biomaterial area, and marrow space was 25.7% &#xb1; 15.0%, 23.4% &#xb1; 14.9%, and 50.9% &#xb1; 12.5%, respectively. The corresponding values in the control group were 17.0% &#xb1; 8.6%, 34.5% &#xb1; 11.2%, and 48.5% &#xb1; 8.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: Statistical evaluation of the samples proved significantly better overall resorption of algae-derived hydroxyapatite AlgOss/C Graft/Algipore and increased new bone formation when PRP was used, especially in the apical region.

### PMID 21819522 (2012) — Colorectal disease : the official journal of the Association of Coloproctology of Great Britain and Ireland
TITLE: Long-term results of surgery plus fibrin sealant for anal fistula.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1463-1318.2011.02747.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: The long-term recurrence rate of fibrin glue treatment was analysed in patients with trans-sphincteric cryptoglandular fistula operated by a two-phase procedure: (i) fistulectomy with seton placement; (ii) fibrin sealant (Tissucol Duo&#xae;, Baxter) insertion in the track.
METHOD: Clinical data were collected prospectively for all patients operated between 2004 and 2010. The statistical association of clinical variables and recurrence was analysed and a disease-free curve was constructed using the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: Twenty-eight consecutive patients (mean age 48.3 &#xb1; 13.3 years; 22 men) were enrolled in the study. Middle and high trans-sphincteric fistulae were diagnosed in 20 (71.4%) and eight (28.6%) patients. Seven (25%) had secondary track formation. The mean interval between the first operation and the fibrin sealant treatment was 12.5 &#xb1; 7.6 months. There were no complications related to the procedure. Nine (32.1%, 95% CI 17.9-50.7%) patients developed recurrence between 3 and 27 months after fibrin sealant treatment. Disease-free curves showed that the highest probability of recurrence occurred in the first 2 years. No incontinence was found at a mean follow-up of 20.6 (3-60) months among the 67.8% patients with no evidence of recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Fibrin sealant is safe and simple. The healing rate is satisfactory without the risk of incontinence.

### PMID 22560324 (2012) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Comparative study of lung sealants in a porcine ex vivo model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.03.050 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Lung sealants are often used to prevent alveolar air leaks after lung resection surgery. Some sealants have shown to be effective in clinical studies, but extensive comparative evaluation has not yet been conducted. We aimed to evaluate different sealant burst pressures in an ex vivo model mimicking air leakage after lung resection.
METHODS: Fifty-four porcine lungs comprised the study material. Six different sealants were evaluated: Bioglue (V-Tech, Roskilde, Denmark), TachoSil (Nycomed, Roskilde, Denmark), Tisseel (Baxter, Aller&#xf8;d, Denmark), Evicel (OMRIX biopharmaceuticals S.A, Rhode-St-Gen&#xe8;se, Belgium), TissuePatchDural (Vingmed, Roskilde, Denmark), and Pleuraseal (Covidien, Copenhagen, Denmark). After creating a standardized pleural defect, each lung was randomized into 1 of the 6 treatment groups (n= 9). Each lung was ventilated with incremental airway pressure. Air leakage was assessed after each increment. If leakage occurred, the burst pressure was recorded.
RESULTS: The Evicel fibrin sealant and Tisseel fibrin sealant exhibited significantly lower burst pressures compared with the Bioglue, TachoSil, and Pleuraseal (p &lt; 0.05). Bioglue had the highest median burst pressure (55 cm H(2)O) followed by TachoSil (35 cm H(2)O), PleuraSeal (35 cm H(2)O), TissuePatchDural (25 cm H(2)O), Evicel (15 cm H(2)O), and Tisseel (15 cm H(2)O).
CONCLUSIONS: This model has shown to be feasible in determining and comparing the burst pressures of different lung sealants. Further studies are needed to determine responses in living tissue and burst pressure over time in vivo.

### PMID 21740379 (2012) — Current pharmaceutical biotechnology
TITLE: In search of a consensus terminology in the field of platelet concentrates for surgical use: platelet-rich plasma (PRP), platelet-rich fibrin (PRF), fibrin gel polymerization and leukocytes.
DOI: 10.2174/138920112800624328 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: In the field of platelet concentrates for surgical use, most products are termed Platelet-Rich Plasma (PRP). Unfortunately, this term is very general and incomplete, leading to many confusions in the scientific database. In this article, a panel of experts discusses this issue and proposes an accurate and simple terminology system for platelet concentrates for surgical use. Four main categories of products can be easily defined, depending on their leukocyte content and fibrin architecture: Pure Platelet-Rich Plasma (P-PRP), such as cell separator PRP, Vivostat PRF or Anitua's PRGF; Leukocyteand Platelet-Rich Plasma (L-PRP), such as Curasan, Regen, Plateltex, SmartPReP, PCCS, Magellan, Angel or GPS PRP; Pure Plaletet-Rich Fibrin (P-PRF), such as Fibrinet; and Leukocyte- and Platelet-Rich Fibrin (L-PRF), such as Choukroun's PRF. P-PRP and L-PRP refer to the unactivated liquid form of these products, their activated versions being respectively named P-PRP gels and L-PRP gels. The purpose of this search for a terminology consensus is to plead for a more serious characterization of these products. Researchers have to be aware of the complex nature of these living biomaterials, in order to avoid misunderstandings and erroneous conclusions. Understanding the biomaterials or believing in the magic of growth factors ? From this choice depends the future of the field.

### PMID 22609726 (2012) — Spine
TITLE: The frequency and treatment of dural tears and cerebrospinal fluid leakage in 266 patients with thoracic myelopathy caused by ossification of the ligamentum flavum.
DOI: 10.1097/BRS.0b013e31824586a8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective review.
OBJECTIVE: To perform a single-institution analysis of incidence, treatment, and clinical outcome in patients with thoracic ossification of the ligamentum flavum (OLF) who experienced dural tears and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: There is a paucity of clinical reports focusing on dural tears and CSF leakage after thoracic OLF surgery. Because dural adhesion and dural ossification are common features of thoracic OLF, the incidence of CSF leakage in OLF patients is high and represents a significant clinical challenge.
METHODS: A total of 266 patients with thoracic OLF were admitted to our hospital from 1995 to 2011. Each patient's medical records were reviewed to identify cases of dural tears and CSF leakage. Information on therapeutic strategy used to repair the dural tears and complications related to CSF leakage was extracted.
RESULTS: The incidence of dural tears and CSF leakage in OLF patients was 32% (85/266). The incidence of dural ossification was 25.2%. The dural tears were repaired with a range of materials, including gelatin sponge, muscle/fascia, artificial dura, silk suture, and fibrin glue. The intraoperative repair procedure did not resolve CSF leakage in 65 cases, and 16 of those cases experienced complications related to the continued CSF leakage, including CSF pseudocyst, wound dehiscence, and meningitis. Fifty-eight patients with CSF leakage were eventually cured by a series of comprehensive treatments, which included prone position, continuous pressure by sandbag, ultrasound-guided puncture, and aspiration. Only 7 patients required reoperation.
CONCLUSION: Dural ossification was the main reason for dural tears. In all, 78 of the 85 patients with CSF leakage or dural tear were successfully cured. The success rate was 91.8%, which indicated that a series of comprehensive treatments was an effective strategy to treat these patients.

### PMID 22823172 (2012) — Asian journal of endoscopic surgery
TITLE: Diaphragmatic repair of hepatic hydrothorax with VATS after abdominal insufflation with CO(2).
DOI: 10.1111/j.1758-5910.2012.00133.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Hepatic hydrothorax is defined as the presence of a significant pleural effusion that develops in a patient with cirrhosis of the liver who does not have an underlying cardiac or pulmonary disease. There have been few published case reports dealing with hepatic hydrothorax treated surgically. Recently, we treated a patient with refractory hepatic hydrothorax by directly suturing the diaphragmatic defect during VATS. During surgery, the diaphragmatic defect was identified by using abdominal insufflation with CO(2) . The defect was sutured and the diaphragm was covered by polyglycolic acid felt and fibrin glue. After surgery, the patient's pleural effusion improved, his postoperative course was uneventful and he did not require a drainage tube at discharge.

### PMID 23098956 (2012) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Successful application of subcutaneous adipose tissue with fibrin glue in conservative treatment of tracheobronchial rupture.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2012.03.100 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An 84-year-old woman underwent aortic and mitral valve replacement. After weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass, hemorrhage was observed in the endobronchial tube. The bleeding bronchus was isolated to protect the airway using the blocker cuff of a Univent tube (Fuji Systems Corp, Tokyo, Japan). Computed tomography showed a pulmonary pseudoaneurysm in the left upper lobe. She underwent selective pulmonary angiography and embolization of the pseudoaneurysm. Bronchoscopy revealed a 5-mm bronchial rupture at the left upper lobe bronchus. The laceration was filled with adipose tissue and fibrin glue. Bronchoscopy showed a completely reepithelialized membrane, and she was discharged 38 days postoperatively.

### PMID 23061032 (2012) — APSP journal of case reports
TITLE: Chylothorax after Primary Repair of Esophageal Atresia with Tracheo-esophageal Fistula: Successful Management by Biological Fibrin Glue.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A neonate, who had undergone primary repair of esophageal atresia with tracheo-esophageal fistula, developed right pleural effusion in the postoperative period. It was initially misdiagnosed as an anastomotic leak, but later confirmed to be chylothorax. Conservative treatment failed. Application of biological fibrin glue (sealant) on the mediastinum through a thoracotomy was curative.

### PMID 22530472 (2012) — The Annals of otology, rhinology, and laryngology
TITLE: Variability of postoperative esophagrams after endoscopic cricopharyngeal myotomy: technique dependence.
DOI: 10.1177/000348941212100301 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: We illustrate the dependence of postoperative day (POD) 1 esophagram findings on the closure technique used after endoscopic cricopharyngeal myotomy (ECPM).
METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart review of POD 1 fluoroscopic examinations of the cervical esophagus utilizing contrast dye after ECPM to assess radiologic findings associated with three different techniques of addressing the exposed buccopharyngeal fascia (BPF).
RESULTS: Each technique resulted in specific and different findings on the POD 1 esophagram. When the BPF was untreated, the esophagram demonstrated a pseudodiverticulum with free flow of contrast dye. When a fibrin glue seal was used, the esophagram demonstrated a curvilinear focus of contrast dye projected over the retropharyngeal soft tissue persisting after the swallow, similar to a leak. When fibrin glue application was combined with single-suture reapproximation of the mucosal incision, the pattern was similar to esophagrams performed 6 weeks after myotomy.
CONCLUSIONS: Different techniques used to address the exposed BPF following ECPM result in specific findings on the POD 1 esophagram. Recognition of these imaging differences and open communication with the fluoroscopist will avoid a misdiagnosis of a pharyngeal leak, which might cause an unnecessary delay of oral feeding and hospital discharge.

### PMID 22083323 (2012) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Multimedia manuscript. Thoracoscopic management of chylothorax after esophagectomy.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-011-1988-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Video-Audio Media
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Chylothorax after esophagectomy is a potentially life-threatening complication, with a reported incidence rate of 1-4%. Two cases of postoperative chylothorax successfully managed thoracoscopically are reported.
METHODS: In case 1, a 61-year-old man presenting with an adenocarcinoma of the lower esophagus underwent laparoscopic transhiatal esophagectomy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. The thoracic duct was identified, and no obvious leaks were detected. The thoracic drain was removed on postoperative day (POD) 6, and chest X-rays were normal. The patient was discharged on POD 10. On POD 20, he was readmitted for acute cardiopulmonary distress. Computed tomography scan showed a massive right collection. After insertion of a chest tube, 8 l of chylous fluid were drained. Once hemodynamic stabilization had been established, the patient was scheduled for surgery. In case 2, a 54-year-old woman presenting with esophageal stenosis after caustic injury refractory to balloon dilation and stenting underwent esophagectomy. Mediastinal dissection was difficult due to fibrotic reaction. On POD 2, the patient presented with a massive chylothorax. In both cases, three trocars were inserted in the right pleural cavity. An incomplete lateral injury of the thoracic duct was found in case 1, and a complete transection proximal to the cervical anastomosis next to the left subclavian was found in case 2. Clips and sutures were used first to seal the duct. Fibrin glue was applied to reinforce the closure. A chest tube was left in place.
RESULTS: The operative time was 60 min in case 1 and 55 min in case 2. The chylothorax did not recur, although the postoperative course was longer in case 2 due to associate comorbidities.
CONCLUSIONS: The thoracic duct is exposed to injuries during esophagectomies, especially in cases of cancer and postcaustic injuries, leading to fibrotic reaction of the surrounding tissue. Early and delayed chylothorax can be managed efficiently by a thoracoscopic approach replicating the sealing techniques used in thoracotomy.

### PMID 21993936 (2012) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Transesophageal endoscopic myotomy for achalasia: recognizing potential pitfalls before clinical application.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-011-1937-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Laparoscopic Heller esophagomyotomy is the standard of care for achalasia treatment. This procedure, although effective, must be performed with the patient under general anesthesia and is associated with several serious potential complications. The authors aimed to develop a method of performing transesophageal endoscopic esophagomyotomy (TEEM) that would obviate the need for both general anesthesia and external incisions while offering lower intra- and postoperative complications.
METHODS: The TEEM procedure was performed on eight pigs. For six of the pigs, the procedure aimed at survival. A mid-esophageal mucosal incision was performed using an endoscope, and a submucosal plane was developed. The lower esophageal sphincter (LES) muscle fibers were clearly visualized and divided. The mucosal incision was closed using fibrin sealant. After 2 weeks of survival, a gastrografin swallow study and necropsy were performed.
RESULTS: The TEEM procedure was performed successfully in all eight porcine models. The myotomy included the LES fibers and extended 4 to 6 cm proximally to the esophagus. The proximal gastric muscle was divided up to 1 to 2 cm. No injuries to the abdominal or mediastinal structures occurred. One pig died on postoperative day 1 due to an unrecognized pneumothorax. Two pigs had ischemic ulcers at the myotomy site. The last three pigs had an uneventful recovery. The mucosal incision site healed completely in all the survived pigs, and except for the pig with mediastinal sepsis, all ate heartily and gained weight as expected.
CONCLUSION: The TEEM procedure is technically feasible. Due to the morbidity encountered in the first three pigs, the reported technique was modified to include a slimmer endoscope, a shorter tunnel, and a partial-thickness myotomy. These changes together with an understanding of the pitfalls involved in this procedure led to successful results for the next three pigs. Nevertheless, the authors believe that TEEM is not yet ready for prime time. Perfection of the technique and development of dedicated instruments are mandatory before safe translation of this method to human patients.

### PMID 22726101 (2012) — Haemophilia : the official journal of the World Federation of Hemophilia
TITLE: Treatment of inherited platelet disorders.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2012.02842.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: For patients affected by severe inherited platelet dysfunctions, e.g. Glanzmann thrombasthenia (GT) or Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS), platelet transfusion is frequently needed for controlling spontaneous bleeding, and is always needed when trauma occurs or surgery is performed. For the mild-to-moderate bleeding entities, e.g. storage pool disease, thrombaxane A2 receptor defect, platelet transfusion is usually unnecessary. Transfusion of platelets should be used selectively and sparingly because of the substantial risk of alloimmunization against HLA antigens and/or platelet glycoproteins (GP) &#x3b1;IIb, &#x3b2;(3), or &#x3b1;IIb&#x3b2;(3) in GT, and GPI-IX-V in BSS, which may lead to refractoriness to therapy. To reduce the risk, HLA-matched single donors of platelets should be used. If such donors are unavailable, leucocyte-depleted blood components should be used. Therapy other than platelet transfusion includes: (i) Prevention (vaccination against hepatitis B, avoidance of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, preservation of dental hygiene, correction of iron deficiency and prenatal diagnosis). (ii) Topical measures (compression with gauze soaked with tranexamic acid, fibrin sealants, splints for dental extractions and packing for nose bleeds). (iii) Antifibrinolytic agents that are useful for minor surgery and as adjuncts for other treatment modalities. (iv) Desmopressin that increases plasma levels of von Willebrand factor and factor VIII giving rise to increased platelet adhesiveness and aggregation associated with shortened bleeding time. (v) Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa). GT patients have been treated for bleeding episodes by rFVIIa with partial success. The mechanism by which rFVIIa arrests bleeding is probably related to increased thrombin generation by a tissue factor-independent process, enhanced platelet adhesion and restoration of platelet aggregation. (vi) Female hormones. Excessive bleeding during menarche in patients with GT or BSS can be controlled by high doses of oestrogen followed by high doses of oral oestrogen-progestin. Menorrhagia later in life can be managed by continuous oral contraceptives. Depo-medroxyprogesterone acetate administered every 3 months is an alternative when combined oral contraceptives are contraindicated.

### PMID 22245545 (2012) — Biologicals : journal of the International Association of Biological Standardization
TITLE: Salmon fibrin glue in rats: antibody studies.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2011.12.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Fibrin sealants and topical thrombin preparations are often used for haemostatic and sealing applications in clinical practice. Some of these preparations contain coagulation factors from bovine sources. To minimize the risk of infection and immunogenicity connected with mammalian blood products, proteins derived from the plasma of farmed Atlantic salmon have been considered as an alternative to these mammalian sources. The purpose of this study is to characterize the immunogenicity of salmon fibrin glue in an animal model focusing on crossreactivity of IgG antibodies to host endogenous counterparts. After two immunizations with salmon fibrin glue, rats developed antibodies of IgG and IgM type to both fibrin glue components. Weak crossreactivity to endogenous fibrinogen and thrombin was seen in a subset of rats after the second application of salmon proteins. Coagulation tests showed that salmon fibrin application has no effect on coagulation profiles in mammalian hosts, consistent with previous reports that found no evidence of significant crossreactivity with host proteins. These studies support the potential suitability of salmon fibrin glue for the development of preparations with clinical impact. Before human use can be considered, however, additional data about safety of this preparation in other animal models, including large animal studies, should be obtained.

### PMID 22074613 (2011) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Several clinical interests regarding lung volume reduction surgery for severe emphysema: meta-analysis and systematic review of randomized controlled trials.
DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-6-148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: We aim to address several clinical interests regarding lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS) for severe emphysema using meta-analysis and systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCTs).
METHODS: Eight RCTs published from 1999 to 2010 were identified and synthesized to compare the efficacy and safety of LVRS vs conservative medical therapy. One RCT was obtained regarding comparison of median sternotomy (MS) and video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). And three RCTs were available evaluating clinical efficacy of using bovine pericardium for buttressing, autologous fibrin sealant and BioGlue, respectively.
RESULTS: Odds ratio (95%CI), expressed as the mortality of group A (the group underwent LVRS) versus group B (conservative medical therapies), was 5.16(2.84, 9.35) in 3 months, 3(0.94, 9.57) in 6 months, 1.05(0.82, 1.33) in 12 months, respectively. On the 3rd, 6th and 12th month, all lung function indices of group A were improved more significantly as compared with group B. PaO2 and PaCO2 on the 6th and 12th month showed the same trend. 6MWD of group A on the 6th month and 12th month were improved significantly than of group B, despite no difference on the 3rd month. Quality of life (QOL) of group A was better than of group B in 6 and 12 months. VATS is preferred to MS, due to the earlier recovery and lower cost. And autologous fibrin sealant and BioGlue seems to be the efficacious methods to reduce air leak following LVRS.
CONCLUSIONS: LVRS offers the more benefits regarding survival, lung function, gas exchange, exercise capacity and QOL, despite the higher mortality in initial three postoperative months. LVRS, with the optimization of surgical approach and material for reinforcement of the staple lines, should be recommended to patients suffering from severe heterogeneous emphysema.

### PMID 21989779 (2011) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Study of dural suture watertightness: an in vitro comparison of different sealants.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-011-1197-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: CSF leakages constitute a major complication of intradural procedures, especially for posterior fossa and skull base surgery. Dural suture watertightness is a decisive issue, and neurosurgeons routinely use different products to reinforce their dural closure. We have designed an experimental system capable of testing CSF leak pressure levels in order to compare two types of sutures in vitro and particularly four different sealants.
METHODS: Twenty-five fresh human cadaveric dural samples were removed and prepared for testing in a pressure chamber system connected to a hydraulic pressure motor. CSF leak levels were objectively registered. First, simple interrupted stitches were compared to running simple closure on 50-mm linear suture. Secondly, four sealants (two sealants/glues, Bioglue&#xae;, Duraseal&#xae;; two haemostatics, Tachosil&#xae;, Tissucol&#xae;) were tested. Statistical analysis was performed with paired Student's t-test.
RESULTS: No significant difference between interrupted closure and running suture was observed (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.079). All sealants increased the watertightness of the suture significatively. However, comparison of the means of the differences for each product revealed large variations. In the conditions of our experiment, one sealant (Duraseal&#xae;) and one haemostatic (Tachosil&#xae;) seemed to show better results. We observed two different types of leakage: at the dura-sealant interface and through the sealant itself.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed an experimental device capable of testing dural closure watertightness. Interrupted stitch suturing seemed no different from running simple closure. On the contrary, the sealants tested show different watertightness capacities.

### PMID 21638854 (2011) — Rozhledy v chirurgii : mesicnik Ceskoslovenske chirurgicke spolecnosti
TITLE: [Effect of biological glues on vascular wall in an experimental model of aortic dissection].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The use of biological glues and their application between the two dissection layers and into the anastomosis region is a common integral part of surgical management of thoracic aortic dissections.
AIM: The aim of the experimental study was to assess and evaluate histopathological changes of vascular wall following deposition of the following three types of glue--GRF, Tissucol, Bioglue, based on qualitative and quantitative parameters. The secondary aim of the study was to assess dynamics of these changes depending on the glue effect duration and to formulate expected behaviour of the vascular wall during the time beyond the experimental period.
METHODOLOGY: The dissection model was performed with pigs of the same gender and age, assigned to four groups. Different glues were used to close artificial infrarenal aortic dissections in Group 1-3, while direct suturing and no glue was used to close false lumini in Group 4. Samples of the dissected aorta were then collected at Month 1, 6 and 12 and then histologically examined.
RESULTS: Upon assessment of the whole group of qualitative and quantitative parameters, the most significant changes in the smooth muscle histological picture were observed with the use GRF glue. The smooth muscle changes following the Bioglue application and, in particular, Tissucol glue application, are similar to changes observed in Group 4, where no glue was used.
CONCLUSION: Based on the results, the authors present a hypothesis that, in a long-time horizont, vascular wall destructions, eventually redissections, are likely to occur more frequently in patients, in whom GRF glue is used.

### PMID 21206312 (2011) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Prevention of cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea after transsphenoidal surgery by collagen fleece coated with fibrin sealant without autologous tissue graft or postoperative lumbar drainage.
DOI: 10.1227/NEU.0b013e318207b4ea | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Autologous tissue grafting and postoperative lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) drainage (PLD) have been used to prevent CSF rhinorrhea after transsphenoidal surgery.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the technical details and efficacy of our techniques of using collagen fleece coated with fibrin sealant (TachoComb, Nycomed, Linz, Austria) instead of an autologous tissue graft and refraining from the use of PLD.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 307 consecutive patients who underwent a transsphenoidal surgery for pituitary adenoma from November 2005 to February 2008. Among them, 90 cases of intraoperative CSF leaks were repaired with TachoComb without an autologous tissue graft or PLD. The repair procedures were tailored according to CSF leakage type, and we used only Bioglue (Cryolife Inc, Atlanta, Georgia) for sellar floor reconstruction.
RESULTS: The overall rate of CSF rhinorrhea was 2.2% (2 of 90 cases). The 2 cases of CSF rhinorrhea resulted from large arachnoid defects, and there were no adverse effects from TachoComb such as transmission of viral disease or infection.
CONCLUSION: Our technique is an alternative method to the traditional autologous tissue graft technique. PLD is not an essential procedure for the prevention of CSF rhinorrhea if the intraoperative CSF leak is completely sealed off during the transsphenoidal surgery. However, in cases of large arachnoid defects, aggressive repair of the arachnoid defect and sellar floor reconstruction with bone or bony substitutes should be considered in conjunction with our methods.

### PMID 21264676 (2011) — Techniques in coloproctology
TITLE: Protection of intestinal anastomosis with biological glues: an experimental randomized controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s10151-010-0674-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to compare the degree of healing and air tightness of hand-sewn colonic anastomoses provided by different biological glues.
METHODS: Thirty colonic anastomoses were fashioned in ten rabbits, at 5, 10, 15 cm from the ileocecal valve, with 4/0 PDS running sutures. Each suture was randomized to treatment with fibrin sealant (Tissucol&#xae;), a synthetic glue (Coseal&#xae;), or nothing (control). After 15 days, the rabbits were killed and the anastomoses examined for their integrity and resistance to bursting. The van der Hamm scale was used to evaluate postoperative adhesions. A blind histological evaluation of the newly formed tissue was made (Ehrlich-Hunt scale).
RESULTS: Two rabbits developed an intraabdominal abscess, one in the control anastomosis group without glue. Postoperative adhesions were present in all animals. Median anastomosis bursting pressures were 0.9 atm in all three groups: Tissucol, Coseal, and control. Pressure values were 0.9, 1.0, and 0.9 atm in the three different proximodistal sites, respectively. A trend toward an increased resistance was observed in the glued anastomosis, although this was not significant. Lymphocyte infiltration, fibroblast activity, blood vessel density, and collagen deposition were lower in controls. Anastomoses treated with Tissucol had the highest lymphocyte infiltration level. The Coseal group developed the highest rates of fibroblast activity, collagen deposition, and blood vessel neogenesis.
CONCLUSION: The use of biological glues did not result in a statistically significantly increased bursting resistance. Histological evaluation demonstrated more intense tissue neoformation in the glue groups, particularly in the Coseal group. The role of biological glues in decreasing the leakage rate of intestinal anastomoses is uncertain, and larger trials using different protective agents are warranted.

### PMID 21806360 (2011) — Journal of neurosurgery. Pediatrics
TITLE: Complications following decompression of Chiari malformation Type I in children: dural graft or sealant?
DOI: 10.3171/2011.5.PEDS10362 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECT: Posterior fossa decompression with duraplasty for Chiari malformation Type I (CM-I) is a common pediatric neurosurgery procedure. Published series report a complication rate ranging from 3% to 40% for this procedure. Historically, many dural substitutes have been used, including bovine grafts, human cadaveric pericardium, synthetic dura, and autologous pericranium. The authors hypothesized that a recently observed increase in complications was dependent on the graft used.
METHODS: Between January 2004 and January 2008, 114 consecutive patients &#x2264; 18 years old underwent primary CM-I decompression using duraplasty. Records were retrospectively reviewed for short- and intermediate-term complications and operative technique, focusing on the choice of duraplasty graft with or without application of a tissue sealant.
RESULTS: The average age of the patients was 8.6 years. The dural graft used was variable: 15 were treated with cadaveric pericardium, 12 with Durepair, and 87 with EnDura. Tisseel was used in 75 patients, DuraSeal in 12, and no tissue sealant was used in 27 patients. The overall complication rate was 21.1%. The most common complications included aseptic meningitis, symptomatic pseudomeningocele, or a CSF leak requiring reoperation. The overall complication rates were as follows: cadaveric pericardium 26.7%, Durepair 41.7%, and EnDura 17.2%; reoperation rates were 13%, 25%, and 8.1%, respectively. Prior to adopting a different graft product, the overall complication rate was 18.1%; following the change the rate increased to 35%. Complication rates for tissue sealants were 14.8% for no sealant, 18.7% for Tisseel, and 50% for DuraSeal. Nine patients were treated with the combination of Durepair and DuraSeal and this subgroup had a 56% complication rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Complication rates after CM-I decompression may be dependent on the dural graft with or without the addition of tissue sealant. The complication rate at the authors' institution approximately doubled following the adoption of a different graft product. Tissue sealants used in combination with a dural substitute to augment a duraplasty may increase the risk of aseptic meningitis and/or CSF leak. The mechanism of the apparent increased inflammation with this combination remains under investigation.

### PMID 21552173 (2011) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Evaluation of fibrin sealants for central nervous system sealing in the mongrel dog durotomy model.
DOI: 10.1227/NEU.0b013e318222ad63 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Watertight repair of the dura is imperative after neurosurgical procedures involving the brain or spinal cord because inadequately treated leakage of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from punctured dura can have serious consequences such as meningitis, arachnoiditis, or epidural abscess.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of Evicel Fibrin Sealant (Human) to prevent CSF leakage using a 2.0-cm durotomy mongrel dog repair model and to compare the tissue response with Tisseel (a fibrin sealant) and Duraseal (a synthetic polyethylene glycol [PEG] hydrogel sealant).
METHODS: The canine durotomy repair model was used. This well-characterized model assesses the ability of sealants to achieve intraoperative watertight seals of the dura mater, as well as long-term safety and efficacy. This study included 27 mongrel dogs and had a 28-day duration.
RESULTS: The 3 sealants were 100% effective in preventing CSF leakage intraoperatively at 15 mm Hg. The 2 fibrin sealants were 100% effective in postoperative sealing; the PEG hydrogel was not. Microscopically, the tissue changes induced by Evicel at the durotomy site were similar in nature except for foamy macrophages seen only with the PEG hydrogel. The extent and severity of adhesions at 28 days were less with the fibrin sealants than with the PEG hydrogel.
CONCLUSION: Evicel, a fibrin sealant, was safe and effective in achieving and maintaining a watertight seal of the dura. The performance of the fibrin sealants was similar to that of the synthetic PEG hydrogel sealant with the exception of a Duraseal seal, which leaked.

### PMID 21341127 (2011) — Ulusal travma ve acil cerrahi dergisi = Turkish journal of trauma &amp; emergency surgery : TJTES
TITLE: Comparison of classical surgery and sutureless repair with DuraSeal or fibrin glue for duodenal perforation in rats.
DOI: 10.5505/tjtes.2011.13914 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The purpose of the study was to compare classical primary suture repair and sutureless repair with fibrin glue or DuraSeal adhesion barrier for the closure of duodenal perforation in rats.
METHODS: Forty adult female Wistar Albino rats weighing between 250-300 g were randomly divided into four equal groups. Primary repair, primary repair and omentoplasty, or application of fibrin glue or DuraSeal adhesion barrier was performed in each of the four groups, respectively. The bursting pressure, tissue hydroxyproline levels and histopathology were evaluated.
RESULTS: Bursting pressure values of the primary repair and primary repair and omentoplasty groups were significantly higher than in the fibrin glue and DuraSeal groups (p &lt; 0.001). There were no significant differences between the experimental groups regarding hydroxyproline levels and histological parameters.
CONCLUSION: The sutureless methods (Fibrin glue, DuraSeal) have no superior effects when compared with the conventional repair techniques. We observed similar results between the sutureless repair groups; thus, DuraSeal can be considered an alternative to fibrin glue for this purpose. This suggestion must be supported with new studies, however, which would be planned with other wound healing markers and different designs.

### PMID 21958767 (2011) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Safety and effectiveness of a new fibrin pleural air leak sealant: a multicenter, controlled, prospective, parallel-group, randomized clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.05.104 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the sealing capacity and safety of a new fibrin sealant (FS) to reduce alveolar air leaks (AALs) after pulmonary resections in a randomized controlled clinical trial conducted in 3 Italian centers.
METHODS: The study randomized (1:1) 185 patients with an intraoperative AAL graded 1 to 3 according to the Macchiarini scale: 91 received FS and 94 had standard lung closure. The primary outcomes were the length of postoperative AAL duration and the mean time to chest drain removal. Other end points included the percentage of patients without AAL, the development of serum antibodies against bovine aprotinin, and any adverse event related to FS. Chest drains were removed when fluid output was 100 mL/day or less, with no air leak.
RESULTS: The study groups were comparable with respect to demographic variables and surgical procedures. The FS group showed a statistically significant reduction in duration of postoperative AALs (9.52 vs 35.8 hours; p &lt; 0.005) and in the percentage of patients with AALs at wound closure (81.11% vs 100%; p &lt; 0.001); the difference in time to chest drain removal was not significant. Pleural empyema developed in 1 patient with FS treatment vs in 4 with standard treatment, and antibodies against bovine aprotinin were found in 34 of 91 FS-treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study showed that the new FS is safe and effective in preventing AALs after lung resections and in shortening the duration of postoperative AALs.

### PMID 21802240 (2011) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Knitted nitinol represents a new generation of constrictive external vein graft meshes.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2011.05.023 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Constriction of vein grafts with braided external nitinol meshes had previously led to the successful elimination of neointimal tissue formation. We investigated whether pulse compliance, smaller kink-free bending radius, and milder medial atrophy can be achieved by knitting the meshes rather than braiding, without losing the suppressive effect on intimal hyperplasia.
METHODS: Pulse compliance, bending stiffness, and bending radius, as well as longitudinal-radial deformation-coupling and radial compression, were compared in braided and knitted nitinol meshes. Identical to previous studies with braided mesh grafts, a senescent nonhuman primate model (Chacma baboons; bilateral femoral interposition grafts/6 months) mimicking the clinical size mismatch between vein grafts and runoff arteries was used to examine the effect of knitted external meshes on vein grafts: nitinol mesh-constricted (group 1); nitinol mesh-constricted and fibrin sealant (FS) spray-coated for mesh attachment (group 2); untreated control veins (group 3), and FS spray-coated control veins (group 4).
RESULTS: Compared with braided meshes, knitted meshes had 3.8-times higher pulse compliance (3.43 &#xb1; 0.53 vs 0.94 &#xb1; 0.12%/100 mm Hg; P = .00002); 30-times lower bending stiffness (0.015 &#xb1; 0.002 vs 0.462 &#xb1; 0.077 Nmm(2); P = .0006); 9.2-times narrower kink-free bending radius (15.3 &#xb1; 0.4 vs 140.8 &#xb1; 22.4 mm; P = .0006), and 4.3-times lower radial narrowing caused by axial distension (18.0% &#xb1; 1.0% vs 77.0% &#xb1; 3.7%; P = .00001). Compared with mesh-supported grafts, neointimal tissue was 8.5-times thicker in group I (195 &#xb1; 45 &#x3bc;m) vs group III (23.0 &#xb1; 21.0 &#x3bc;m; P &lt; .001) corresponding with a 14.3-times larger neointimal area in group I (4330 &#xb1; 957 &#xd7; 103 &#x3bc;m(2)) vs group III (303 &#xb1; 221&#xd7; 103 &#x3bc;m(2); P &lt; .00004). FS had no significant influence. Medial muscle mass remained at 43.4% in knitted meshes vs the 28.1% previously observed in braided meshes.
CONCLUSION: Combining the suppression of intimal hyperplasia with a more physiologic remodeling process of the media, manifold higher kink-resistance, and lower fraying than in braided meshes makes knitted nitinol an attractive concept in external vein graft protection.

### PMID 21514114 (2011) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Use of fibrin sealant as a hemostatic agent in expanded polytetrafluoroethylene graft placement surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2010.12.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017427">Clinical Trial, Phase II, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The low thrombogenicity, porosity, and limited elasticity of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) vascular grafts, although beneficial, may exacerbate the problem of suture-line bleeding at vascular anastomoses and consequently lead to increased operating times. The overall objective of this prospective, randomized, controlled, subject-blinded, multicenter phase 2 study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a fibrin sealant containing 500 IU/mL thrombin and synthetic aprotinin (FS; marketed in the United States under the name TISSEEL) for hemostasis in subjects undergoing vascular surgery and receiving prosthetic ePTFE vascular grafts.
METHODS: FS was compared with manual compression with surgical gauze pads, a standard of care for hemostasis in vascular surgery. Two FS polymerization/setting times (60 and 120 seconds) were investigated to evaluate influence on the efficacy results. Patients undergoing ePTFE graft placement surgery (N = 73) who experienced bleeding that required treatment after surgical hemostasis were randomized to be treated with FS with clamps opened at 60 seconds (FS-60; N = 26), with FS with clamps opened at 120 seconds (FS-120; N = 24), or with manual compression with surgical gauze pads (control; N = 23). The proportion of subjects achieving hemostasis at 4 minutes (primary endpoint) as well as at 6 and 10 minutes (secondary endpoints) in the three treatment groups was analyzed using logistic regression analysis, taking into account gender, age, type of intervention, severity of bleeding, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, heparin coating of the ePTFE graft, and platelet inhibitors.
RESULTS: There were substantial differences in the proportion of subjects who achieved hemostasis at the study suture line at 4 minutes from treatment application between FS-120 (62.5%) and control (34.8%) groups (a 79.6% relative improvement). Logistic regression analyses found a statistically significant treatment effect at the 10% level in the odds ratio (OR) of achieving hemostasis at 4 minutes between the FS-120 and control groups (OR = 3.98, p = 0.0991). Furthermore, it has been shown that the perioperative administration of platelet inhibitors significantly influences (OR = 3.89, p = 0.0607) hemostasis rates at the primary endpoint. No statistically significant treatment effects were found for the other factors. Logistic regression analyses performed on the secondary endpoints demonstrated a significant treatment effect of achieving hemostasis at 6 minutes (OR = 9.92, p = 0.0225) and at 10 minutes (OR = 6.70, p = 0.0708) between the FS-120 and control groups. Statistically significant effects in the logistic regression analyses were found at the 10% level in the OR of achieving hemostasis at 6 and 10 minutes, respectively, for the following factors: FS-120 versus control group (OR = 9.92; p = 0.0225 and OR = 6.70; p = 0.0708, respectively), type of intervention (OR = 0.3; p = 0.0775 and OR = 0.25; p = 0.0402, respectively), and heparin coating of the ePTFE prosthesis (OR = 4.83; p&#xa0;= 0.0413 and OR = 3.65; p = 0.0911, respectively). FS was safe and well-tolerated, as indicated by the lack of any related serious adverse events.
CONCLUSION: The findings from this phase 2 study support the strong safety profile of FS and suggest that it is an efficacious hemostatic agent in ePTFE graft placement surgery, as well as a useful tool in peripheral vascular surgery applications.

### PMID 23169029 (2011) — Journal of bronchology &amp; interventional pulmonology
TITLE: Use of fibrin sealant glue as a treatment for massive hemoptysis.
DOI: 10.1097/LBR.0b013e318206e9a0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In patients presenting with massive hemoptysis, it is often challenging to control bleeding. Uncontrolled bleeding can lead to hemodynamic compromise, asphyxiation, and high mortality. We present a case of a patient who presented with massive hemoptysis, and the use of fibrin sealant glue through a bronchoscopic catheter, which was effective in controlling bleeding.

### PMID 21051376 (2011) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: The covering with forceps-assisted polymeric biodegradable sheet and endostapling method: a simplified technique for wide coverage and reinforcement of staple-line in video-assisted thoracoscopic bullectomy for spontaneous pneumothorax.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2010.246124 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Primary spontaneous pneumothorax is one of the most common diseases. To prevent recurrent pneumothorax after video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, various methods of pleural covering with biodegradable polymers have been devised. In addition, using fibrin sealant should be avoided as far as possible because of its infectious aspect. Thus, we devised the covering with forceps-assisted polymeric biodegradable sheet and endostapling method in response to these demands. With this novel technique, we used non-woven polyglycolic acid (PGA) NEOVEIL&#xae; sheet (Gunze, Ayabe, Japan). A 5-mm cut was made in the center of the PGA sheet, which was then guided over the apical bulla with a lung forceps. The bulla was then pulled through the cut hole with the lung forceps, in a manner similar to the way a cape is worn through the head. To avoid stapling failure caused by wrinkling of the PGA sheet, we moistened the sheet with a few drops of saline before endostapling. The diseased lung tissue was resected by endostapling across the PGA sheet. After firing the endostapler, we could perform a sealing test by inflating the lung to detect persistent air leaks. This is a simple and reliable technique of staple-line reinforcement without fibrin glue.

### PMID 20878653 (2011) — Microsurgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealant decreases postoperative drainage in immediate breast reconstruction by deep inferior epigastric perforator flap after mastectomy with axillary dissection.
DOI: 10.1002/micr.20812 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Serosanguinous drainage after breast reconstruction by deep inferior epigastric perforator flap (DIEP) can limit patient's discharge. We introduced fibrin sealant in immediate breast reconstruction by DIEP flap to reduce drainage after mastectomy with axillary dissection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed an open study on 30 consecutive female aged from 28 to 63 years old. All underwent immediate breast reconstructions by DIEP flaps after mastectomy and axillary dissection for cancer. Patients were divided in group 1 (N = 15) without fibrin sealant and group 2 (N = 15) where the flap, thoracic, and axillary areas were sprayed with 5 mL of liquid fibrin sealant before drains insertion. There was no difference in the patient's BMI, height, weight or age between both the groups. Blake suction drains were placed under the flap and in the axillary area.
RESULTS: No adverse effects were reported, after a 20-month median follow-up. Drainage volumes or durations were not correlated to the patient's BMI, nor the height, weight or age. Thoracic drainage duration was longer than abdominal drainage in both the groups. Average drained volumes from the thoracic area were lower (427 vs. 552 mL; P = 0.015) and thoracic drains were removed earlier (5.47 vs. 6.33 days P = 0.022), in group 2 than in group 1. The length of stay was also reduced after the use of fibrin sealant (5.53 vs. 6.33 days; P = 0.032).
CONCLUSION: This study introduce the interest of fibrin sealant to significantly decrease the postoperative drainage volume and duration in the thoracic area after immediate breast reconstruction by DIEP flap.

### PMID 21888851 (2011) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Aseptic necrosis of the capitulum of the humerus (Panner's disease) treated by solid chondrograft implantation].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors present the case of aseptic necrosis of the humeral capitulum in a top female gymnast. She was referred to our department with the diagnosis of aseptic necrosis already made and after repeated arthroscopic treatment of the elbow including removal of a loose body in another institution. Exercise-related pain and swelling of the elbow became permanent and did not allow her to pursue her sports activities. After thorough examination, the treatment by implantation of autologous cultured chondrocytes, as a solid chondrograft, was chosen. At the first stage of arthroscopic surgery, a loose body was removed and a sample of healthy cartilage from an articular region not subject to strain was collected. The sample was sent to the Tissue Bank for cultivation and chondrocyte formation into a solid chondrograft, a procedure taking 4 to 5 weeks. At the second stage, the chondrograft was implanted into the lesion site and fixed with tissue glue (Tissucol). The arm was immobilised in a plaster cast for 4 weeks. The patient was followed up clinically and examined with magnetic resonance imaging at 6 month after implantation. The examination showed full graft integration and the arm's return to full mobility without pain at exercise. Even with this rare lesion site within the elbow joint, the implantation of a solid chondrograft proved to be a method achieving very good outcomes.

### PMID 21830417 (2011) — Hepato-gastroenterology
TITLE: A randomized controlled trial comparing fibrin glue and PlasmaJet on the raw surface of the liver after hepatic resection.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND/AIMS: In order to reduce the rate of bleeding and bile leakage after hepatic resection, different operative techniques have been used such as selective suture, electrocautery, topical hemostatic agents, argon beam coagulation, omentoplasty and application of fibrin glue.
METHODOLOGY: The PlasmaJet, a recent tool that provides a high energy flow of ionized gas which seals small blood and lymph vessels has been recently introduced into clinical practice. We have conducted a randomized trial comparing the application of 5mL of fibrin glue (Tissucol) and the treatment by PlasmaJet (Plasma Surgical Limited, Theale, UK) on the raw surface of the liver stump after elective hepatic resection.
RESULTS: Fifty-eight consecutive hepatic resections were performed and the postoperative mortality, blood transfusions and reoperations were not statistically different between the groups. However, there was a significant reduction of the incidence of collections requiring percutaneous drainage in the PlasmaJet group (p&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Compared to fibrin glue application, the employment of PlasmaJet on the raw surface of the liver stump led to a significant reduction of postoperative complications requiring percutaneous drainage after elective hepatectomy.

### PMID 21531079 (2011) — Burns : journal of the International Society for Burn Injuries
TITLE: Clinical study of cultured epithelial autografts in liquid suspension in severe burn patients.
DOI: 10.1016/j.burns.2011.03.018 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: We address the clinical application of the suspension type cultured epithelial autografts (CEAs), Keraheal&#x2122; (MCTT, Seoul, Korea), along with the effects, application method, merits and demerits thereof. From February 2007 to June 2010, 29 burn patients with extensive burns, participated in the suspension type of CEA clinical test. A widely meshed autograft (1:4-6 ratio) was applied to the wound bed and the suspension type CEA was sprayed with a Tissomat cell sprayer, followed by a Tissucol spray, a fibrin sealant. The patients' (men/women=26/3) median (interquartile ranges) age was 42 (30-49) years old, the burned TBSA was 55 (44-60) %, and the full thickness burn area was 40 (30-46.5) %. The area of Keraheal&#x2122; applied was 800 (400-1200) cm(2). The take rate was 96 (90.5-99) % and 100 (98.5-100) % at 2 and 4 weeks after treatment with Keraheal&#x2122;, respectively. The Vancouver burn scar scale was 5 (4-6.5), 4 (3-6), and 3 (2-4) at 8, 12 and 24 weeks after the Keraheal&#x2122; application. Widely meshed autograft must be applied in massive burns but it's take rate is greatly reduced. The CEAs enhance the take rate of a wide meshed autograft in massive burns and allow for grafting wide meshed autograft together with acellular dermal matrix in some cases.

### PMID 21196326 (2011) — Frontiers in bioscience (Elite edition)
TITLE: A new bone surgical laser technique: technical aspects and applications in dentistry.
DOI: 10.2741/e261 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Ten patients requiring the extraction of a severely-deteriorated molar or premolar before placement of a dental implant for prosthodontic rehabilitation were selected (6 women; 4 men). The sockets were curetted and decontaminated with an 810 nm wavelength diode laser using a 400 micron fiber at close distance (1 mm) from the target area, power setting 2.5 W, pulsed mode (10 msec t-on, 10 msec t-off for five seconds, three repetitions for each bone wall, 30 seconds pause between each irradiation). The socket filled with beta-TCP plus Tissucol and primary closure was attempted. In addition all patients were treated with a 810 nm GaAlAs laser, in continuous wave mode, defocused hand-piece, 50 J\cm2 ( 1W for 50 seconds) after surgery and on days 3, 5, 7 postoperatively. At 18 months after prosthodontic treatment and loading, the implant was stable. Laser therapy, combined with a graft of biomaterial composed of beta-TCP and tissucol, prevented alveolar crest resorption following tooth extraction. Formation of new bone of acceptable quality and quantity permitted placement of osseointegrated dental implants.

### PMID 21190028 (2011) — International journal of colorectal disease
TITLE: Fibrin glue in the endoscopic treatment of fistulae and anastomotic leakages of the gastrointestinal tract.
DOI: 10.1007/s00384-010-1104-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fistulae or leakages of anastomotic junctions of the gastrointestinal tract used to be an indication for surgery. However, patients often are severely ill and endoscopic therapeutic options have been suggested to avoid surgical intervention.
PURPOSE: This is a retrospective analysis of fibrin glue application in the treatment of gastrointestinal fistulae or anastomotic leakages.
AIM: The aim of this study was to investigate the value of fibrin glue in the treatment of gastrointestinal fistulae and leakages.
METHODS: From September 1996 to November 2002, 52 patients with gastrointestinal fistulae or insufficiencies have been treated endoscopically including the use of fibrin glue (Tissucol Duo S&#xae;, Baxter, Unterschleissheim, Germany). Clinical data comprising concomitant therapies and results were analysed by chart review.
RESULTS: Twenty-six lesions were located in the oesophagus or gastroesophageal junction, 4 in the stomach, 7 in the small intestine, 13 colorectal and 2 in the pancreas. The duration of treatment ranged from 12 to 1,765 days. Two to 81 ml fibrin glue (median 8.5) was used in 1-40 sessions (median 4). All patients received antibiotics; additional endoscopic options were frequently applied. Endoscopic therapy cured 55.7% patients (n = 29); 36.5% (n = 19) were cured with fibrin glue as sole endoscopic option. In 23.1% (n = 12), surgical intervention became necessary. Patients without major infectious complications tended to have a higher cure rate without surgery (87.5% vs. 50%). Eleven patients died (21.1%).
CONCLUSION: Endoscopic therapy is a valuable option in the treatment of fistulae and anastomotic insufficiencies of the gastrointestinal tract. It usually is applied repeatedly. Fibrin glue is a mainstay of this procedure. Major infectious complications seem to define a subgroup of patients with poorer outcome.

### PMID 20861727 (2011) — Cornea
TITLE: Long-term follow-up of pterygium surgery using a conjunctival autograft and Tissucol.
DOI: 10.1097/ICO.0b013e3181dea7f0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the rate of recurrence and to detect pre- or postoperative complications in pterygium surgery using fibrin glue to attach the conjunctival autograft.
METHODS: Retrospective case series. In a period of 20 months, 35 patients were operated on for a pterygium using a conjunctival autograft, of which 7 patients were operated (20%) for a recurrent pterygium. The autograft was glued with Tissucol Duo 500, a human tissue glue. Follow-up was at least 1 year.
RESULTS: Mean age was 50.4 years (range, 23-80 years), 18 women and 17 men. Success rate was 97.1%. In 1 patient with a primary pterygium, the lesion recurred after 4 months (2.9%). One autograft was lost on the first postoperative day. No other pre- or postoperative problems were encountered.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of Tissucol fibrin glue seems to be a safe, easy, and effective technique for attaching the conjunctival autograft in pterygium surgery. The recurrence rate of the procedure is low.

### PMID 20676711 (2011) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Open tension-free Lichtenstein repair of inguinal hernia: use of fibrin glue versus sutures for mesh fixation.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-010-0706-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To investigate pain and other complications following inguinal hernioplasty performed by the Lichtenstein technique with mesh fixation by fibrin glue or sutures.
METHODS: Five hundred and twenty patients were enrolled in this 12-month observational multicenter study and received either sutures or fibrin glue (Tissucol(&#xae;)/Tisseel(&#xae;)) based on the preference of the surgeon. Pain, numbness, discomfort, recurrence, and other complications were assessed postoperatively and at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months. Pain intensity was assessed by a visual analog scale (VAS; 0 [no pain] to 10 [worst pain]).
RESULTS: One hundred and seventy-one patients received sutures and 349 received fibrin glue. During the early postoperative phase, 87.4% of patients in the fibrin glue group and 76.6% of patients in the sutures group were complication-free (P = 0.001). Patients who received fibrin glue were also less likely to experience hematoma/ecchymosis than those in the suture group (both P = 0.001). The mean pain score was significantly lower in the fibrin group than the sutures group (2.5 vs. 3.2, P &lt; 0.001). At 1 month, significantly fewer patients in the fibrin glue group reported pain, numbness, and discomfort compared with patients in the sutures group (all P &lt; 0.05). Fibrin glue patients also experienced less intense pain (0.6 vs. 1.2; P = 0.001). By 3 months, the between-group differences had disappeared, except for numbness, which was more prevalent in the sutures group. By 12 months, very few patients reported complications.
CONCLUSIONS: Tissucol fibrin glue for mesh fixation in the Lichtenstein repair of inguinal hernia shows advantages over sutures, including lower incidence of complications such as pain, numbness, and discomfort, and should be considered as a first-line option for mesh fixation in hernioplasty.

### PMID 20309806 (2011) — Zentralblatt fur Chirurgie
TITLE: [Hiatoplasty reinforcement by means of a lightweight titanized polypropylene mesh fixed with fibrin glue].
DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1247261 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Suture-based hiatoplasty is associated with a high recurrence rate. Using meshes of different shapes and materials to reinforce these sutures reduces the risk of recurrences. On the other hand morbidity attributable to the suture and tack fixation of these meshes has been observed during the development phase of these techniques. Moreover, there are some experimental and clinical data about mesh migration into the oesophageus. For this reason we analysed the outcome of our patients who underwent a mesh-reinforced hiatoplasty with a lightweight titanised polypropylene mesh fixed by fibrin glue.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All the patients who under-went a mesh-reinforcement between 3&#x200a;/&#x200a;2006 and 12&#x200a;/&#x200a;2007 were collected retrospectively. The hiatoplasty was reinforced by means of a lightweight titanised polypropylene mesh that had been designed especially for that purpose (TiSure&#xae;, GfE). Mesh fixation was performed with 2&#x200a; mL of fibrin glue (Tissucol&#xae;, Baxter). Postoperative data were elucidated for all patients via their general practitioner or by interviewing the patients by telephone using a dedicated questionnaire.
RESULTS: 26 &#x200a;patients with a median age of 58&#x200a; years and a median BMI of 27.5&#x200a;kg&#x200a;/&#x200a;m&#xb2; underwent laparoscopic mesh-reinforced hiatoplasty. There were 15 &#x200a;axial and 11 &#x200a;paraoesophageal hernias, in 5 &#x200a;cases with upside-down stomach and in 4 &#x200a;cases recurrent hernias. 15&#x200a; patients underwent an additional dorsal 270&#xb0;-fundoplication, the remaining 11 patients had a fundophrenicopexy, with conversion taking place in 2&#x200a; cases. The median follow-up was 34.3 &#x200a;months. 3&#x200a; patients suffered from dysphagia, 1 &#x200a;of them had to be re-operated and has been free of symptoms since then. 2&#x200a; patients suffered from mild gastrooesophageal reflux which was treated conservatively. So far no mesh migration and no recurrences have been seen.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the short observation time, this study indicates the patients are not exposed to any danger by the lightweight titanised polypropylene mesh. Moreover, the mesh appears to enhance hiatorrhaphy safety even in the presence of extensive hiatal hernias as well as in the case of an upside-down stomach.

### PMID 20130874 (2011) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Cutaneous bronchobiliary fistula treated with Tissucol sealant.
DOI: 10.1007/s00270-010-9807-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchobiliary fistula is a rare and is an uncommon but severe complication of hydatid disease of the liver. Treatment has traditionally been surgical resection, but embolization and stent placement have been described. The invasive method seems to be a key component of patient treatment. We describe a case of a 58-year-old woman who, 25 years before, had undergone surgery for a hydatid cyst. A total cystectomy without previous puncture or parasite extraction was carried out. The lower aspect of the cyst was found to be completely perforated over the biliary duct. During the postoperative course, the patient had subphrenic right-sided pleural effusion and biliary fistula that subsided with medical treatment. Afterward, the patient came to the outpatient area of our hospital complaining of leakage of purulent exudate through the cutaneous opening, pain located on the right hypochondrium radiating to the right hemithorax, malaise, fever, chronic cough, and occasional vomiting of bile. Fistulography revealed an anfractuous cavity communicating with a residual cystic cavity on the right hepatic lobe. We observed communication with the intrahepatic canaliculi. Computed tomographic scan revealed a fistulous tract on the anterior liver border through the abdominal wall. There were no posttreatment complications. The patient is asymptomatic.

### PMID 21942978 (2011) — Drugs
TITLE: Fibrin sealant (evicel&#xae; [quixil&#xae;/crosseal&#x2122;]): a review of its use as supportive treatment for haemostasis in surgery.
DOI: 10.2165/11207700-000000000-00000 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Evicel&#xae; is a fibrin sealant consisting of two components, human clottable protein (predominantly human fibrinogen) and human thrombin. It is indicated as supportive treatment in patients undergoing surgery when control of bleeding by standard surgical techniques is ineffective or impractical. Evicel&#xae; is a new formulation of the previously available fibrin sealant Quixil&#xae; (in the EU) or Crosseal&#x2122; (in the US). Evicel&#xae; differs from Quixil&#xae;/Crosseal&#x2122; in that its fibrinogen component does not contain the antifibrinolytic agent tranexamic acid, which is potentially neurotoxic, resulting in Quixil&#xae;/Crosseal&#x2122; being contraindicated for use in neurosurgery. The removal of tranexamic acid did not affect the haemostatic efficacy or longevity of Evicel&#xae; fibrin clots and allowed the sealant to be granted an expanded indication. Evicel&#xae; and Quixil&#xae;/Crosseal&#x2122; are easy to use and, since they do not contain synthetic or bovine aprotinin, have a reduced potential for hypersensitivity reactions. This article reviews the pharmacological properties, clinical efficacy and tolerability of Evicel&#xae; and its previous formulation as supportive treatment for haemostasis in surgery. In clinical studies, Evicel&#xae; and Quixil&#xae;/Crosseal&#x2122; were generally well tolerated and effective haemostatic agents for adjunctive use in various types of surgeries when conventional methods were impractical or ineffective in controlling bleeding. Two pivotal, randomized studies showed that Evicel&#xae; was significantly more effective than manual compression in patients undergoing vascular surgery, and significantly more effective than Surgicel&#xae; in patients undergoing retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal surgery, as assessed by the proportion of patients achieving haemostasis. In another similarly designed pivotal study in patients undergoing liver resection, Crosseal&#x2122; was significantly more effective than standard haemostatic agents (e.g. Surgicel&#xae;), as assessed by the mean time to haemostasis. The incidences of treatment-emergent adverse events in these studies were generally similar between the Evicel&#xae; or Crosseal&#x2122; groups and the comparator groups. Quixil&#xae; was also generally well tolerated and an effective haemostatic agent in endonasal surgeries, and tonsillectomies and/or adenoidectomies, with some benefit of treatment with Evicel&#xae; or Quixil&#xae; also observed in orthopaedic surgeries. Although additional comparative studies with other haemostatic agents would help to definitively position Evicel&#xae; with respect to these agents, current evidence suggests that Evicel&#xae; is useful in surgeries for improving haemostasis where standard surgical techniques are insufficient.

### PMID 21740197 (2011) — Journal of endourology
TITLE: Pathologic evaluation of hemostatic agents in percutaneous nephrolithotomy tracts in a porcine model.
DOI: 10.1089/end.2011.0041 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Hemostatic agents have been suggested as an adjunct for tubeless percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL). We pathologically evaluated the percutaneous tracts injected with the fibrin sealant (FS) Evicel and hemostatic gelatin matrix (HGM) Surgiflo at various time intervals to determine their absorption and tract closure rates. We also evaluated whether these agents reduced urine leak rates in a porcine model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Percutaneous access was obtained in 19 kidneys in 10 domestic swine. The tracts were dilated to 30F using a balloon dilating catheter. Ten kidneys served as controls. Surgiflo was injected into the tract of four kidneys, and Evicel was injected into the tract of five kidneys. Intravenous urography (IVU) was performed on postoperative days (POD) 1 and 10 to 14. IVU was performed on two pigs at POD 30. The pigs were sacrificed and kidneys were harvested for pathologic evaluation.
RESULTS: Two (20%) control kidneys had a urine leak on IVU on POD 1. None of the kidneys treated with HGM or FS had a urine leak on POD 1. None of the kidneys had a leak on POD 10 to 14 or POD 30. On pathologic inspection, the tracts of all the control kidneys and HGM kidneys had closed completely at POD 14. Two kidneys treated with FS had fistula at POD 6 and POD 14. At POD 30, the tracts in the control kidneys and kidney treated with HGM had completely healed. Fibrin sealant remained in the tract at POD 30.
CONCLUSION: Fibrin sealant should be used with caution because it can persist in the tract for up to 30 days and may inhibit wound healing. Hemostatic gelatin matrix is the preferable agent because the tract closed by POD 10 to 14, similar to the findings in the control animals. The use of hemostatic agents in a nephroscopy tract may reduce the risk of early urine leak after tubeless PCNL.

### PMID 21263290 (2011) — Annals of plastic surgery
TITLE: Fibrin glue: a scaffold for cellular-based therapy in a critical-sized defect.
DOI: 10.1097/SAP.0b013e3181fc0507 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Cartilage-based treatments have vast applications in plastic and reconstructive surgery, especially craniofacial constructs. Current techniques in craniofacial cartilage reconstructions greatly rely on autologous donor site harvest. Whole cartilage grafts are wrought with complications of warping, resorption, extrusion, and donor site morbidity. Percutaneous delivery of expanded chondrocytes would have the potential to expand a small quantity of autologous cells to deliver cell therapy. To deliver chondrocytes effectively, there must be a reliable medium in which chondrocytes can be kept. The purpose of this work is to highlight the utility of fibrin glue sealant, Evicel, as a suitable chondrocyte carrier in the treatment of a critical-sized defect model of nonarticular cartilage previously developed in our laboratory.
METHODS: Athymic rats were separated into 2 groups: fibrin glue (n = 3) and fibrin glue + rat chondrocytes (n = 6). The animals with an empty defect were used to ensure that they responded normally to the procedure. All animals received a 3-mm full-thickness xiphoid cartilage defect characterized previously as a critical-sized defect in our laboratory (Moyer HR, Wang Y, Farooque T, et al. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010;16:2321-2330). A control animal received no xiphoid defect creation procedure. The fibrin glue group was treated with 0.5 mL of fibrin glue placed directly into the 3-mm defect. The fibrin glue/rat chondrocyte group received a mixture of 1 &#xd7; 10 resting zone chondrocytes mixed with 0.5 mL of fibrin glue. Rats were euthanized at 5 weeks (35 days) and their xiphoid cartilages harvested. The xiphoids were analyzed with morphometrics through histology and microcomputed tomography.
RESULTS: In the fibrin glue vehicle group, there was minimal evidence of wound healing. Xiphoid defects treated with resting zone chondrocytes in a fibrin glue carrier were significantly smaller (P = 0.002) at harvest and had significantly more glycosaminoglycan content on microcomputed tomography analysis. Thus, there was significant healing in the chondrocyte/fibrin glue group.
CONCLUSION: Human fibrin sealant is an effective chondrocyte carrier and retains viable cells. Treatment of a nonarticular critical-size defect with resting zone chondrocytes embedded in a fibrin glue polymer demonstrates tissue healing.

### PMID 21150581 (2011) — Blood coagulation &amp; fibrinolysis : an international journal in haemostasis and thrombosis
TITLE: A comparison of the mechanical, kinetic, and biochemical properties of fibrin clots formed with two different fibrin sealants.
DOI: 10.1097/MBC.0b013e32833fcbfb | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The objective of the present study was to compare the mechanical, kinetic, and biochemical properties of fibrin clots produced using EVICEL Fibrin Sealant (Human) and TISSEEL Fibrin Sealant. The stiffness/elasticity and strength of fibrin clots formed with EVICEL and TISSEEL were assessed using applied mechanical force and thromboelastography (TEG). The factor XIII content of the fibrin clots was also evaluated. Mean Young modulus and tensile strength of the fibrin clots produced by EVICEL were significantly higher than those of clots produced by TISSEEL (P &lt; 0.05 for both). The mean time to initial clot formation and mean time to the predefined level of clot formation were numerically shorter for EVICEL compared with TISSEEL. Furthermore, mean maximal amplitude of the clots formed with EVICEL was significantly greater than that for the clots formed with TISSEEL. Mean concentration of factor XIII for the EVICEL fibrinogen samples tested was 9 IU/ml compared with undetectable concentrations of factor XIII for the TISSEEL fibrinogen samples. Fibrin clots formed with EVICEL have a much higher resistance to stretching and tensile strength and are more capable of maintaining their structure against applied force than those formed with TISSEEL. EVICEL also allows more rapid development of fibrin clots than TISSEEL. This superior clot strength and resilience obtained with EVICEL relative to TISSEEL may be due in large part to the presence of factor XIII.

### PMID 21607571 (2011) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Histologic evaluation of absorbable and non-absorbable barrier coated mesh secured to the peritoneum with fibrin sealant in a New Zealand white rabbit model.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-011-0834-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to evaluate the histologic response to fibrin sealant (FS) as an alternative fixation method for laparoscopic ventral hernia repair.
METHODS: One non-absorbable barrier mesh (Composix&#x2122;) and three absorbable barrier meshes (Sepramesh&#x2122;, Proceed&#x2122;, and Parietex&#x2122; Composite) were used for the study, with uncoated macroporous polypropylene mesh (ProLite Ultra&#x2122;) as the control. Three methods of fixation were used: #0-polypropylene suture&#xa0;+&#xa0;FS (ARTISS&#x2122;, Baxter Healthcare Corp.), FS alone (ARTISS&#x2122;), or tacks alone (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;10 for each group). Two pieces of mesh (of dimensions 4&#xa0;&#xd7;&#xa0;4-cm) were secured intraperitoneally in 75 New Zealand white rabbits. After 8&#xa0;weeks, hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E)-stained specimens were evaluated for host tissue response. Statistical significance (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05) was determined using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Fisher's least significant difference (LSD) post hoc test.
RESULTS: Composix&#x2122; with FS only showed significantly greater cellular infiltration than with suture&#xa0;+&#xa0;FS (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.0007), Proceed&#x2122; with FS only had significantly greater neovascularization than with suture&#xa0;+&#xa0;FS (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.0172), and ProLite Ultra&#x2122; with suture&#xa0;+&#xa0;FS had significantly greater neovascularization than with tacks only (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.046). Differences due to mesh type showed that Composix&#x2122; exhibited less extensive cellular infiltration (P&#xa0;&#x2264;&#xa0;0.0032), extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, and neovascularization, and demonstrated less inflammatory cells and more fibroblasts compared to the other meshes (P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: FS did not have a significant histologic effect compared to tacks when utilized for the fixation of mesh to the peritoneum of New Zealand White rabbits. However, the mesh type did have a significant histologic effect. The permanent barrier mesh (Composix&#x2122;) was associated with less histologic incorporation than absorbable barrier and macroporous meshes, as evidenced by lower levels of cellular infiltration, ECM deposition, and neovascularization, independent of the fixation method used.

### PMID 20652323 (2011) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Evaluation of intraperitoneal placement of absorbable and nonabsorbable barrier coated mesh secured with fibrin sealant in a New Zealand white rabbit model.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-010-1230-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study aimed to evaluate the acute and chronic fixation strength of fibrin sealant (FS) as an alternative method of fixation for laparoscopic ventral hernia repair (LVHR).
METHODS: Representative mesh types for LVHR included one nonabsorbable barrier mesh (Composix) and three absorbable barrier meshes (Sepramesh, Proceed, and Parietex composite). Macroporous polypropylene mesh (Prolite Ultra) served as the control mesh. Three methods of fixation were used, namely, 0-polypropylene suture+FS (ARTISS 4 IU), FS alone (ARTISS), and tacks alone, to secure 3&#xd7;4-cm pieces of mesh (10 of each combination) to the peritoneal surface of New Zealand white rabbit abdominal wall. After 2 h of incubation at 37 &#xb0;C, specimens underwent acute testing. Subsequently, a chronic phase was completed using the aforementioned fixation methods (10 of each combination), in which two 4&#xd7;4-cm pieces of mesh were secured intraperitoneally in each of 75 New Zealand white rabbits, which survived 8 weeks until they were sacrificed. A transparent grid overlay was used to measure the mesh and adhesion area. Adhesion tenacity was characterized using the Garrard adhesion scale. In both the acute and chronic samples, a 3&#xd7;3-cm area of mesh-tissue interface underwent lap shear testing at a rate of 0.42 mm/s using a tensiometer (Instron 5542). The maximum load sustained by the mesh-tissue construct was recorded as the acute fixation strength in newtons (N). Data are given as means&#xb1;standard error of the mean. Statistical significance (p&lt;0.05) was determined using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Fisher's least significant difference (LSD) posttest or a nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test (adhesion scores).
RESULTS: The acute fixation strength was significantly greater for all the meshes secured with either suture+FS or tacks alone than for FS alone (p&lt;0.001 for all comparisons). All the meshes except Proceed demonstrated greater acute fixation strength with suture+FS than with tacks alone (p&#x2264;0.016). Composix achieved greater acute fixation with suture+FS than all the other meshes (p&#x2264;0.022). Acute fixation with suture + FS was greater for Parietex Composite and ProLite Ultra than for Proceed (p&#x2264;0.015). When the animals were sacrificed, 48 of 50 meshes fixed with FS alone were insufficiently affixed to the abdominal wall, which may have resulted in hernia recurrence in a hernia model. The chronic fixation strength was greater for all the mesh types with either suture+FS or tacks only than with FS alone (p&#x2264;0.0005). The chronic fixation strength was greater with suture+FS than with tacks for Proceed and ProLite Ultra (p&#x2264;0.013). Neither mesh area nor adhesion tenacity differed significantly with any mesh/fixation method combination.
CONCLUSIONS: In a chronic rabbit model of LVHR, fixation strength with FS alone was inadequate for selected nonabsorbable and absorbable barrier-coated meshes. The acute and chronic fixation strengths of suture+FS were equivalent or superior to the fixation strength of tacks alone. Using a combination of suture and FS for mesh fixation in LVHR may provide adequate fixation while decreasing postoperative pain due to spiral titanium tacks. In this preclinical series, mesh secured to the peritoneal surface by FS alone may have led to early recurrence.

### PMID 22242295 (2011) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Successful repair of left ventricular free wall rupture with repeated mydriasis and loss of light reflex].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 73-year-old woman was transferred to our hospital because of loss of consciousness. Cardiac catheterization showed a left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) due to acute myocardial infarction at the posterolateral region. Shortly after cardiac catheterization, she lost her consciousness again and went into cardiogenic shock. Repeated mydriasis and loss of light reflex was recognized during establishment of cardiopulmonary bypass. Direct suture closure using equine pericardial strips and 4-0 polypropylene mattress sutures was performed under cardiac arrest. The suture site was covered with TachoComb and fibrin glue. Post-cardiac arrest brain injury was prevented by postoperative mild hypothermia. Surgical repair of LVFWR should be performed even when the signs of severe cerebral ischemia are apparent.

### PMID 21874421 (2011) — Surgery today
TITLE: Pleural defect repair with an overlapping method using fibrin glue-coated collagen fleece.
DOI: 10.1007/s00595-010-4468-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Collagen fleece coated with fibrin glue (TachoComb; CSL Behring, Tokyo, Japan) is a tissue adhesive and sealant used to stop hemorrhage and air leakage. We assessed the efficacy of overlapping methods combined with the use of TachoComb to repair pleural defects.
METHODS: Using a beagle animal model, circular and square defects were created on the pulmonary pleura and then repaired with TachoComb patches of varying minimum overlap widths (MOW). The airway pressure at which air leakage from the repaired region occurred (bursting pressure) was measured in a water sealing test. The ability of TachoComb to withstand temporal changes was assessed by repairing a 6-mm circular defect. The bursting pressure was measured at 5 min, 10 min, 3 h, and 24 h after the repair.
RESULTS: TachoComb patches with an MOW &#x2265; 6 mm withstood significantly higher pressures than patches with an MOW &#x2264; 3 mm for both circular and square defects. The bursting pressure was found to increase over time for up to 3 h after being applied, indicating that adhesion of the TachoComb patch to the pleural tissue improved during the 3-h period.
CONCLUSION: Pleural defects repaired using an overlapping method with an MOW of 6 mm were able to withstand airway pressures &#x2265; 40 cmH(2)O.

### PMID 21661439 (2011) — Hepato-gastroenterology
TITLE: A fibrin adhesive sealing method for the prevention of pancreatic fistula following distal pancreatectomy.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND/AIMS: Pancreatic fistula is the most common complication following distal pancreatectomy. We have developed a fibrin adhesive sealing method which covers the cut surface and parenchyma of the pancreas, to prevent pancreatic fistula.
METHODOLOGY: We performed 25 distal pancreatectomies. Fibrin adhesive (TachoComb) was applied to the staple line of the pancreas before stapling. Pancreatic fistula was defined and graded according to the International Study Group of Postoperative Pancreatic Fistula (ISGPF) definition.
RESULTS: The overall incidence of pancreatic fistula was five cases (20%). Four cases (16%) were classified as Grade A. Only one case (4%) was classified as Grade B. In patients with or without pancreatic fistula, the mean length of postoperative hospital stay was not significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The fibrin adhesive sealing method is a simple and effective method of preventing postoperative pancreatic fistula formation after distal pancreatectomy.

### PMID 21510312 (2011) — Hepato-gastroenterology
TITLE: Pancreaticojejunostomy using a fibrin adhesive sealant (TachoComb) for the prevention of pancreatic fistula after pancreaticoduodenectomy.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND/AIMS: Pancreatic fistula is a common complication following pancreaticoduodenectomy. A number of technical modifications aimed to improve the pancreato-enteric anastomosis technique have been reported. The aim of this study was to evaluate the safety of TachoComb fibrin adhesive as a sealing method in duct-to-mucosa pancreaticojejunostomy after pancreaticoduodenectomy.
METHODOLOGY: Between 2005 to 2009, 40 patients (28 men and 12 women) underwent duct-to-mucosa pancreaticojejunostomy using a fibrin adhesive (TachoComb) sealing method after pancreaticoduodenectomy (either pylorus-preserving or modified Child's methods). The mean age was 67.9 years (range of 49 to 80 years).
RESULTS: The overall postoperative rates of mortality and morbidity were 0.0% and 35.0%, respectively. Following the classification system described by the International Study Group on Pancreatic Fistula, 5 patients (12.5%) had Grade A pancreatic fistulas and 3 patients (7.5%) had Grade B pancreatic fistulas. There were no patients with Grade C pancreatic fistulas, and no cases of postoperative hemorrhage. No significant difference in the length of postoperative hospital stay was observed in patients with or without pancreatic fistulas.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of TachoComb fibrin adhesive as a sealing method in duct-to-mucosa pancreaticojejunostomy is safe, reliable for the prevention of pancreatic fistula, and shows promise for all types of reconstruction following pancreaticoduodenectomy.

### PMID 21491727 (2011) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Clinical managements for intractable pneumothorax with interstitial pneumonia].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intractable pneumothorax with interstitial pneumonia (IP) is famous for the disease finally to lead to death in case of persistent air leakage. It is because severe infection, respiratory insufficiency and tissue healing insufficiency by treatments with steroid hormones and immune-suppressants on IP. Pleurodesis is generally performed although the effect of it is questionable. It is important to stop immune-suppressants and reduce steroid hormones before the treatments to succeed in thoracoscopic surgery and thoracographic fibrin glue sealing method (TGF) if possible. Less invasive interventional treatments like TGF are recommendable because intractable pneumothorax with IP is in the high risk group to need to avoid surgery. Hand suturing, looping, covering and putting TachoComb on the air leak point instead of end-stapling should be performed in order to stop air leakage when forced to choose thoracoscopic surgery.

### PMID 21389896 (2011) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: "Double-stick tape" technique for transposition of an offending vessel in microvascular decompression: technical case report.
DOI: 10.1227/NEU.0b013e318217141c | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND IMPORTANCE: Severe hemifacial spasm caused by compression by a tortuous vertebral artery (VA) often is encountered and is difficult to treat. We describe a patient with hemifacial spasm caused by compression of the facial nerve by a tortuous VA. A simple and effective transposition approach, a "double-stick tape" technique, to the offending artery using a fibrin tissue-adhesive collagen fleece product (TachoComb) is reported.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A 65-year-old woman presented with an 8-year history of right-sided facial spasms, including the orbicularis oculi and orbicularis oris muscles. MRI revealed a tortuous right VA indented into the pontomedullary junction. The right anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) also contacted the proximal portion of the facial nerve. Surgical exploration with standard retrosigmoid craniotomy was performed. The offending VA was dissected away from the pontomedullary junction toward the cranial base. A small piece of TachoComb, with fibrin glue applied on the non-coated side of the fleece to make a "double-stick tape," was then placed on the ventral surface of the VA. Until the glue hardened, the VA was held away from the brainstem onto the dura of the petrous pyramid. After this procedure, AICA transposition was performed. The patient's symptoms were completely resolved immediately after surgery, and she remained asymptomatic at her 1 year follow-up visit.
CONCLUSION: The advantage of our "double-stick tape" technique is the simplicity of the procedure. The present technique is a feasible alternative for the treatment of hemifacial spasm caused by a tortuous VA.

### PMID 20868207 (2011) — Tissue engineering. Part C, Methods
TITLE: Autologous valve replacement-CD133+ stem cell-plus-fibrin composite-based sprayed cell seeding for intraoperative heart valve tissue engineering.
DOI: 10.1089/ten.TEC.2010.0051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The development of biological valve prostheses with lifetime native-like performance and optimal host engraftment is an ultimate goal of heart valve tissue engineering. We describe a new concept for autologous graft coating based on a CD133(+)-stem-cells-plus-fibrin (SC+F) complex processed from bone marrow and peripheral blood of a single patient.
METHODS: CD133(+)-SC (1&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10(6) cells/mL) from human bone marrow and autologous fibrin (20&#x2009;mg/mL) were administered simultaneously via spray administration using the novel Vivostat Co-Delivery System. During static cultivation, SC+F performance was monitored for 20 days after delivery and compared with controls. For dynamic testing SC+F-composite was sprayed on a decellularized porcine pulmonary valve and transferred to a bioreactor under pulsatile flow conditions for 7 days.
RESULTS: Static cultivation of SC+F-composite induced significant improvements in stem cell proliferation as compared with controls. For dynamic testing, microscopic analyses on a smooth engineered heart valve surface detected homogenous distribution of stem cells. Ultrasonic analysis revealed native-like valve performance. Applied CD133(+) stem cells differentiated into endothelial-like cells positive for CD31 and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 and engrafted the valve. However, occasional delamination was observed.
CONCLUSION: SC+F serves as an excellent autologous matrix for intraoperative tissue engineering of valve prostheses promising optimal in vivo integration. However, stability remains an issue.

### PMID 22040778 (2011) — Transfusion and apheresis science : official journal of the World Apheresis Association : official journal of the European Society for Haemapheresis
TITLE: Topical hemostatic agents in surgical practice.
DOI: 10.1016/j.transci.2011.10.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Hemostasis is of critical importance in achieving a positive outcome in any surgical intervention. Different hemostatic methods can be employed and topical hemostatic agents are used in a wide variety of surgical settings. Procoagulation agents have different hemostatic properties and the choice of a specific one is determined by the type of surgical procedure and bleeding. Hemostatic treatments include fibrin sealants, microfibrillar collagen, gelatin hemostatic agents, oxidized regenerated cellulose and cyanoacrylates adhesives. Surgeons should be familiar with topical hemostatics to ensure an appropriate use. Our purpose is to illustrate the currently available agents, their mechanism of action and their effective applications, in order to ensure an optimal use in operating room.

### PMID 21106141 (2011) — The Journal of laryngology and otology
TITLE: Management of intra-operative cerebrospinal fluid leak following endoscopic trans-sphenoidal pituitary surgery.
DOI: 10.1017/S0022215110002483 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Cerebrospinal fluid leakage is the most common complication of endoscopic trans-sphenoidal pituitary surgery. However, there is no uniformly accepted way of managing this complication when it occurs intra-operatively. This paper describes a quick, simple technique, involving layered fibrin glue and gelatin sponge, which does not compromise post-operative patient follow up.
METHOD: Retrospective review of all endoscopic pituitary surgery cases conducted at a single institution since the introduction of this technique in 2002.
RESULTS: A total of 120 endoscopic pituitary operations were performed (96 primary procedures and 24 revisions). All intra-operative cerebrospinal fluid leaks were managed using the described method, with a failure rate of 3.6 per cent. The overall post-operative leakage rate was 1.7 per cent.
CONCLUSION: This simple, conservative technique avoids the need for further dissection and the use of non-absorbable foreign material, and has a low incidence of post-operative cerebrospinal fluid leakage.

### PMID 22066364 (2011) — The Journal of heart valve disease
TITLE: Antibiotic pretreatment of heart valve prostheses to prevent early prosthetic valve endocarditis.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND AIM OF THE STUDY: Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE), a rare but major complication after heart valve replacement surgery, has potentially catastrophic consequences despite maximal treatment. Thus, preventive measures are essential. The study aim was to investigate the effect of pretreating heart valve prostheses with the antibiotics baneomycin and daptomycin, with and without surgical sealant fibrin glue as a drug-releasing substance. The biocompatibility of baneocin and daptomycin was also investigated.
METHODS: Samples of polyethylene terephthalate (PTE), as used for the sewing cuffs of prosthetic heart valves, were tested; untreated samples served as controls. All samples were contaminated with Staphylococcus epidermidis, and colony-forming units (CFUs) then counted. Cytotoxicity tests were performed using the MTT-assay to evaluate the effects of baneomycin and daptomycin on cell proliferation and wound healing.
RESULTS: Untreated and fibrin glue-coated samples were directly infected with a bacterial count of 2.82 +/- 0.63 x 10(5) CFU/ml and 2.80 +/- 1.07 x 10(5) CFU/ml, on average. Baneocin-impregnated samples were sterile for 1.9 +/- 0.38 days, with a subsequent bacterial count of 2.26 +/- 0.6 x 10(5) CFU/ml, while daptomycin-impregnated samples were sterile for 2.9 +/- 0.38 days, with a subsequent bacterial count of 1.81 +/- 0.53 x 10(5) CFU/ml. Samples coated with a fibrin glue-baneocin mixture were sterile for 3.14 +/- 0.38 days, after which the bacterial count was 0.74 +/- 0.47 x 10(5) CFU/ml. After coating with a fibrin glue-daptomycin mixture, samples were sterile for 7.0 +/- 0.58 days, and the bacterial count was 0.70 +/- 0.56 x 10(5) CFU/ml.
CONCLUSION: In this in-vitro study, the pretreatment of prosthetic heart valves with antibiotics reduced the risk of bacterial adhesion and consequent infection. The combination of antibiotics with fibrin glue prolonged this preventive effect, with baneocin demonstrating a better biocompatibility than daptomycin. On the basis of its antibacterial efficacy, daptomycin appears to be a more suitable antibiotic to prevent early PVE with Gram-positive bacteria. The soaking of prosthetic heart valves in antibiotic solutions prior to implantation, in combination with fibrin glue in cases of suspected endocarditis, can prevent the development of early PVE. This preventive strategy should be investigated for use as a standard procedure in clinical practice.

### PMID 21533522 (2011) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Biologic hernia implants in experimental intraperitoneal onlay mesh plasty repair: the impact of proprietary collagen processing methods and fibrin sealant application on tissue integration.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-011-1700-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Biologic implants have been recommended for reinforcement in routine and challenging hernia repair. However, experimental and clinical studies have reported adverse effects (e.g., slow implant integration and pronounced foreign body reaction). To evaluate the impact of different material processing methods (cross-linking vs. non-cross-linking of collagen) and implant design, four different biologic hernia implants were compared directly in experimental intraperitoneal onlay mesh plasty (IPOM). Tissue integration, shrinkage, and foreign body reaction were primary outcome parameters.
METHODS: In this study, 48 Sprague-Dawley rats were randomized to four treatment groups. Open IPOM repair was performed. One peritoneal defect per animal was covered with 2 &#xd7; 2 cm patches of cross-linked or non-cross-linked implants including CollaMend (n = 12), Peripatch (n = 12), Surgisis (n = 12), and Tutomesh (n = 12). In half of the animals, fibrin sealant was applied for additional fixation and to cover sutures. The observation period was 60 days. The primary outcome parameters were implant integration, shrinkage, and foreign body reaction. Macroscopic and histologic assessments were performed.
RESULTS: The integration of implants was insufficient in all the groups. The implants could be detached easily from the underlying tissue, and the penetration of fibroblasts and vessels was limited to the perforations. Foreign body reaction was pronounced with CollaMend and Surgisis, leading to persistent granulomatous inflammation. Shrinkage was excessive with Surgisis, whereas Tutomesh and Peripatch yielded sufficient anti-adhesion and elicited no foreign body reaction.
CONCLUSION: At 2 months, cross-linked and non-cross-linked biologic hernia implants were poorly integrated. Cross-linking led to a more pronounced foreign body reaction. Less inflammatory response may reduce local complications, but did not enhance implant integration in this study.

### PMID 21654294 (2011) — Surgical laparoscopy, endoscopy &amp; percutaneous techniques
TITLE: Use of fibrin-based sealants and gelatin-matrix hemostats in laparoscopic liver surgery.
DOI: 10.1097/SLE.0b013e31821db688 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: During surgery, liver tissue is particularly prone to bleeding which can be difficult to control, especially in patients with liver disease-associated coagulopathy. Topical sealants and hemostats can enhance clot formation and wound healing, and can be useful for controlling or preventing troublesome bleeding during surgical interventions where conventional methods of hemostasis are inadequate.
METHODS: An extensive customized literature search was conducted using medical reference databases to identify publications related to the use of potential agents in laparoscopic liver surgery. Citations from these articles were also used. Details of the authors' own experience in this area is also included.
RESULTS: Routine use of fibrin-based sealants in open liver surgery now seems to be widespread. Data from several large prospective randomized controlled clinical trials have indicated that application of fibrin-based sealants to the cut liver surface during hepatectomy does provide some benefit in terms of a shorter time to hemostasis and a reduction in postoperative drainage fluid, even when compared with argon beam coagulation. Another trial found no additional benefit of fibrin sealants when applied after coagulation of the cut liver surface. A prospective, uncontrolled study found that application of the flowable gelatin matrix-based hemostat Floseal provided rapid effective control of mild-to-severe bleeding during surgical removal of primary or metastatic liver tumors, even in those with cirrhosis. Some of these topical hemostatic agents are already being used on a routine basis by many surgeons performing laparoscopic liver surgery. Although there are no randomized clinical trials, there are several anecdotal or case reports of their effective use during laparoscopic liver surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of current evidence of using hemostats and sealants in open liver surgery, there is potential of developing these strategies in laparoscopic liver surgery.

### PMID 21094467 (2010) — The spine journal : official journal of the North American Spine Society
TITLE: Dural repair with four spinal sealants: focused review of the manufacturers' inserts and the current literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.spinee.2010.09.017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND CONTEXT: Deliberate or traumatic dural fistulas are typically augmented by a "sealant" or "fibrin glue" to enhance the strength of dural closure.
PURPOSE: Little is known about the risks and complications associated with two specific "sealants" and two specific "fibrin glues" used for dural closure.
STUDY DESIGN/SETTING: Review of the manufacturers' inserts and a focused review of the literature concerning the pros and cons for two "sealants" (DuraSeal [Confluent Surgical Inc., Waltham, MA, USA] and BioGlue [Cryolife, Kennesaw, GA, USA]) and two "fibrin glues" (EVICEL [Johnson and Johnson Wound Management, Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA] and Tisseel [fibrin sealant; Baxter International Inc., Westlake Village, CA, USA]) were assessed.
PATIENT SAMPLE: A focused review of the literature using four different "sealants" or "fibrin glues" was performed.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Documentation of persistent/recurrent postoperative cerebrospinal fluid fistulas was an end point for failure for the four different "sealants" and "fibrin glues."
METHODS: Manufacturers' inserts and a focused review of the literature concerning the relative safety and efficacy of two "sealants" (DuraSeal and BioGlue) and two "fibrin glues" (EVICEL and Tisseel) used to augment dural closure were assessed.
RESULTS: Although DuraSeal is approved by the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) for intracranial and spinal application, two instances of paralysis are described in the literature. BioGlue is classified by the manufacturer as neurotoxic. EVICEL, one of the "fibrin glues," appeared in just two animal studies, whereas Tisseel, the other "fibrin glue," has been used in many large clinical series without adverse events.
CONCLUSION: Despite the lack of FDA approval, Tisseel (fibrin glue) has seen wide adoption in "off-label" use. DuraSeal, which is FDA approved, was associated with two instances of paralysis. Alternatively, BioGlue was described as neurotoxic even by the manufacturer.

### PMID 20679922 (2010) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Experimental simplification of the excimer laser-assisted nonocclusive anastomosis (ELANA) technique.
DOI: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000382959.43931.EA | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The excimer laser-assisted nonocclusive anastomosis (ELANA) technique facilitates the construction of an end-to-side anastomosis between a donor vessel and a recipient artery without the need to temporarily occlude the recipient artery.
OBJECTIVE: To test whether the surgically difficult ELANA technique can be simplified.
METHODS: In 42 rabbits, with the aorta as the recipient artery and human saphenous veins as donor grafts, we made 30 conventional ELANAs with 8 microsutures, 90 ELANAs with 4 microsutures (ELANA-4s), 40 ELANAs with 2 microsutures (ELANA-2s), and 90 sutureless ELANAs (SELANAs). SELANA involved a new ring design with 2 pins. ELANA-4, ELANA-2, and SELANA were each combined with 3 different sealants (Bioglue, Tachoseal, and Tisseel) and compared regarding application time, complications, and burst pressure.
RESULTS: The conventional ELANA was constructed in a mean of 14.8 +/- 2.6 minutes. All experimental anastomoses were constructed significantly faster; the ELANA-4 in a mean of 10.9 +/- 1.3 minutes, the ELANA-2 in a mean of 5.4 +/- 1.7 minutes, and the SELANA in a mean of 2.5 +/- 1.8 minutes. All ELANA and ELANA-4 anastomoses were sufficiently strong with a burst pressure &gt; 200 mm Hg, except for 1 insufficiently sealed ELANA-4 anastomosis. ELANA-2 was sufficiently strong only with Bioglue, showing a burst pressure &gt; 280 mm Hg. SELANA was sufficiently strong with Bioglue or TachoSil, showing a burst pressure &gt; 260 mm Hg.
CONCLUSION: The ELANA technique can be simplified by reducing or even abandoning microsutures. Of the experimental anastomoses tested, we consider the SELANA technique combined with TachoSil of most potential benefit. Long-term survival studies will be performed in animals before we consider using any of these new techniques in patients.

### PMID 20620377 (2010) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: A prospective, randomized trial comparing BioGlue and Vivostat for the control of alveolar air leak.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2009.11.064 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: BioGlue (CryoLife, Europa Ltd, Surrey, UK) is effective in reducing alveolar air leak after pulmonary resection. However, concerns exist regarding the use of bovine-derived products. Vivostat (Vivostat A/S, Alleroed, Denmark) is an autologous fibrin sealant that confers certain advantages. It shows superior elastic properties, a faster absorption time, and the absence of risk of transmission of blood-borne diseases.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, single blind controlled study to compare BioGlue and Vivostat in the control of postoperative air leak. Primary endpoints were duration of air leak, time to intercostal drain removal, and length of hospital stay. Secondary endpoints related to postoperative complications.
RESULTS: Between December 2005 and December 2007, 103 patients were randomized. The analysis included 102 patients; 67% were male. Median age was 56 +/- 19 years. Indications for surgery were primary lung cancer in 41 patients (40%), secondary malignancy in 48 patients (47%), carcinoid in 6 patients (6%), and 7 patients underwent surgery for benign disease (7%). Bilobectomy was performed in 2 patients (2%), lobectomy in 41 patients (40%), lobectomy with lesser resection in 3 patients (3%), segmentectomy in 16 patients (16%), precision excision in 34 patients (33%), and 6 patients underwent other resections (6%). Median duration of air leak was 3 (0-32) days versus 2 (0-33) days for patients who received BioGlue and Vivostat, respectively (P = .677). Time to intercostal drain removal was 5 (1-32) days in the BioGlue group compared with 5 (1-34) days for the Vivostat group (P = .473). Median hospital stay was 8 (3-22) days versus 7 (2-29) days for the BioGlue and Vivostat groups, respectively (P = .382). There was no significant difference in the incidence of complications between the 2 groups (20 patients receiving BioGlue versus 19 patients receiving Vivostat, P = .839).
CONCLUSIONS: There were no significant differences in the 3 clinical outcome measures of duration of air leak, time to intercostal drain removal, and length of hospital stay in those patients receiving BioGlue or Vivostat. Given the inherent advantages of our institutional preference is to use Vivostat in the control of postoperative air leaks after pulmonary resection.

### PMID 20512511 (2010) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: A comparison of a bovine albumin/glutaraldehyde glue versus fibrin sealant for hernia mesh fixation in experimental onlay and IPOM repair in rats.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-010-1094-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Research in hernia repair has targeted new atraumatic mesh fixation to reduce major complications such as chronic pain and adhesion formation. The efficacy and safety of two surgical adhesives, viz. Artiss&#xae; (FS, fibrin sealant containing 4 IU thrombin) and Bioglue&#xae; (AGG, bovine serum albumin/glutaraldehyde glue), were evaluated in this study. Primary study endpoints were tissue integration, dislocation, and adhesion formation. Foreign-body reaction formed the secondary study endpoint.
METHODS: Twenty-four polypropylene meshes (VM, Vitamesh&#xae;) were randomized to four groups (n = 6): two groups of onlay hernia repair (two meshes per animal) with mesh fixation by FS (O-FS) or by AGG (O-AGG), and two groups of IPOM repair (one mesh per animal) with mesh fixation by four sutures and FS (I-FS) or AGG (I-AGG). Eighteen rats underwent surgery. Follow-up was 30 days. Tissue integration, dislocation, seroma formation, inflammation, adhesion formation, and foreign-body reaction were assessed.
RESULTS: Meshes fixed with FS (O-FS, I-FS) showed good tissue integration. No dislocation, seroma formation, or macroscopic signs of inflammation were detectable. Adhesion formation of I-FS was significantly milder compared with I-AGG (P = 0.024). A moderate foreign-body reaction without active inflammation was seen histologically in O-FS and I-FS groups. Samples fixed with AGG (O-AGG, I-AGG) showed extensive scar formation. No dislocation and no seroma formation were observed. All of these samples showed moderate to severe signs of inflammation with abscess formation in the six meshes of O-AGG. Histology underlined these findings.
CONCLUSIONS: The fibrin sealant adhesive showed very good overall results of the primary and secondary outcome parameters. FS is a recommendable atraumatic fixation tool for the surgical onlay technique. AGG provides high adhesive strength, but shows low biocompatibility. Persisting active inflammation was seen in both the O-AGG and I-AGG groups, not favoring its use for these indications.

### PMID 19902233 (2010) — Histochemistry and cell biology
TITLE: Tissue reaction to three different types of tissue glues in an experimental aorta dissection model: a quantitative approach.
DOI: 10.1007/s00418-009-0656-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Tissue glues are used during surgical treatment of acute aorta dissection although some glues release toxic products and thus alter the histological structure of the vessel wall. The aim of our study was to use a porcine experimental model of infrarenal aorta dissection to compare histological changes of the vessel wall 1, 6 and 12 months after application of BioGlue, Gelatin-resorcin-formaldehyde (GRF) glue and Tissucol. For quantification, stereological methods were used. All types of glue caused stenosis, GRF most and Tissucol least severely. With increasing postoperative survival time, stenosis was again reduced. Elastine length density decreased with increasing survival time in Control as well as in all Experimental groups. The immunohistochemical phenotype of vascular smooth muscle cells was similar in Tissucol and Control samples. In GRF samples, actin, desmin and vimentin expression changed most severely. Similarly, number and distribution of vasa vasorum in the aortic wall was altered most severely in GRF samples. They tended to return to normal with increasing postoperative survival time, but at a slow rate in the GRF samples. It can be concluded that GRF causes the most severe histopathological changes within the treated aorta, which could be a reason for late failures of dissection surgery. However, glue handling and adhesive properties have to be taken into account, too, when certain glue is chosen for surgical intervention. Increased inflammation and vascularisation might even stabilise the aortic wall. Long-term experimental studies would be helpful to assess healing processes after initial disorganisation of the aortic wall structure.

### PMID 21059513 (2010) — The Canadian journal of neurological sciences. Le journal canadien des sciences neurologiques
TITLE: Use of tissue glues in endoscopic pituitary surgery: a cost comparison.
DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100010842 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Post-operative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks are a common complication of endoscopic pituitary surgery and account for a significant proportion of hospital costs associated with this procedure. Tisseel&#xae; is a tissue glue commonly used as an adjunct in dural repair but is not optimal for this purpose. DuraSeal&#xae; has several properties advantageous for dural repair but is not widely accepted in Canada partly due to its increased cost.
OBJECTIVE: A cost analysis of DuraSeal&#xae; versus Tisseel&#xae; in endoscopic pituitary surgery.
METHODS: A cost analysis was performed based on typical endoscopic pituitary surgery cases performed at our tertiary care institution. Operating room, hospital admission, and surgical sealant costs were obtained directly while estimates of patient recovery time and post-operative CSF leak rates were based on consensus values reported in the literature. Outcomes were reported for various possible clinical scenarios of sealant use.
RESULTS: In a model where surgical sealant is employed only in high-risk cases, use of DuraSeal&#xae; allows for a yearly cost savings of at least $4486.72. If surgical sealant is used in all cases, regular use of DuraSeal&#xae; versus Tisseel&#xae; either marginally reduces yearly costs or increases them by a maximum of $7619.25, depending on the case volume and estimated post-operative CSF leak rate.
CONCLUSION: In most clinical scenarios, use of DuraSeal&#xae; in endoscopic pituitary surgery may reduce overall yearly hospital costs compared to Tisseel&#xae;.

### PMID 20828525 (2010) — Journal of otolaryngology - head &amp; neck surgery = Le Journal d'oto-rhino-laryngologie et de chirurgie cervico-faciale
TITLE: Use of duraseal in repair of cerebrospinal fluid leaks.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The purpose of our article is to review the use of the DuraSeal Sealant System (Confluent Surgical Inc., Waltham, MA) in the repair of complex cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks in endoscopic skull-base surgery.
DESIGN: Retrospective chart review.
SETTING: London Health Sciences Centre.
METHODS: A database of endoscopic skull-base cases between 2007 and 2009 that involved CSF leakage repaired with DuraSeal was created. Demographic data and operative reports were collected and analyzed qualitatively.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Recurrence of CSF leak after repair.
RESULTS: Five cases were identified that met study criteria. In four of the five cases, the repair was successful. There were no complications related to DuraSeal use. Comparison to a subset of patients using Tisseel Fibrin Sealant (Baxter, Toronto, ON) for repair did not show a significant difference in failure rate (&#x3c7;2 = 0.029, p = .858).
CONCLUSIONS: There are a variety of techniques described to repair CSF rhinorrhea, with various studies demonstrating the advantages of using tissue glues in CSF leak repairs. We used DuraSeal in five patients to enhance graft strength and form a watertight seal. The system was effective in the majority of patients. Our study is the first to report on endoscopic endonasal repair of CSF leaks using DuraSeal.

### PMID 20828762 (2010) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Prevention of early vascular graft infection using regional antibiotic release.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2010.05.029 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Infections after prosthetic replacement of the aorta remain a serious and life-threatening complication. The only appropriate treatment is the surgical removal of the infected prosthesis. Accordingly, there is a need for new procedures to prevent the infection of vascular prostheses. This in vitro experiment investigated the effect of the pretreatment of vascular prostheses with antibiotics (daptomycin or baneocin) and the effect of antibiotics combined with fibrin sealant as possible prophylaxis of perioperative graft infection.
METHODS: Untreated prostheses served as controls. Pretreated prostheses of double woven velour vascular grafts were contaminated with Staphylococcus epidermidis, and colony-forming units were counted each day (CFU/mL).
RESULTS: The period of sterility differed significantly as a function of the pretreatment. Uncoated prostheses were immediately non-sterile and exhibited 2.63 &#xb1; 0.61 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL. Baneocin pretreatment resulted in sterility for 1.7 &#xb1; 0.6 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.0-2.4) d before we detected 2.14 &#xb1; 0.57 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL on the prostheses. Pretreatment with daptomycin yielded 2.9 &#xb1; 0.4 (CI 2.6-3.2) and fibrin sealant/baneocin compound yielded 3.1 &#xb1; 0.3 (CI 2.9-3.3) d of sterility, after which 1.81 &#xb1; 0.86 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL and 1.04 &#xb1; 0.77 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL were recorded. Finally, pretreatment with fibrin sealant/daptomycin led to sterility for 7.1 &#xb1; 0.3 (CI 6.9-7.3) d, after which 0.77 &#xb1; 0.60 &#xd7; 10(5) CFU/mL were observed on the prostheses.
CONCLUSIONS: The risk of vascular graft infection is reduced by pretreating the prostheses with antibiotics. The antibiotic/fibrin compound exhibited an effect of delayed antibiotic release. Vascular prostheses should therefore be pretreated with antibiotic solution to reduce bacterial adhesion. This procedure might be an effective prophylaxis for perioperative vascular graft infection and provides suitable protection for the prosthetic material.

### PMID 20233004 (2010) — Journal of investigative surgery : the official journal of the Academy of Surgical Research
TITLE: A comparison of a cyanoacrylate [corrected] glue (Glubran) vs. fibrin sealant (Tisseel) in experimental models of partial pulmonary resection and lung incision [corrected] in rabbits.
DOI: 10.3109/08941930903469383 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Bronchopleural fistulas (BPF) and air leaks (AL) present major complications after pulmonary resection. Various tissue sealants have been proposed for their prevention, e.g., fibrin sealant (FS) and cyanoacrylate glues (CA). Contrary to the safety record of FS, substantial side effects such as foreign body reaction and impaired tissue integration have been reported for CA. This study compares the sealing efficacy and biocompatibility as well as side effects of FS and CA in experimental partial pulmonary resection and lung incision in rabbits.
METHODS: 26 New Zealand white rabbits (3 kg) were randomized to one of the three groups: partial pulmonary resection (A, acute model; n = 7 FS/ 7CA), lung incision [2 (B; n = 3 FS/ 3 CA)], and 14-day observation period (C; n = 3 FS/ 3 CA). In all groups (A, B, and C), FS was considered as control and CA as treatment. Surgery was carried out in general anaesthesia and mechanical ventilation. For partial lung resection a median thoracotomy was performed and the apex of the left median lobe was resected and the parenchymal surface covered with 0.09 ml of FS and CA. The thoracic cavity was filled with ringer solution after 5 minutes. The inspiratory minute volume (IMV) was increased by 0.02 l after every 4th inspiration. In groups B and C, a left lateral thoracotomy was performed in the 4th intercostal space and the left median lobe was incised with a scalpel. The incision was covered with 0.5 ml of FS or CA. At autopsy (B and C) the operation site was assessed macroscopically. Histology was performed in all animals.
RESULTS: In terms of sealing purposes, FS and CA yielded comparable results in all groups. CA elicited a substantial increase of tissue temperature in the acute phase immediately after application (A). After 14 days CA residues were found, whereas FS was completely degraded. Histology showed a pronounced inflammatory response to CA but not to FS. We conclude that although the effect of airtight sealing was equally satisfying, our results emphasize that FS is preferable to CA for the prevention of BPF and AL due to superior biocompatibility and degradability. Longterm effects of CA residues on pulmonary tissue require further experimental testing.

### PMID 20124293 (2010) — Asian cardiovascular &amp; thoracic annals
TITLE: Comparison of cryoprecipitate with commercial fibrinogen in bullectomy.
DOI: 10.1177/0218492309355329 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glues are widely used for various pulmonary operations, but commercially produced glues are made of heterogeneous fibrinogen that has infection risks. We used autologous cryoprecipitate and evaluated its clinical value as a fibrin sealant instead of the commercially available glue. One hundred patients who underwent thoracoscopic bullectomy for primary spontaneous pneumothorax were studied. The apical visceral pleura was covered with an absorbable mesh and a fibrin glue. Autologous cryoprecipitate glue was used in 30 patients (group A), and commercially produced fibrinogen was used in 70 (group B). The mean duration of postoperative chest drainage was 1.9 days in group A and 1.5 days in group B. The cumulative 2-year postoperative recurrence rate was 3.4% in group A and 6.5% in group B. There were no differences in clinical results after surgery for primary spontaneous pneumothorax, using either autologous cryoprecipitate or commercially produced fibrinogen. The production autologous cryoprecipitate was easy and low-cost. We propose that autologous cryoprecipitates be used in operations for primary spontaneous pneumothorax.

### PMID 20592461 (2010) — Bioscience trends
TITLE: Isolation of mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow wastes of spinal fusion procedure (TLIF) for low back pain patients and preparation of bone dusts for transplantable autologous bone graft with a serum glue.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Low back pain and subsequent disabilities are common. A lumbar spinal fusion procedure is an effective treatment with autologous bone grafts, but harvesting the bone from the iliac crest is associated with risks of complications. New treatments using stem cells together with osteoconductive and otesoinductive materials have made the procedure safer, but the inconsistency of the amount of stem cells harvested from bone marrow aspirate still remains to be solved. This study reports that the bone dusts, usually discarded as surgical wastes during transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion procedure (TLIF procedure), yielded cells which had the characteristics of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in vitro. The cells were positive for the MSC markers and were able to differentiate in osteogenic and adipogenic directions. The cells grew robustly in an osteoconductive material, Bolheal (serum glue), and also proliferated well in culture medium supplemented with autologous serum. Therefore, the bone dust is a good candidate for the alternative source of stem cells other than bone marrow aspirate to increase the safety of the TLIF procedure.

### PMID 21294388 (2010) — Annali italiani di chirurgia
TITLE: Meta-analysis of fibrin glue versus surgery for treatment of fistula-in-ano.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: AIM: To evaluate the convenience in terms of recurrence and fecal incontinence rates of fibrin glue versus surgical treatment in the management of fistula-in-ano.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and non-randomized studies (CCTs) comparing conventional surgical treatment versus fibrin glue treatment in patients with perianal fistulae were identified using a predefined search strategy. The post treatment anal incontinence rate and the fistula recurrence rates between the two operations were compared by using the methods provided by the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. The lack of homogeneity of results between the different studies did not allow to analyze other secondary outcomes. Patients with cryptoglandular and Crohn's anal fistula were enrolled in the analysis. The employed fibrin glue came from commercial kits: Beriplast (Aventis Behring, Sussex, United Kingdom) and Tisseal or Tissucol (Baxter, Inc, Mississauga, Ontario). Surgical conventional treatment consisted of fistulotomy, placement of a cutting or loose latex seton and advancement mucosal flap closure. All patients were followed up at 6 and 12 weeks, the longest follow up was 6 months.
RESULTS: Two RCTs (106 patients) and 1 non randomized studies (232 patients) were identified. The recurrence rate is higher, although still not statistically significant, in those patients who underwent fibrin glue injection (44/81) versus conventional surgical treatment (108/230), (OR: 0.44; 95 %CI: 0.12-1.68; P = 0.23). Furthermore in the analysis of the subgroup of RCTs alone there were not significant differences with the previous results of RCTs with CCT analysis (OR: 0.33; 95 %CI: 0.03-3.66; P = 0.37). In the same way the analysis of the subgroup of RCTs with complex anal fistulae were not statistically significant and similar to the previous results regarding all type of fistulas (OR: 0.86; 95 %CI: 0.01-72.36; P = 0.95). The analysis of post-operative anal incontinence showed no difference between the group who underwent fibrin glue injection (9/230) and the conventional surgical treatment group (10/81), (OR: 1.00; 95 %CI: 0.43-2.34; P = 1.00). A very low heterogeneity in the analysis was detected (Chi-square = 0.04 - P = 0%).
CONCLUSION: Our statistical analysis does not show any significant statistical difference between fibrin glue treatment versus conventional surgical treatment for all perianal fistulae in terms of recurrence (P = 0.23) and anal incontinence (P = 1.00).

### PMID 20544241 (2010) — Journal of artificial organs : the official journal of the Japanese Society for Artificial Organs
TITLE: New pre-clotting method for fibrin glue in a non-sealed graft used in an LVAD: the KYO method.
DOI: 10.1007/s10047-010-0504-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Pre-clotting has been applied to a vascular prosthesis with high permeability (non-sealed graft). In this study, conventional pre-clotting methods were compared with our novel method, which keeps high-yield optimization of hemostasis, the KYO method. Fibrinogen solution (A) and thrombin solution (B) of fibrin glue (Beriplast P Combi-Set(&#xae;)) were applied to the graft (Cooly low-porosity woven graft) by five methods; Group 1: control, without fibrin glue; Group 2: spray method, spraying solutions A and B simultaneously; Group 3: rub method, rubbing solution A first, and then rubbing solution B on the graft; Group 4: rub-and-spray method, rubbing solution A on the graft, then spraying solutions A and B; Group 5: the KYO method, rubbing solution A into the graft with the finger, then rubbing solution B on the graft. Burst pressure, the point of saline solution leakage, was measured 10 times for each group. The grafts were microscopically examined using HE staining and electron microscopy. The average burst pressure was 12.6 &#xb1; 1.5 mmHg in Group 1, 27.1 &#xb1; 3.3 mmHg in Group 2, 22.4 &#xb1; 7.1 mmHg in Group 3, 41.0 &#xb1; 9.0 mmHg in Group 4, and 300 mmHg in Group 5. Saline solution did not leak through the graft at a pressure of 300 mmHg in Group 5. There were statistically significant differences among the groups. The relationship between fibrin glue and the graft was unclear in all groups by HE staining. Electron microscopic photographs showed a smooth surface and fibrin glue permeating the graft fibers in Group 5. The KYO method was better than the others in terms of resistance to pressure. It was a very simple method, and could thus come into widespread use.

### PMID 22553582 (2010) — International journal of ophthalmology
TITLE: Comparison of fibrin glue and suture technique in pterygium surgery performed with limbal autograft.
DOI: 10.3980/j.issn.2222-3959.2010.04.09 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: To compare the efficiency and safety of fibrin glue to suture technique in pterygium surgery performed with limbal autograft.
METHODS: A prospective randomised clinical trial was carried out in 58 eyes of 58 patients operated for primary nasal pterygium. Autologous conjunctival graft taken from the superotemporal limbus was used to cover the sclera after pterygium excision. In 29 eyes, the transplant was attached to the sclera with a fibrin tissue adhesive (Beriplast P) and in 29 eyes with 8-0 Virgin silk sutures. The Mann-Whitney U test was used for statistical analysis. Postoperative patient discomfort (pain, stinging, watering) and biomicroscopic findings (hyperemia, edema) were graded. Patients were followed up at least for six months.
RESULTS: Subconjunctival hemorrhage occured under the graft in one patient in group 1. In seven cases of group 2, sutures were removed at the 15(th) day because of granulomatous tissue reaction. Patient symptoms were significantly less and biomicroscopic findings were better in group 1. Pterygium recurrence was seen in one case of group 1, and 2 cases of group 2. Average surgery cost was higher (P&lt;0.05) and surgery time was shorter (P&lt;0.05) in fibrin group.
CONCLUSION: Using fibrin glue for graft fixation in pterygium surgery causes significantly less postoperative pain and shortens surgery time significantly.

### PMID 19900744 (2010) — European journal of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive biology
TITLE: Hydrogel protection: a novel approach to reduce bowel inflammation in experimental gastroschisis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2009.10.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: In gastroschisis there is herniation of the fetal bowel into the amniotic cavity that results in severe intestinal dysfunction. In order to reduce bowel exposure to amniotic fluid we used a hydrogel of N-isopropylacrylamide copolymerized with acrylic acid (P(NIPAAm-co-AAc)) to coat the herniated bowel through the use of a fibrin adhesive (Beriplast).
STUDY DESIGN: Gastroschisis was created in fetuses of 31 pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats by evisceration of the bowel through a right paramedian incision in the abdominal wall on day 18.5 of pregnancy. The fetuses were separated in four groups of 12 fetuses: control (C), gastroschisis (G), gastroschisis+fibrin adhesive (GA) and gastroschisis+fibrin adhesive+dry hydrogel (GAH). Animals were harvested at day 21.5 of pregnancy and the hydrogel was removed. Fetuses and bowels were weighed and morphometric analysis was performed. Isoelectric focusing of the amniotic fluid determined its electrical charge. We evaluated the hydrogel swelling ratio (Q) in the amniotic fluid. Histological analysis and scanning electronic microscopy (SEM) of the bowel and hydrogel were performed. Our primary outcome was bowel intactness after hydrogel removal and our secondary outcome was the effectiveness of the hydrogel in protecting the bowel against amniotic fluid and its components. Differences among the groups were tested by the ANOVA and Tukey-Kramer post-test method and the statistical significance accepted was for p values &lt;0.05.
RESULTS: The mass of swollen hydrogel was 34 times the mass of dry hydrogel. Isoelectric focusing of the amniotic fluid showed that most of its proteins are negatively charged as the hydrogel. SEM showed that removal of the hydrogel did not damage bowel serosa. Bowel weight, diameter and wall thickness were similar between groups C and GAH but bowel diameter and wall thickness was significantly reduced in C and GAH compared to G and GA (p&lt;0.001).
CONCLUSION: The P(NIPAAm-co-AAc) hydrogel does not harm the bowel and provides a safe effective protection with reduction of bowel damage in gastroschisis.

### PMID 21082565 (2010) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Current developments in hernia repair; meshes, adhesives, and tacking.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Open and laparoscopic hernia surgery continues to evolve with new products allowing surgeons multiple choices in treating their patients. The evolution towards tension-free techniques in dealing with hernias requires that today's surgeons know the options available in meshes as well as fixation methods in order to have the best outcomes. In recent years, there has been a rapid expansion in the number of meshes available. Currently, there are numerous uncoated, coated, and biologic meshes in production that can be used in hernia repair. This paper will focus on the latest developments in coated meshes that allow for intra-abdominal placement as well as the different types of biologic meshes and their typical uses. Tacking devices for laparoscopic hernia repair now come in titanium as well as absorbable devices. AbsorbaTack&#x2122; (Covidien, Norwalk, CT) and Sorbafix&#x2122; (Davol, Warwick, RI) are two of the newest absorbable tacking devices thought to possibly benefit patients with decreased pain and long-term complications as compared with their titanium counterparts. Adhesives continue to be used more and more for hernia repair, especially in inguinal and paraesophageal hernia repairs. Tissucol&#x2122;/Tisseel&#x2122; (Baxter, Deerfield, IL) and Evicel&#x2122; (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) are two types of fibrin glues that are available for use in hernia repair. Practitioners using these biologic adhesives think there is less pain compared with tacking.

### PMID 21059326 (2010) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Treatment of deep cartilage defects of the knee with autologous chondrocyte transplantation: long-term results].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE OF THE STUDY: The authors present the long-term results of surgical treatment of deep chondral defects of the knee (medial or lateral femoral condyle). They used the transplantation of autologous cultured chondrocytes in the form of a solid chondral graft.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Indications for autologous chondrocyte transplantation most frequently included acute trauma to the knee. Patients with chondral lesions categorized as grades IIIa and IIIb by the Noyes-Stabler classification were indicated for this treatment. A small sample of healthy cartilage was harvested arthroscopically from the non-weight-bearing area of the knee and was sent to the Tissue Bank for chondrocyte cultivation. After 4 to 5 weeks the cultured chondrocytes were formed into a solid chondral graft, implanted at the damaged site of the medial or lateral femoral condyle and fixed with fibrin glue (Tissucol).
RESULTS: Fifty-two patients, 34 males and 18 females (average age, 29 years range, 17 to 45 years) were treated using this method in the period from 2001 to 2009. Follow-up was 6 to 84 months, with an average of 46 months. Thirteen patients were examined by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 7 to 39 months (average, 19 months) after the implantation. Full incorporation the chondrograft was observed in 12 patients (92.3%). The clinical results were evaluated by the Lysholm scoring system (1, 2 and 5 years after the operation) and showed significant improvement. In 24 patients, the chondrograft quality was evaluated by immunohistochemical methods in samples taken by second-look arthroscopy from the borders of implantation sites. Hyaline chondral tissue was detected in 100% samples by microscopic examination, and collagen type II was present in 100% samples examined by imnunohistochemistry using haematoxylin-eosin staining.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant improvement in knee function was recorded when the pre-operative and final follow-up stages were compared. The autologous chondrocyte transplantation showed a potential for the treatment of large cartilage defects. The excellent results achieved allowed the patients to return to normal activity levels.This method is also convenient when ligament reconstruction is necessary during one operation.

### PMID 20932376 (2010) — JSLS : Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons
TITLE: Laparoscopic incisional hernia repair with fibrin glue in select patients.
DOI: 10.4293/108680810X12785289144359 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Laparoscopic treatment of incisional hernias can be performed using different types of fixation devices and prosthesis. We present a case series of 19 patients with incisional hernias with a diameter of &lt; 6 cm, who underwent laparoscopic repair using Hi-tex dual-side mesh, positioned intraperitoneally, fixed to the abdominal wall by fibrin glue (Tissucol).
METHODS: Nineteen patients with incisional hernias &lt; 6 cm in diameter were enrolled in this study and treated laparoscopically with Hi-tex and Tissucol. Surgical complications and patient outcomes were assessed with a clinical follow-up.
RESULTS: Laparoscopic repair of incisional hernias by using Hi-tex mesh affixed to the parietal wall with fibrin glue was feasible and easy in patients with parietal defects &lt; 6 cm in diameter. Mean operating time was 30 minutes. Mean hospital stay was 1.5 days. Almost no postoperative pain, major surgical complications, seroma formation, relapses, or prosthesis infection occurred during a mean follow-up of 20 months.
CONCLUSIONS: In select patients, Hi-tex mesh affixed using fibrin glue allows laparoscopic repair of incisional hernias with very good patient outcomes, especially in terms of postoperative pain and seroma formation.

### PMID 20888589 (2010) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Development and analysis of a collagen-based hemostatic adhesive.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2010.08.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Commercially available hemostatic-adhesive has the risk of disease transmission because it is derived from a plasma component. The purpose of this study is to manufacture a new hemostatic adhesive and evaluate its performances.
METHODS: Two atelocollagen-based hemostatic adhesives were produced and named as Bleestop A (2% esterified atelocollagen in 75% ethanol + 1% CaCl(2) + 0.71% DOPA + 0.1% tranexamic acid in DW) and Bleestop B (2% esterified atelocollagen in DW + 1% CaCl(2) + 0.71% DOPA + 0.1% aminocaproic acid in DW). These are compared with the negative control group (no adhesives used group) and the positive control group (Tissucol Duo Quick group). The adult male Sprague-Dawley rat model was adopted and the hemostatic-adhesion activities of each group were assessed by the adhesion strength test and the morphologic features of adhesion. The liver tissues were used. Histologic assessment of adhesion was accessed using light microscopy.
RESULTS: Bleeding was controlled immediately after application of Bleestop A and partial adhesion was observed after 30 s. More than 95% area of the resected surface attached after 1 min. In Bleestop B, partial adhesion was observed after 30 s. More than 95% area of the resected surface was attached after 45 s. Histologic evaluation showed that Bleestop A and B mediated organized adhesion rapidly between both resected tissue surfaces. The adhesion strength of Bleestop A and B was better than the negative control group and showed same adhesion strength as the positive control group after 3 min.
CONCLUSION: Bleestop A and B showed significant hemostasis and adhesion capability within 1 min. They are comparable to the positive control group.

### PMID 20835530 (2010) — Brazilian journal of otorhinolaryngology
TITLE: Nasal septal perforation closure with bacterial cellulose in rabbits.
DOI: 10.1590/S1808-86942010000400007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: Alloplastic materials can be used together with tissue and structure to close nasal septal perforation.
AIM: to test cellulose use in the closure of septal perforation in rabbits and to compare fibrosis, inflammation, vascular congestion and graft integrity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifteen rabbits. The rabbits were divided into two groups:
CONTROL: Five rabbits and Bionext and fibrin glue Tissucol: Ten rabbits. Septal perforations were done in all of them. In the Bionext group the closure was performed with the placement of cellulose.
RESULTS: Two rabbits died in the first week. Cellulose group: 2 closures without the cellulose in between the septum membrane and in 4 cases the graft stood in the middle of the perforation locked in place by the edges. No closure in the control group.
CONCLUSION: There was no closure of the perforation of the nasal septum with the graft between the septum membranes. There was no statistically significant difference concerning acute inflammation, vascular congestion and fibrosis between the 2 groups. In cases in which the graft remained in place, there was no change in its integrity. It may be used as a substructure for re-epithelization of the perforation edges.

### PMID 20827666 (2010) — Handchirurgie, Mikrochirurgie, plastische Chirurgie : Organ der Deutschsprachigen Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Handchirurgie : Organ der Deutschsprachigen Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Mikrochirurgie der Peripheren Nerven und Gefasse : Organ der V...
TITLE: [Alloplastic cancellous bone replacement and fibrin glue in hand surgery].
DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1254111 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Alloplastic replacement of cancellous bone is being increasingly used in the clinical setting. The use in hand surgery, however, is only sparsely documented.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We report about the use of micro- and macroporous biphasic calicium phosphate granulate (Tricos (&#xae;)) in combination with fibrin sealant (Tissucol (&#xae;)) in six patients undergoing surgery of the hand involving cancellous bone deficits. The indications ranged from carpal stabilisation to DIP athrodesis. Follow-up time was up to 15 months.
RESULTS: Because cancellous bone harvesting could be avoided, morbidity and the extent of surgery could be reduced in all patients. Healing was uneventful and the clinical course as documented by X-ray controls, toleration of physiotherapeutic exercises and stability was analogous to that of conventional surgery involving cancellous bone grafting.
CONCLUSION: These first results indicate that alloplastic replacement of spongiosa grafts, especially by micro- and macroporous biphasic calcium phosphate granulate can possibly be successfully used in surgery of the hand. The extent of bony remodelling still needs to be determined by further examination.

### PMID 20580279 (2010) — Oral surgery, oral medicine, oral pathology, oral radiology, and endodontics
TITLE: A comparison of bone generation capability in rabbits using tooth ash and plaster of Paris with platelet-rich plasma or fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tripleo.2010.03.031 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Increased attention has been focused on determining the most efficacious materials for generalized bone grafts. This article presents the results of a histomorphometric analysis of bone healing in the calvaria of rabbits. The study compared the use of a tooth ash and plaster of Paris mixture alone, in association with platelet-rich plasma (PRP), and in association with fibrin sealant.
STUDY DESIGN: Twelve rabbits were divided into control (group 1) and experimental groups (groups 2, 3, and 4). Group 1 was maintained as an unfilled control, and tooth ash and plaster of Paris were used in group 2, tooth ash and plaster of Paris with PRP were used in group 3, and tooth ash and plaster of Paris with fibrin sealant (Tissucol Duo Quick) were used in group 4. One-half of the animals were killed after 4 weeks, and the rest were killed after 8 weeks. Bone samples were taken from the defect areas, and newly formed bone was analyzed histomorphometrically.
RESULTS: The rate of new bone formation in groups 2, 3, and 4 was significantly higher than the rate in the control group. The rate of new bone formation in groups 3 and 4 was higher than the rate in group 2, but the difference was not statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: The concomitant use of PRP or fibrin sealant with tooth ash and plaster of Paris graft materials may have a positive effect on bone healing.

### PMID 20574742 (2010) — European archives of oto-rhino-laryngology : official journal of the European Federation of Oto-Rhino-Laryngological Societies (EUFOS) : affiliated with the German Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
TITLE: CO2 laser-assisted microsurgery for intracordal cysts: technique and results of 49 patients.
DOI: 10.1007/s00405-010-1315-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Microsurgery for intracordal cysts is a challenging procedure, because cysts are close to the vocal ligament and the risk of inducing a scar is high. In this retrospective study, our experience with the CO(2)-laser scanning system (Acublade(&#xae;)) is reported on 49 patients. There were 41% epidermoid cysts and 59% mucous retention cysts. A quarter of the patients presented with bilateral cystic lesions and 59% had a contralateral lesion other than a cyst. The cyst was removed after a minimicroflap. It was dissected away from the lamina propria and the epithelium. Collagen was injected intraoperatively if the glottal gap was considered important. The epithelium was redraped using Tissucol (Baxter, Vienna, Austria). The mean follow-up time was 160 days. We noted a statistically significant improvement in the grade of the dysphonia according to Hirano's perceptual scale (G pre = 2, G post = 1, p = 0.002); the Vocal Handicap Index (VHI pre = 51, VHI post = 28, p = 0.001) and the maximal phonation time in milliseconds (MPT pre = 11, 1 MPT post = 12.7, p = 0.033) in all the patients. In the professional voice subgroup (20/49 patients), there was a significant improvement in the frequency range (FR pre = 310 Hz, FR post = 434 Hz, p = 0.001). The CO(2)-laser scanning system is reliable in the treatment of intracordal cysts.

### PMID 20387581 (2010) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Operative neurosurgery: personal view and historical backgrounds. 6. Positioning, instruments].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Important points of positioning and instruments at the time of performing microneurosurgery according to the traditional Zuerich school style were presented based on the experience of ca. 1,000 surgeries/year for around 13.5 years. Most of the instruments and equipment had been taken over from the time of Prof. Ya&#x15f;argil. Positioning: Three positions, supine, knee-elbow and siting position were almost all the positions, which we have used and special mention was directed to the sitting position. Around 1/3 of our surgeries were done in the sitting position. Its indication includes lesions not only in the posterior fossa, but in the parieto-occipital region and in the cervico-thoracal region down to the Th5. Good fixation of the head with Mayfield 3-pin-fixation apparatus with the use of one pin mostly around the medial root of the mastoid process (thickness of the bone and small amount of soft tissue) is of cardinal importance and prevention of excessive flexion (with the one-finger breadth between the chin and its underlying neck), so that strangulation of the tracheal tube and the jugular venous system can be avoided and also the below mentioned jugular compression maneuver can be done effectively. Basic knowledge of prevention of air embolism was pointed out: knowledge of usual anatomical entrance sites of the air (emissary veins, diploic veins, veins entering into the venous sinuses, venous plexus around the craniocervical junction etc.), detection of the air entrance sites by jugular compression and their sealing with tissue adhesives Tissucol. Endotidal CO2 value should be above 4.0 kPk. Importance of reclination of the position in case of further falling down of the CO2 value was emphasized. Special mention was made about the patent foramen ovale as a risk of air embolism. Advantages of the sitting position in the performance of supracerebellar infratentorial/transtentorial SCIT/SCTT approach and transvertebralis dural ring approach TVDRA were emphasized and the use of linear incision was stressed at the time of performance of all these surgeries including the posterior circulation revascularization, occipital artery-posterior cerebral artery/superior cerebellar artery OA-PCA/SCA bypass and occipital artery-posterior inferior cerebellar artery OA-PICA bypass. As for the operating microscope, importance of the eyepiece-lens assembly with mouthpiece was emphasized. Appropriate selection of this system enables surgery of long duration in a comfortable and non-tiring condition in terms of the arm length of the surgeon and his immediate reaction especially at the time of intraoperative premature rupture of an aneurysm or of minute delicate focusing at the time of microvascular suturing without withdrawal of one or both hands from the operative field for handling the operating microscope. An arm rest enables secure, effective, precise and tireless performance of microsurgery in every operating position, so that the use of height an adjustable oil pressure driven arm rest was presented along with a simply height adjustable and easily movable chair. As for the bipolar coagulator pincette, the followings were discussed: more than three different lengths of byonett forceps, each of three different tip-sizes, with isolated tips, dosis and method of coagulation. Practically no need of monopolar coagulation was pointed out. Suction tube also should have different length and size according to the depth and situations. Its vacuum power should be regulated also in accordance with changing situation in every stage of surgery. The vacuum power is regulated at surgeon's request by scrub nurses or circulating nurses, so that the surgeon can concentrate only on the precise maneuver of the tip of the suction tube. For the same reason, foot pedals for the bipolar coagulator, drilling and trepanation should be stepped by other than the surgeon, so that he can concentrate on the tip the of instrument for precise maneuvering. As tissue destruction apparatus, we prefer to use CUSA to laser, as the former enables preservation of blood vessels at the time of tissue destruction and suction by appropriate power application. Besides these, the followings items were discussed: scissors (blunt tips), Lyla retractor (variously tapered tips and fixation or holding at the other peripheral end), drilling (turning direction adjustable, cutting and diamond burr) etc.

### PMID 20096254 (2010) — American journal of obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Injectable candidate sealants for fetal membrane repair: bonding and toxicity in vitro.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2009.07.051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: This study was undertaken to test injectable surgical sealants that are biocompatible with fetal membranes and that are to be used eventually for the closure of iatrogenic membrane defects.
STUDY DESIGN: Dermabond (Ethicon Inc, Norderstedt, Germany), Histoacryl (B. Braun GmbH, Tuttlingen, Germany), and Tissucol (Baxter AG, Volketwil, Switzerland) fibrin glue, and 3 types of in situ forming poly(ethylene glycol)-based polymer hydrogels were tested for acute toxicity on direct contact with fetal membranes for 24 hours. For the determination of elution toxicity, extracts of sealants were incubated on amnion cell cultures for 72 hours. Bonding and toxicity was assessed through morphologic and/or biochemical analysis.
RESULTS: Extracts of all adhesives were nontoxic for cultured cells. However, only Tissucol and 1 type of poly(ethylene glycol)-based hydrogel, which is a mussel-mimetic tissue adhesive, showed efficient, nondisruptive, nontoxic bonding to fetal membranes. Mussel-mimetic tissue adhesive that was applied over membrane defects that were created with a 3.5-mm trocar accomplished leak-proof closure that withstood membrane stretch in an in vitro model.
CONCLUSION: A synthetic hydrogel-type tissue adhesive that merits further evaluation in vivo emerged as a potential sealing modality for iatrogenic membrane defects.

### PMID 20025455 (2010) — Tissue engineering. Part B, Reviews
TITLE: Strategies for articular cartilage lesion repair and functional restoration.
DOI: 10.1089/ten.TEB.2009.0590 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: Injury of articular cartilage due to trauma or pathological conditions is the major cause of disability worldwide, especially in North America. The increasing number of patients suffering from joint-related conditions leads to a concomitant increase in the economic burden. In this review article, we focus on strategies to repair and replace knee joint cartilage, since knee-associated disabilities are more prevalent than any other joint. Because of inadequacies associated with widely used approaches, the orthopedic community has an increasing tendency to develop biological strategies, which include transplantation of autologous (i.e., mosaicplasty) or allogeneic osteochondral grafts, autologous chondrocytes (autologous chondrocyte transplantation), or tissue-engineered cartilage substitutes. Tissue-engineered cartilage constructs represent a highly promising treatment option for knee injury as they mimic the biomechanical environment of the native cartilage and have superior integration capabilities. Currently, a wide range of tissue-engineering-based strategies are established and investigated clinically as an alternative to the routinely used techniques (i.e., knee replacement and autologous chondrocyte transplantation). Tissue-engineering-based strategies include implantation of autologous chondrocytes in combination with collagen I, collagen I/III (matrix-induced autologous chondrocyte implantation), HYAFF 11 (Hyalograft C), and fibrin glue (Tissucol) or implantation of minced cartilage in combination with copolymers of polyglycolic acid along with polycaprolactone (cartilage autograft implantation system), and fibrin glue (DeNovo NT graft). Tissue-engineered cartilage replacements show better clinical outcomes in the short term, and with advances that have been made in orthopedics they can be introduced arthroscopically in a minimally invasive fashion. Thus, the future is bright for this innovative approach to restore function.

### PMID 19877186 (2010) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Tissue-engineered allograft tracheal cartilage using fibrin/hyaluronan composite gel and its in vivo implantation.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.20652 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Treatment and management of tracheal defects remain challenging in head and neck surgery. Various reconstruction techniques have been used, with no consensus on the best approach. The purpose of this study was to explore a novel strategy to fabricate tissue-engineered trachea by using fibrin/hyaluronic acid (HA) composite gel and evaluate the feasibility of creating tracheal cartilage.
STUDY DESIGN: A preliminary animal experiment.
METHODS: Chondrocytes from rabbit cartilage were expanded and seeded into a culture dish at high density to form mechanically stable allograft tracheal cartilage using fibrin/HA composite gel. After a longitudinal cervical skin incision, the trachea was exposed and a rectangular defect (1 x 0.5 cm) was created on the cervical trachea by scalpel on six rabbits. Tissue-engineered cartilage using fibrin/HA composite was trimmed and fixed to defect boundaries with Tissucol (Baxter International, Deerfield, IL). Postoperatively, the site was evaluated endoscopically, histologically, radiologically, and functionally.
RESULTS: Postoperatively, rigid telescopic examination showed that the implanted scaffolds in all cases were completely covered with regenerated mucosa without granulation or stenosis. Histologic data showed ciliated epithelium regenerated at the operated site from 2 months postoperatively. Ciliary beat frequency of ciliated epithelium on implants was very similar to normal respiratory mucosa. Computed tomography images revealed fine luminal contour of the regenerated site. However, allograft cartilage implanted was found to be partially preserved on the postoperative specimen.
CONCLUSIONS: The tracheal luminal contour and functional epithelial regeneration without graft rejection and inflammation were observed after repair of a tracheal resection using allogeneic implants with chondrocytes cultured with fibrin/HA.

### PMID 19748275 (2010) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Tracheal lacerations after endotracheal intubation: a proposed morphological classification to guide non-surgical treatment.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2009.07.034 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Postintubation tracheobronchial lacerations (PITLs) are traditionally managed surgically. We sought to evaluate the rationale for non-surgical management of PITL.
METHODS: From January 2003 to November 2008, 30 patients with PITL were observed in our institution. PITL were graded as follows: Level I - mucosal or submucosal tracheal involvement without mediastinal emphysema and without oesophageal injury; Level II - tracheal lesion up to the muscular wall with subcutaneous or mediastinal emphysema without oesophageal injury or mediastinitis; Level IIIA - complete laceration of the tracheal wall with oesophageal or mediastinal soft-tissue hernia without oesophageal injury or mediastinitis; Level IIIB - any laceration of the tracheal wall with oesophageal injury or mediastinitis. All patients with Level I, II and IIIA PITL were treated conservatively with endoscopic instillation of fibrin glue (Tissucol, Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, MA, USA).
RESULTS: All patients with Level I (n=3), II (n=24) and IIIA (n=2) PITL were successfully treated conservatively. The patient with a Level IIIB injury underwent posterolateral thoracotomy repair of the trachea. No mortality was reported. Mean hospital stay was 12.9 days. Flexible bronchoscopy at 7, 28, 90 and 180 days showed no abnormalities. Complete healing was attained in all patients by day 28.
CONCLUSIONS: Level I or II PITL should be managed non-surgically. When adequate respiratory status is present, Level IIIA PITL can be managed conservatively in selected institutions only, because these injuries are high-risk injuries. Any PITL associated with injury involving the oesophagus or with mediastinitis (Level IIIB) must be treated as soon as possible by surgery.

### PMID 19708077 (2010) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
TITLE: Human mesenchymal stem cells: Influence of oxygen pressure on proliferation and chondrogenic differentiation in fibrin glue in vitro.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.32577 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Tissue engineering using biomaterials is a promising solution for cartilage replacement. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether the fibrin sealant Tissucol(R) provides a suitable scaffold for re-implanting stem cells during chondrogenic replacement therapy. Pluripotent stem cells were isolated from adult human bone marrow (hMSCs), cultured and characterized by FACS (CD105+/CD106+, CD45-/CD14-/CD34-). A large-holed porous hMSC-containing fibrin matrix was built that allowed hMSCs to survive throughout the period of culture (42 days) in either proliferation or chondrogenic differentiation medium under normoxic (21% O2) or hypoxic (3% O2) conditions. Morphology (as determined by electron microscopy) and proliferation (Ki67 staining) of the embedded hMSCs did not markedly vary under normoxic and hypoxic culture even after 42 days in culture. The stem cell marker Oct-4 was expressed during the whole culture period. Under chondrogenic differentiation conditions, especially under hypoxic conditions, we observed rounded chondrocyte-like cell types and a chondral phenotype assessed by mRNA expression of collagen II and Alcian blue staining. hMSCs seeded into large-holed porous preparations of Tissucol survive, proliferate and keep their stem cell character. Furthermore, culturing the cells in a corresponding medium induces chondrogenic differentiation, which could be remarkably and significantly enhanced under hypoxic conditions.

### PMID 19184090 (2010) — Langenbeck's archives of surgery
TITLE: Mesh fixation with fibrin glue (Tissucol/Tisseel) in hernia repair dependent on the mesh structure--is there an optimum fibrin-mesh combination?--investigations on a biomechanical model.
DOI: 10.1007/s00423-009-0466-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Because of its hemostatic and adhesive properties, fibrin glue has been used in many areas of surgical treatment in recent years. One example is hernia repair, where fibrin gluing has become increasingly established as an alternative method for mesh fixation. Clinically, fixation with fibrin glue shows a reduced postoperative complication rate compared to other fixation methods (staples, sutures), particularly with regard to pain.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Six different lightweight meshes were tested: TiMesh light, TiMesh extralight, Parietene light, Ultrapro, Optilene LP, and BARD Soft Mesh. Two millimeters Tissucol was used for fixation. Five meshes from each group were tested on muscular tissue with and without fibrin glue. The defined defect was 4.5 cm in diameter. The biomechanical measurements were taken in a standardized way using a materials testing machine. The minimum fixation strength required was 32 N, calculated from a corresponding model.
RESULTS: The fixation strength measurements without fibrin glue gave a mean value for all 30 meshes of 2.98 N with a SD of 0.92 N. This was far below the 32 N required. With fibrin glue, the mean of all the measurements (30 meshes) was 61.86 +/- 23.0 N (min 34.9 N, max 97.3 N). The lowest value was recorded for Ultrapro (34.9 +/- 12.5 N). All the other meshes had a significantly higher fixation strength when fixed with fibrin glue than Ultrapro (p = 0.001). The best results were found for Optilene LP, and this was significantly better than all the other meshes (97.3 +/- 8.9 N; p &lt; 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Given the adequate stability and superior biocompatibility of lightweight large pore monofilament polypropylene meshes, heavyweight polypropylene meshes should no longer be used. It is possible to achieve adequate fixation of the meshes using fibrin glue. However, careful consideration should be given to the particular structure of the mesh in each case. Not every mesh is equally suitable for this purpose.

### PMID 19159952 (2010) — Langenbeck's archives of surgery
TITLE: Primary mesh augmentation with fibrin glue for abdominal wall closure--investigations on a biomechanical model.
DOI: 10.1007/s00423-008-0453-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The occurrence of incisional hernias after various types of abdominal procedures and incisions continues to be a problem. A number of studies conducted for diverse risk groups have identified a beneficial role for the prophylactic use of mesh augmentation. To what extent this affects the stability of a suture was tested in our biomechanical model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To that effect, we compared three groups, carrying out six measurements in each case: (1) single suture in a muscle specimen, (2) suture and additional reinforcement with fibrin glue, and (3) suture and additional reinforcement with a mesh fixed with fibrin glue (Tissucol, Tisseel; with an overlap of 2 cm to all sides).
RESULTS: The single suture conferred a tensile strength, which in our model, was just above the prescribed maximum abdominal pressure of 32 N (37.3 N). The additional use of fibrin glue did not have any significant impact on this result (41.8 N). Only through mesh augmentation with fibrin glue was it possible to achieve a significantly greater tensile strength (64.5 N, p = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: The prophylactic use of meshes for stabilization of laparotomy closures appears to be effective. Adequate mesh fixation can be achieved with fibrin glue alone. Further experimental studies and in particular randomized clinical trials are needed to demonstrate proof of the long-term advantages of mesh augmentation in risk groups.

### PMID 20730858 (2010) — The British journal of surgery
TITLE: Randomized clinical trial of tranexamic acid-free fibrin sealant during vascular surgical procedures.
DOI: 10.1002/bjs.7235 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the safety and haemostatic effectiveness of a fibrin sealant (EVICEL(&#x2122;) Fibrin Sealant (Human)) during vascular surgery.
METHODS: This prospective randomized controlled trial compared the haemostatic effectiveness of fibrin sealant (75 patients) or manual compression (72) in polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) arterial anastomoses. The primary endpoint was the absence of bleeding at the anastomosis at 4 min after randomization. Secondary endpoints included haemostasis at 7 and 10 min, treatment failures and the incidence of complications potentially related to bleeding. Adverse events were recorded.
RESULTS: A higher percentage of patients who received fibrin sealant versus manual compression achieved haemostasis at 4 min (85 versus 39 per cent respectively; odds ratio 11&#xb7;34, 95 per cent confidence interval 4&#xb7;67 to 27&#xb7;52; P &lt; 0&#xb7;001). Similarly, a higher percentage of patients who received fibrin sealant achieved haemostasis at 7 and 10 min (both P &lt; 0&#xb7;001). The incidence of treatment failure was lower in the fibrin sealant group (P &lt; 0&#xb7;001). The rate of complications potentially related to bleeding was similar (P = 0&#xb7;426). Some 64 per cent of patients who received fibrin sealant experienced at least one adverse event, compared with 71 per cent who received manual compression.
CONCLUSION: This fibrin sealant was safe, and significantly shortened the time to haemostasis in vascular procedures using PTFE.
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT00154141 (http://www.clinicaltrials.gov).

### PMID 20817641 (2010) — Surgical innovation
TITLE: Evaluation of acute fixation strength for mechanical tacking devices and fibrin sealant versus polypropylene suture for laparoscopic ventral hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1177/1553350610379427 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The purpose of this comparative study is to evaluate the acute fixation strength of mechanical tacking devices and fibrin sealant against polypropylene suture for laparoscopic ventral hernia repair.
METHODS: Three metallic mechanical tacking devices (ProTack, Salute, EndoANCHOR), 4 absorbable tacking devices (AbsorbaTack, PermaSorb, I-Clip, and SorbaFix), and 2 types of fibrin sealant (Tisseel, Artiss) were compared with 0-polypropylene suture. Three constructs from each device or an amount of sealant sufficient to cover a 3 &#xd7; 3 cm(2) area were used to affix a 4 &#xd7; 3 cm piece of absorbable barrier-coated mesh (Proceed, Ethicon, Inc) to the peritoneal surface of porcine abdominal wall. Ten samples were completed for each fixation modality. Acute fixation strength was measured via a lap shear test on an Instron tensiometer.
RESULTS: Acute fixation strength was significantly greater for suture (59.7 7.2 N) compared with all laparoscopic tacking devices and to fibrin sealant (P &lt; .001 for all comparisons). Protack (29.5 &#xb1; 2.8 N) was stronger than Absorbatack (13.2 &#xb1; 3.7 N; P = .029). Protack, Permasorb, SorbaFix, and I-clip were stronger than fibrin sealant (P &lt; .05 for all comparisons).
CONCLUSIONS: The acute fixation strengths of metallic or absorbable tacks as well as fibrin sealant are all significantly less than that achieved with polypropylene suture. These factors should be considered in selecting the type of mechanical fixation for patients undergoing laparoscopic ventral hernia repair.

### PMID 20454989 (2010) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Evaluation of acute fixation strength of absorbable and nonabsorbable barrier coated mesh secured with fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-010-0670-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the acute fixation strength of fibrin sealant as an alternative fixation method for laparoscopic ventral hernia repair (LVHR) when utilized with absorbable and nonabsorbable barrier meshes.
METHODS: Representative mesh types for LVHR included one nonabsorbable barrier mesh (Bard Composix) and three absorbable barrier meshes (Sepramesh, Proceed, and Parietex Composite Mesh). Macroporous polypropylene mesh (Prolite Ultra) served as a control. An associated pilot study demonstrated that acute fixation was not achieved with C-Qur or Dualmesh, thus these meshes were not subjected to further analysis. Two fibrin sealants varying in thrombin concentration (TISSEEL 500 IU/ml or ARTISS 4 IU/ml) were each utilized to secure a 3 x 4 cm piece of mesh to the peritoneal surface of harvested abdominal wall from New Zealand white rabbits. Ten samples were prepared for each mesh and fibrin sealant combination. The resulting mesh-tissue interface (3 x 3 cm) underwent lap shear testing at a rate of 0.42 mm/s using a tensiometer (Instron 5542, Norwood, MA). The maximum load sustained by the construct was recorded as the acute fixation strength in units of Newtons (N). Data are given as means +/- SEM. Statistical significance (P &lt; 0.05) was determined using a two-way ANOVA and Bonferroni post-test.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference (P &gt; 0.05) in the acute fixation strength achieved by ARTISS versus TISSEEL with Composix, Sepramesh, Proceed, and Parietex Composite Mesh. However, Prolite Ultra fixed with ARTISS (7.099 +/- 1.01 N) had a significantly higher tensile strength (P &lt; 0.001) than Prolite Ultra fixed with TISSEEL (3.405 +/- 0.72 N). Among meshes fixed with TISSEEL, Parietex Composite (3.936 +/- 0.73 N) was significantly stronger than Sepramesh (1.760 +/- 0.33 N) (P &lt; 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Acute fixation strength is equivalent for TISSEEL and ARTISS fibrin sealants for selected nonabsorbable (Composix) and absorbable barrier-coated (Sepramesh, Proceed, and Parietex Composite Mesh) meshes. Previous evaluations in this model indicated fibrin sealant alone did not appear to be a suitable method of fixation with C-Qur or DualMesh against the peritoneum. Long-term evaluation is needed to evaluate the efficacy of this method of fixation using absorbable and nonabsorbable barrier-coated meshes in a model of LVHR.

### PMID 20190704 (2010) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: The effects of sheet-type absorbable topical collagen hemostat used to prevent pulmonary fistula after lung surgery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Numerous reports have been published on the application of fibrin glues, biological adhesives used as sealants for air leaks after pulmonary resection; however, the use of blood products has been questioned from both safety and economic perspectives. Therefore we were prompted to attempt the use of Integran (method C), a sheet-type absorbable topical collagen hemostat that is neither expensive nor derived from blood.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of method C with that of method G, a combined approach in which TachoComb or a polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheet was fixed with a fibrin glue in a randomized controlled trial to prevent pulmonary fistula formation after lung surgery.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Of the patients who were scheduled to undergo pulmonary resection in 2006 at the Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Juntendo University, and who provided informed consent for the study before surgery, those who developed visible air leaks during lobectomy, segmentectomy, partial resection for lung tumor or pulmonary cyst, or intractable pneumothorax were included as the subjects of this study. The subjects were randomized for treatment with either of 2 procedures, namely, method C or method G. Pulmonary fistula was defined as an obvious air leak persisting until day 3 after surgery.
RESULTS: A total of 38 patients were assigned to method C and 34 to method G. Three patients (7.9%) assigned to method C (including 1 who underwent lobectomy and 2 who underwent partial resection), and 6 (17.6%) patients assigned to method G, including 3 who each underwent a lobectomy and partial resection, developed postoperative pulmonary fistula. The incidence of pulmonary fistula was significantly lower in the group assigned to method C, with a statistically significant difference of p = 0.044.
CONCLUSIONS: In a randomized controlled trial of sealing with a sheet-type collagen vs. a combined approach of fixing a collagen sponge, using fibrin glue for closure of air leaks, the use of Integran, a sheet-type absorbable topical collagen hemostat, is feasible to prevent pulmonary fistula after lung surgery. It is also affordable and safe because it is not a blood product.

### PMID 20668329 (2010) — In vivo (Athens, Greece)
TITLE: Tension-free primary closure with autologous platelet gel versus Vivostat- for the definitive treatment of chronic sacrococcygeal pilonidal disease.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: A randomized clinical trial was performed in patients with chronic or recurrent pilonidal sinus (PS) comparing primary closure coupled with random application of in house autologous platelet gel or produced by means of Vivostat- in order to assess whether a standardized product had an impact on the wound healing process.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Between June 2006 and June 2009, 100 patients (82 males, 18 females: median age 30 years; range, 16-51 years) underwent wide excision of the pilonidal area with midline tension-free closure and were randomly given either the in house autologous platelet gel (Group 1) or the Vivostat- gel (Group 2).
RESULTS: Group 2 patients had shorter wound healing time (8 vs. 10 days; p&lt;0.0001), time to return to full activity (11 vs. 16 days: p&lt;0.0001), less uncomplicated fluid collections (120 vs. 190 ml: p&lt;0.0001), and fewer postoperative wound complications (1/50=2% vs. 5/50=10%, p&lt;0.001). After a median follow-up of 21 months (range: 4-40 months), two recurrences were detected in Group 1.
CONCLUSION: The standardized production of platelet gel by means of the Vivostat- system guarantees the reproducibility of the procedure and its use was correlated with an improved outcome, with a high degree of patient satisfaction and better cosmetic results.

### PMID 19821947 (2010) — Transfusion
TITLE: Platelet gel for treatment of mucocutaneous lesions related to graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2009.02439.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Platelet (PLT) gel has been successfully used in tissue regeneration of diabetic/surgical wounds through the releasing of growth factors such as basic fibroblast growth factor and PLT-derived growth factor. Therefore, the PLT gel could represent a therapeutic tool in treating the deep and painful wounds sometimes occurring during graft-versus-host disease (GVHD).
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: The aim of this study was to verify the efficacy and safety of PLT gel for treating GVHD ulcers. Allogeneic hemocomponents were used to obtain PLT gel with an automated system for the on-site preparation and application of patient (autologous) or healthy blood donor (allogeneic)-derived fibrin sealant or PLT-rich fibrin (Vivostat system, Vivostat A/S). Six patients with multiple lesions involving dermis (Grade I, n = 2), subcutaneous (Grade II, n = 4), or oral mucosa and related to GVHD underwent PLT gel as local therapy.
RESULTS: After the second PLT gel application, the pain disappeared in all cases and the granulation tissue was observed in the four patients with Grade II lesions. After a median of eight PLT gel applications (range, 4-10), five of six patients showed a complete response, while one patient with a partial response died early from multiorgan failure. No side effects were documented.
CONCLUSION: These preliminary data show that the PLT gel may be used as a safe and effective tool in the management of mucosal skin lesions related to the GVHD.

### PMID 22767672 (2010) — BMJ case reports
TITLE: Open partial splenectomy for trauma using GIA-Stapler and FloSeal matrix haemostatic agent.
DOI: 10.1136/bcr.01.2010.2601 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A ruptured spleen caused by blunt abdominal injury is often treated by splenectomy. In view of the gravity of the 'postsplenectomy syndrome,' a conservative approach has been increasingly used. We present the case of a 29-year-old man with a Grade III splenic lesion for a blunt abdominal trauma after a car accident. We performed a partial splenectomy of the upper pole using GIA-Stapler. A supplemental haemostasis of the stapled line was successfully achieved by the application of FloSeal matrix haemostatic agent. The splenic remnant was fixed into the left-upper quadrant using human fibrin glue.

### PMID 21116358 (2010) — Indian journal of urology : IJU : journal of the Urological Society of India
TITLE: Evolution of hemostatic agents in surgical practice.
DOI: 10.4103/0970-1591.70574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Topical hemostatic agents are used in a wide variety of surgical settings, and the evolution of this class of surgical tools is an interesting topic. We reviewed and outlined the historical progress of topical hemostats into present day surgery and urology, and highlight opportunities for future research.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A MEDLINE search of all available literature concerning several classes of topical hemostatic agents was performed. Fibrins sealants, Gelatin sponge hemostatics, cyanoacrylate adhesives, oxidized regenerated cellulose, and microfibrillar collagen were included. References were chosen from a broad range of surgical literature.
RESULTS: Topical hemostatic agents have historically taken advantage of a wide variety of mechanisms for hemostasis. Fibrin sealants have a rich history and large potential for further applications. Gelatin sponge hemostatics have been widely used since their introduction, but have changed little. Cyanoacrylate adhesives have a unique mechanism and opportunity for novel applications of existing products. Oxidized cellulose was original in the use of plant-based components. Microfibrillar collagen hemostats have evolved to a wide variety of formats.
CONCLUSIONS: A review of the evolution of topical hemostatic agents highlights opportunities for potential novel research. Fibrin sealants may have the most opportunity for advancement, and understanding the history of these products is useful. With the drive in urology for minimally invasive surgical techniques, adaptation of topical hemostatic agents to this surgical approach would be valuable and offers an opportunity for novel contributions.

### PMID 19934160 (2010) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Experimental use of an elastomeric surgical sealant for arterial hemostasis and its long-term tissue response.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2009.217620 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Reliable suture line hemostasis should improve the outcome of aortic surgery. We examined the hemostatic effect and the tissue response of a novel elastomeric surgical sealant.
METHODS: Using porcine internal carotid arteries, we performed 16 end-to-end anastomoses with four stitches of simple interrupted sutures under full heparinization. The anastomoses were divided into two groups (eight anastomoses per group). Either novel sealant or fibrin glue was applied. The amount of bleeding was measured during the 30 s period after removing the vascular clamp. In a separate experiment, we applied the novel sealant around the abdominal aorta of rabbits (n=6) to assess the effect of the elastomeric property of the sealant on arterial wall histology. For comparison, we applied cyanoacrylate, which has no elastomeric property (n=6). A histological study was performed three months after the operation.
RESULTS: The novel sealant prevented arterial bleeding. The amount of bleeding from the anastomoses applied with novel sealant and fibrin glue was 0.12+/-0.03 g vs. 91.8+/-16.5 g, respectively (P&lt;0.001). Thinning of the rabbit aortic wall was observed in the cyanoacrylate-treated abdominal aorta, whereas no thinning was observed in the novel sealant group. Histological examination revealed neither cell death nor necrosis in the novel sealant group.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel sealant effectively prevented arterial bleeding from the anastomosis under full heparinization. In addition, the elastomeric property of the sealant prevented thinning of the aortic wall. The novel sealant may be a promising hemostatic agent for arterial anastomosis.

### PMID 19646890 (2010) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: The laparoscopically harvested omental flap for deep sternal wound infection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2009.06.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To report our experience with the laparoscopically harvested omental flap in the treatment of deep sternal wound infection, and to present a modification and introduce two supportive techniques in the perioperative management.
METHODS: Between June 2005 and September 2007, six patients with grade IV (El Oakley-Wright classification) deep sternal wound infection following a median sternotomy for coronary artery bypass grafting underwent a reconstruction with a laparoscopically harvested omental flap. The median age of the cohort of six, consisting of one female and five males, was 67 years (range: 61-77 years). In five patients, an unilateral internal thoracic artery had been used. Considerable preoperative risk factors were present: one patient suffered from severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1)1L; two from moderate chronic obstructive airway disease, three from insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and three were on glucocorticoid steroid therapy preoperatively. Abdominal surgery had previously been performed in four patients. In all cases, the mediastinal wound was prepared with vacuum-assisted (&lt;or=125 mmHg) therapy following debridement and pulsed irrigation. White, small-pore foam was placed over the right ventricle when the risk of adhesion to the sternal remnants or secondary haemorrhage was a concern. In all cases, the position of the spread-out omental flap was maintained intrathoracically with autologous fibrin glue and in one case the split-skin graft covering the flap was also dealt with in this way. In the five other cases, the omental flap was covered by mobilising and advancing the local soft tissue and skin towards the midline. Portable sonography proved useful in monitoring the doubtful intrathoracic flap.
RESULTS: The 30-day perioperative mortality rate was zero, with a 2-year overall survival of 100%. One patient received a temporary colostomy due to a partial transverse colon necrosis. Follow-up ranged from 20 to 53 months (median: 39 months) for the group as a whole. Death occurred in one case 2.8 years after reconstruction due to reasons other than cardiac or mediastinal conditions.
CONCLUSION: The laparoscopically harvested omental flap can contribute to a successful outcome following deep sternal wound infection and deserves serious consideration in type IV mediastinitis in particular, regardless of the co-morbidity or previous abdominal surgery.

### PMID 22282693 (2010) — Journal of blood medicine
TITLE: Thrombin use in surgery: an evidence-based review of its clinical use.
DOI: 10.2147/JBM.S6622 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Retracted Publication
ABSTRACT: When surgical ligation of bleeding fails, or is not possible, surgeons rely on a number of hemostatic aids, including thrombin. This review discusses the history, pharmacology and clinical application of thrombin as a surgical hemostat. The initial thrombin was bovine in origin, but its use has been complicated by the formation of antibodies that cross-react with human coagulation factors. This has been associated with life-threatening bleeding and in some circumstances anaphylaxis and death. Human thrombin, isolated from pooled plasma of donors, was developed in an effort to minimize these risks, but its downsides are its limited availability and the potential for transmitting blood-borne pathogens. Recently a recombinant thrombin has been developed, and approved for use by the FDA. It has the advantage of being minimally antigenic and devoid of the risk of viral transmission. Thrombin is often used in conjunction with other hemostatic aids, including absorbable agents such as Gelfoam, and with fibrinogen in fibrin glues. The last part of this review will discuss these agents in detail, and review their clinical applications.

### PMID 19484773 (2010) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
TITLE: Characterization of the biological effect of fish fibrin glue in experiments on rats: immunological and coagulation studies.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.32505 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glues (FG) of human or bovine origin are widely used for haemostasis and wound healing. In addition FGs are studied in many biomedical areas like cell therapy or tissue engineering. As any mammalian plasma products FG-s pose risk of transmission of bacteria, viruses, or prions and may compromise patient homeostasis. In this study, we examined coagulation parameters and immunological status of rats treated with salmon-derived FG. We evaluated the changes in thrombin time, prothrombin activity, and presence of antibodies on 46 Wistar rats. This study shows that salmon-derived FG, injected intraperitoneally, does not cause coagulation disturbances in the peripheral blood. After a first challenge with salmon-derived FG there were low but detectable amounts of antibodies revealed by ELISA and immunoblot. After a second administration there was substantial elevation of antibodies to FG components and other copurifying plasma proteins. Antibody reactivity to human Factor Va, revealed in three animals, was not associated with FG application. Taken together, blood immunological and coagulation parameters support the suitability of salmon-derived FG in the development of fibrin sealants for medical use.

### PMID 19275489 (2009) — Journal of endourology
TITLE: Evaluation of the outcomes of electrosurgical induced bowel injury treated with tissue glue/sealant versus sutured repair in a rabbit model.
DOI: 10.1089/end.2008.0274 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Bowel injury is an uncommon, although potentially devastating, intraoperative laparoscopic complication. Questions have been raised about the possible use of a tissue adhesive to repair injured bowel. We compared glued repair and sutured repair of both large bowel (LB) and small bowel (SB) electrosurgical injuries in a rabbit model.
METHODS: Pneumoperitoneum was obtained, and four laparoscopic ports were placed in each of 48 New Zealand rabbits. The hook electrode was used in a specified manner to create an equal number of uniform full-thickness injuries to either the SB or the LB. Laparoscopic repair was performed with a 3-0 silk Lembert suture (LS), fibrin glue (FG), or BioGlue (BG), or repair was not performed (i.e., no repair, NR); the animals were monitored for 3 weeks. Adverse clinical outcomes and findings at laparotomy were recorded. Pathologic assessment included an objective scaled evaluation of the intensity of the inflammatory response and degree of healing.
RESULTS: In the SB injury group, deteriorating clinical condition necessitated early euthanasia in one animal repaired with FG, one animal repaired with BG, and two animals with NR. LS repair animals had no adverse clinical outcomes. The LB injury group had no adverse clinical outcomes regardless of the method of repair, including the control group. Of the animals that survived for 3 weeks, the animals repaired with BG had more intraabdominal adhesions (100%) than LS (33%), FG (55%), and NR (50%) (p = 0.001). The pathologic assessment revealed that BG induced a more intense inflammatory response (p &lt; 0.05).
CONCLUSION: In the rabbit, suture repair of an electrosurgical SB injury appears to have improved outcomes when compared with a glued repair. In contrast, LB injury responded well to any form of treatment. The data suggest that suture is superior to biological glues when dealing with a laparoscopic electrosurgical bowel injury.

### PMID 19181342 (2009) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Choice of hemostatic agent influences adhesion formation in a rat cecal adhesion model.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2008.08.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Hemostatic agents are frequently used during abdominal surgery and some are linked to adhesion formation. We sought to evaluate the impact of several commonly used hemostatic agents on adhesion formation in a rat peritoneal model.
METHODS: In our study, Wister outbred rats underwent laparotomy and excision of a portion of their peritoneum to initiate adhesion formation process. One of six different hemostatic agents, namely, activated starch microspheres (Arista AH; Medafor Inc., Minneapolis, MN), glutaraldehyde activated collagen (BioGlue; Cryolife Inc., Kennesaw, GA), thrombin coated collagen microspheres (FloSeal; Baxter Inc., Deerfield, IL), thrombin activated fibrin polymer (Tisseel, Baxter), polyethylene glycol polymer (CoSeal, Baxter), or oxidized cellulose (Surgicel; Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ), was placed in the area of peritoneal defect. All animals were sacrificed on post-op day 7 and strength and extent of adhesion formation was determined. Histopathological examination of rat caecum was also performed.
RESULTS: Arista and CoSeal showed significantly lower adhesion formation than controls (P &lt; 0.05). Higher adhesion scores were seen in BioGlue (P &lt; 0.05) treated rats. Additionally, histopathologic examination showed that BioGlue caused statistically more inflammation and necrosis than controls (P &lt; 0.05). Total adhesion score increased with residual amount of agent present at 7 d.
CONCLUSIONS: Use of Arista and CoSeal may help in reducing peritoneal adhesions after intra-abdominal surgeries. Furthermore, there appears to be a relationship between the creation of inflammation and necrosis in tissues and the eventual formation of adhesions. This could aid in improving the design of these agents in the future.

### PMID 19324142 (2009) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Mechanical properties of surgical glues used in aortic root replacement.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2008.12.072 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Surgical glues are used in mechanical, stentless bioprosthetic, and homograft aortic root replacements to seal and reinforce anastomotic suture lines. The aortic root normally undergoes substantial physiologic dilation and may be affected by the stiffness of applied sealants. We determined the material properties of four common commercial glues, comparing them with known properties of aortic root replacements.
METHODS: Samples of BioGlue (CryoLife, Inc, Kennesaw, GA), CoSeal (Baxter Healthcare International, Palo Alto, CA), Tisseel (Baxter Healthcare Corp, Glendale, CA), and Crosseal (OMRIX Biopharmaceuticals, Inc, New York, NY) sealants underwent biaxial tensile testing. A Hookean strain energy function was fit to the stress-strain response of each sample, and the Young's modulus was obtained for comparison of material stiffness.
RESULTS: Sealants demonstrate a relatively linear response to loading; mean elastic moduli for BioGlue (3,122.04 +/- 1,639.68 kPa), CoSeal (100.02 +/- 67.60 kPa), Tisseel (102.59 +/- 41.13 kPa), and Crosseal (53.56 +/- 32.59 kPa) varied greatly. CoSeal and Tisseel have no significant difference in stiffness (p = 0.897) while Crosseal is more compliant than Tisseel (p = 0.004) and CoSeal (p = 0.055). BioGlue is stiffer than CoSeal, Tisseel, and Crosseal (p &lt; 0.001). Furthermore, BioGlue is much stiffer than cited properties of Dacron grafts, glutaraldehyde-fixed porcine roots, and human aortic tissue. However, CoSeal and Tisseel are much more compliant than the aortic root conduits.
CONCLUSIONS: BioGlue is much less compliant than the other sealants studied and materials available for aortic root replacement. A surgeon's choice of glue should be determined by stiffness as well as sealant efficacy. Sealants with greater stiffness than aortic root replacement material may restrict normal physiologic dilation and cause anastomotic strictures.

### PMID 19894568 (2009) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [A novel selected segmental inflation technique for anatomical segmentectomy].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Radical segmentectomy is being performed for small-sized lung cancer. However, it is not always easy to identify the intersegmental border. In this report, we present a new method to recognize it easier by using the nozzle of fibrin sealant spray kit. The diseased segment can be inflated through a pin hole which is placed distal to the ligation at segmental bronchus. In our 20 cases, successful inflation of diseased segment was easily done through thoracoscopic procedure.

### PMID 19668958 (2009) — Arquivos brasileiros de oftalmologia
TITLE: [Use of fibrin glue in ocular surgery].
DOI: 10.1590/s0004-27492009000300006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the use of fibrin glue and its complications in different ophthalmic surgeries.
METHODS: A retrospective and non-comparative case series study. 161 eyes were evaluated. The mean age was 51.8 years. Fibrin glue (Beriplast--Aventis Behring, Germany) was used in all patients for tissue adherence or incisional closure.
RESULTS: Main preoperatives diseases were pterygium (76 patients), superior limbic keratoconjunctivitis (4 patients), limbal tumor (4 patients), conjunctivochalasis (21 patients), bullous keratopathy (31 patients), limbal stem cell deficiency (7 patients), alkali injury (6 patients), Stevens-Johnson syndrome (2 patients), cataract (5 patients) and glaucoma (5 patients). Complications occurred in 28 patients (17.4%). Detachment of the fixed tissue and granulomatous foreign body reaction were the main complications. Detachment occurred in 10 cases (5.6%) (7 in amniotic membrane transplantation in bullous keratopathy, 2 in autologous conjunctival grafting for pterygium surgery, 1 in autologous limbal transplantation in a Stevens-Johnson syndrome). Granulomatous foreign body reaction was described in 9 patients (5.6%) (5 in amniotic membrane transplantation due to acute alkali injury, 1 in autologous limbal graft due to chronic burn injury, and 3 in autologous conjunctival transplant due to pterygium surgery). All the complications described occurred in the first week after surgery.
CONCLUSION: Despite the limitations related to the retrospective and non-comparative setting, this study suggests that the use of fibrin glue seems to be safe and effective for tissue fixation or incisional closure presenting low rates of complications in ocular surface and anterior segment surgeries.

### PMID 20564911 (2009) — Otolaryngologia polska = The Polish otolaryngology
TITLE: [Endoscopic surgical treatment of isolated inverted papilloma of the sphenoid sinus complicated by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea--case report].
DOI: 10.1016/S0030-6657(09)70199-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This report presents a case of isolated inverted papilloma of the sphenoid sinus in 48-year old patients diagnosed and treated in ENT Departament of Military Hospital in Wroc&#x142;aw. Post operative course complicated by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea. We used Surgicel, lyophylized dura and TachoComb with Tissucol to close dural fistula. Using of this in reconstructive surgery to treat post operative CSF leak was effective. In last CT three years after operation, we observe the bone decline in sphenoid sinus and recurrence of the leasion in sphenoid sinus.

### PMID 19660740 (2009) — Cirugia espanola
TITLE: [Mesh fixation with sutures versus fibrin sealant in hernioplasty with re-absorbable prosthesis (polyglycolic acid and trimethylene carbonate). Experimental study in animals].
DOI: 10.1016/j.ciresp.2009.05.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Current studies have shown the validity of the atraumatic fixation with fibrin glue (Tissucol) compared to conventional sutures in polypropylene mesh fixation. We propose to study the behaviour of absorbable mesh.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We used 20 Wistar white rats. Two hernia defects were made in the abdominal wall, which were repaired using absorbable PGA-TMC preperitoneal mesh. The right side of the mesh was fixed with Tissucol and left side with conventional suture attached to the muscle fascia. One group of 10 rats were sacrificed at day 14 (Series A) and the other 10 rats at 28 days (Series B). We used two tests to assess the contingency of the abdominal wall; Pressure Test: pneumoperitoneum more than 40mmHg maintained for 1min, Traction Test: dynamometry of the affected area more than 300mg per cm(2) of traction. Abdominal wall was analysed to determine the integration of the new generation mesh.
RESULTS: The fixation of the mesh after the pressure and traction tests showed no statistically significant changes in either group. The integration of the mesh and vessel neoformation was higher in the cases of fixation with fibrin glue.
CONCLUSIONS: Biological fixation with fibrin glue is similar to the conventional. Absorbable mesh was suitably integrated and vascular neoformation and integration of the mesh was also found to be better than conventional sutures when fibrin sealant was applied.

### PMID 19542837 (2009) — Surgical laparoscopy, endoscopy &amp; percutaneous techniques
TITLE: Fibrin sealant (Tissucol) for the fixation of hiatal mesh in the repair of giant paraesophageal hernia: a case report.
DOI: 10.1097/SLE.0b013e31819f2066 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The use of hiatal meshes for the repair of giant paraesophageal hernias (GPH) is associated with a significantly decreased rate of recurrences compared with mesh free techniques. Many surgeons refrain from mesh implantation at the gastroesophageal junction owing to reported complications, such as mesh migration, strictures, and risks of tack or suture placement. This case report presents the laparoscopic application of a titanium-coated mesh (TiSure, GfE, Germany) designated for hiatal repair, with fibrin sealant fixation (Tissucol, Baxter, Austria) in a patient with GPH.
METHODS: A patient (male, 59 y) presented at our outpatient department with a 3-year history of epigastric pain and decreasing lung capacity. A GPH with an intrathoracic upside-down stomach had already been radiologically diagnosed 3 years before admission. In elective laparoscopy, the stomach was repositioned and the crura of the diaphragm were approximated with nonresorbable sutures. The defect was reinforced with a preshaped titanium-coated mesh and fibrin sealant (2 mL) applied with a 45 degree angled tip laparoscopic spraying device. No perforating fixation device was used for mesh fixation itself. The patient was discharged on the seventeenth postoperative (postOP) day. The clinical follow-up included the assessment of postOP pain with a visual analog score and a confirmative computed tomography scan 6 months after surgery.
RESULTS: The patient has fully recovered, showing no recurrence or adverse effects 1 year postOP.
DISCUSSION: Based on previous good results from own experimental trials, the mesh sealing approach in hiatal hernia repair was performed clinically, yielding an excellent result in this case. Multicenter trials to assess the full impact of FS mesh fixation in combination with macroporous hiatal meshes seem mandatory.

### PMID 19384757 (2009) — Archivos de la Sociedad Espanola de Oftalmologia
TITLE: [Pterygium surgery: comparative study of conjunctival autograft with suture versus fibrin adhesive].
DOI: 10.4321/s0365-66912009000400003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Controlled Clinical Trial, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare recurrence rate, complications, and biomicroscopical findings after conjunctival autograft pterygium surgery with the use of a fibrin glue (Tissucol Duo, Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria) or suture (7-0 silk).
METHODS: Patients with nasal pterygium were included in two groups of conjunctival autograft surgery. In 9 of them the graft was sutured to the surrounding conjunctiva and in 8 of them the graft was fixed to the conjunctiva using fibrin glue.
RESULTS: 17 patients (17 eyes) 41.2% women and 58.8% men were surgically treated. Mean patient age was 59.8 years. Five of the patients presented recurrence for simple excision and 12 presented primary pterygium. The extent of corneal invasion was 2 to 4 mm. In the suture group, 33.3% of the patients experienced pain after surgery compared to none in the fibrin glue group. In the suture group, 44.4% of the patients presented inflammation after surgery compared to none in the glue group. One patient from the glue group lost the graft and presented a recurrence one month later.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of fibrin glue in pterygium surgery reduces patient symptoms, inflammation and discomfort. The rate of recurrence seems to be similar in both procedures.

### PMID 19296347 (2009) — The Journal of dermatological treatment
TITLE: Addition of zinc and manganese to a biological dressing.
DOI: 10.1080/09546630802509089 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Zinc and manganese, which are used in vivo because of their healing properties, have been shown to modulate in vitro integrin expression and to enhance keratinocyte migration. In addition, at the clinical level, a dressing of keratinocytes suspended in a fibrin glue has been proposed for the treatment of chronic wounds.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the addition of trace elements to this dressing could modulate the migratory phenotype of keratinocytes via the modulation of integrin expression in a manner similar to an in vitro model and thus increase the healing properties of this dressing.
METHODS: Keratinocytes were mixed with Tissucol and maintained in culture for 12 days in a medium either supplemented or not with zinc or manganese. Then, integrin expression was studied by immunohistochemistry on fibrin clot cryosections.
RESULTS: We observed a significant increase of alpha5beta1 with zinc compared to the control medium. Zinc also enhanced alphaVbeta6 expression and manganese alpha5beta1, alphaVbeta5 and alphaVbeta6 expression, however without reaching a significant level.
CONCLUSION: By modulating integrin expression, trace elements can improve the efficiency of a biological dressing made of keratinocytes in a fibrin glue matrix and, thus, it appears beneficial to add them to this biological dressing for the treatment of skin defects.

### PMID 19404570 (2009) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Management strategies of intercavernous sinus bleeding during transsphenoidal surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-009-0356-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Transsphenoidal surgery has been well established as an effective primary treatment for tumours of the sellar region. During the dural opening, the prominent intercavernous sinus poses limitations for this approach and may contribute to incomplete tumour resections.
METHOD: Based on our experience from 940 cases of conventional transsphenoidal surgery, we have developed a stepwise protocol for achieving bleeding control in 72 cases (7.7%) that had prominent anterior intercavernous sinus.
FINDINGS: A custom-made 45-degree right- or left-angled bipolar coagulator (38 cases) or Landolt bipolar coagulator (29 cases; Aesculp, Tuttlingen, Germany) was inserted into the small dural opening, and both of the dural layers were coagulated together so that the potential space between the endoosteal layer and meningeal layer could be sealed, and the dural opening could be extended. When the anterior portion of the medial wall of the cavernous sinus was accidentally opened, we then placed a small piece of oxidised regenerated cellulose (Surgicel; Johnson &amp; Johnson, North Yorkshire, UK) at the opening of the medial wall of the cavernous sinus and coagulated both dural layers together starting from the sellar floor side with a custom-made 45-degree angled bipolar coagulator. For the relatively large opening of the cavernous sinus, a microfibrillar collagen haemostat (Avitene; MedChem Products, Woburn, MA) or fleece-coated fibrin glue (TachoComb; Nycomed Austria, Linz, Austria) patch was applied over the opened cavernous sinus with gentle compression and was found to be effective in most cases. Rarely, direct suture of the opened medial wall of the cavernous sinus was necessary in five cases.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a stepwise approach to overcome unusual bleedings from the prominent intercavernous sinus during conventional transsphenoidal surgery. Our surgical experience reveals that these methods can be very effective for the control of sinus bleeding.

### PMID 20608146 (2009) — Archivio italiano di urologia, andrologia : organo ufficiale [di] Societa italiana di ecografia urologica e nefrologica
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of the haemostasis achieved by Vivostat system during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Haemostasis remains the greatest challenge during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy. We describe the use of the Vivostat system helping effective haemostasis during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (LPN).
PATIENTS AND METHOD: Twenty-eight patients underwent LPN. Autologous fibrin sealant was prepared with the Vivostat system and applied to the resection bed. This system is an automated medical device for the preparation of an autologous fibrin sealant from the patient's blood. Pre and postoperative clinical parameters and laboratory values were evaluated, for acute and delayed bleeding.
RESULTS: Median patient's age was 58 years (range, 25-75). All patients underwent LPN for renal tumors (mean size 2.5 cm; range 0.9-4.5 cm). Six resection were performed without vessels clamping, and 22 were realized with selective arterial Bulldog clamping. Haemostasis was achieved by a cellulose bolster (80%), by stitches (67%) and by sealant application after declamping (100%) (mean amount applied: 5.1 ml). The mean warm ischemia time was 26 minutes (range, 16-45) for 22 interventions. Mean blood loss was 128 cc (range, 20-500). Pre-operative and post-operative creatinine values (mean, 0.91 vs. 1 ng/mi) did not differ significantly; whereas mean Hb levels slightly decreases after surgery (mean, 14.7 vs. 12.5 g/dl). Mean operative time was 131 minutes (range, 60-190). All but one had negative surgical margins. One intraoperative bleeding occurred needing blood transfusion (1 unit). Postoperatively, we observed only 1 perirenal hematoma treated conservatively requiring blood transfusion.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, an effective haemostasis was achieved and maintained after kidney reperfusion. These data support the previous finding with the same system and encourage its use in LPN.

### PMID 19379990 (2009) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Stability of an autologous platelet clot in the pericardial sac: An experimental and clinical study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.10.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Autologous platelet clots serve as slow-release delivery systems for platelet-derived growth factors and cytokines. Their application to the pericardial sac might facilitate salvage and repair of ischemically injured myocardium. However, little is known about platelet clot stability in the pericardial sac. We investigated the stability of platelet clots in vitro and after administration to the pericardial sac in pigs and patients.
METHODS: In 5 Yorkshire-Landrace pigs and 10 patients, in vitro manufactured autologous platelet gel (Medtronic Magellan Platelet Separator) and platelet-rich fibrin (Vivolution Vivostat System) were administered to the pericardial sac for 30 minutes. Two antifibrinolytics (tranexamic acid and aprotinin) were tested for their capacity to stabilize autologous platelet gel. In vitro clots, incubated at 37 degrees C for 48 hours, served as controls. Clot weight was measured before and after administration.
RESULTS: In vitro, autologous platelet gel clots of either formula liquefied almost entirely within 60 minutes whereas platelet-rich fibrin clots remained intact. In the pig, platelet clot weight decreased to 16.7% +/- 7.8% (P &lt; .05) and 66.4% +/- 3.2% (P &lt; .05) of initial clot weight for autologous platelet gel and platelet-rich fibrin, respectively. Addition of antifibrinolytics to autologous platelet gel did not reduce clot degradation significantly. In patients, autologous platelet gel and platelet-rich fibrin clot weight remained 9.0% +/- 1.5% (P &lt; .05) and 73.7% +/- 2.6% (P &lt; .05) of initial clot weight, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Autologous platelet gel is unstable both in vitro and in vivo, whereas platelet-rich fibrin remains intact in vitro and, compared with autologous platelet gel, is less subject to degradation in pigs and in patients.

### PMID 19187989 (2009) — Trends in biotechnology
TITLE: Classification of platelet concentrates: from pure platelet-rich plasma (P-PRP) to leucocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF).
DOI: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2008.11.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: The topical use of platelet concentrates is recent and its efficiency remains controversial. Several techniques for platelet concentrates are available; however, their applications have been confusing because each method leads to a different product with different biology and potential uses. Here, we present classification of the different platelet concentrates into four categories, depending on their leucocyte and fibrin content: pure platelet-rich plasma (P-PRP), such as cell separator PRP, Vivostat PRF or Anitua's PRGF; leucocyte- and platelet-rich plasma (L-PRP), such as Curasan, Regen, Plateltex, SmartPReP, PCCS, Magellan or GPS PRP; pure plaletet-rich fibrin (P-PRF), such as Fibrinet; and leucocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF), such as Choukroun's PRF. This classification should help to elucidate successes and failures that have occurred so far, as well as providing an objective approach for the further development of these techniques.

### PMID 19246867 (2009) — Neurologia medico-chirurgica
TITLE: Rapid reduction of syrinx associated with traumatic intracranial hypotension by direct surgery: case report.
DOI: 10.2176/nmc.49.66 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A woman in her early twenties presented with cerebellar tonsillar herniation with syrinx in the cervicothoracic spinal cord manifesting as postural headache after suffering trauma to the hip. She was treated under a diagnosis of traumatic intracranial hypotension. Cranial magnetic resonance (MR) imaging demonstrated tonsillar herniation to the upper rim of the C1 lamina, associated with effacement of the basal cisterns and flattening of the pons against the clivus, sagging of the optic chiasm, and protrusion of the pituitary gland into the suprasellar cistern. Spinal MR imaging and computed tomography (CT) myelography showed cervicothoracic syrinx and arachnoid diverticulum. Three applications of epidural blood patches produced no improvement. Surgery identified cerebrospinal fluid leakage from two small holes in the spinal dural sac, slightly proximal from the origin of the left L1 root sleeve, and arachnoid diverticulum. These two holes were sutured and a few sheets of gelatin sponge were placed around the arachnoid diverticulum and sealed with fibrin glue. The cervicothoracic syrinx was reduced significantly and tonsillar herniation disappeared within 10 days. Simple surgical repair of the dural tears may rapidly improve symptoms and imaging findings in patients with tonsillar herniation caused by traumatic intracranial hypotension.

### PMID 19280953 (2009) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Candida mediastinitis after double closure technique for repairing ventricular septal perforation].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 69-year-old man was referred to our hospital due to acute myocardial infarction. Systolic heart murmur was first noted on the 23rd day after the onset, but no cardiac shunt flow was detected by echocardiography at that time. Six days later, cardiac function deteriorated rapidly, followed by oliguria and shock. Re-do echocardiography showed ventricular septal perforation. Emergency operation was performed, and septal perforation was seen on the anterior portion of the septum. In addition to infarct-exclusion-technique (Komeda-David method) with the equine pericardial patch, direct closure of the septal defect was performed (double closure technique). Fibrin glue was applied between the ventricular septum and the patch. After surgery, he suffered from Candida mediastinitis and received omentum plombage. Furthermore tracheotomy was performed for pneumonia. He recovered gradually, and was discharged about 3 months after surgery. Echocardiography showed no residual shunt.

### PMID 20183534 (2009) — Journal of toxicology and environmental health. Part B, Critical reviews
TITLE: A new fibrin sealant from Crotalus durissus terrificus venom: applications in medicine.
DOI: 10.1080/10937400903442514 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Fibrin sealant, a widely available tissue adhesive, has been used since 1940 in a variety of clinical applications. Commercially available fibrin sealant products are synthesized from bovine thrombin and human fibrinogen, which may transmit infectious diseases, and recipients may also develop antibodies against bovine thrombin. Bearing these disadvantages in mind, a new fibrin sealant was developed in 1989 by a group of researchers from the Center for the Study of Venoms and Venomous Animals, in Sao Paulo State, Brazil. The main purpose was to produce an adhesive fibrin without using human blood, to avoid transmitting infectious diseases. The components of this novel sealant were extracted from large animals and a serine proteinase extracted from Crotalus durissus terrificus snake venom. The applicability of this sealant was tested in animals and humans with beneficial results. The new fibrin sealant can be a useful tool clinically due to its flexibility and diversity of applications. This sealant is a biological and biodegradable product that (1) does not produce adverse reactions, (1) contains no human blood, (3) has a good adhesive capacity, (4) gives no transmission of infectious diseases, and (5) may be used as an adjuvant in conventional suture procedures. The effectiveness of this new fibrin sealant is reviewed and its development and employment are described.

### PMID 19545437 (2009) — Patient safety in surgery
TITLE: Collagen fleece-bound fibrin sealant is not associated with an increased risk of thromboembolic events or major bleeding after its use for haemostasis in surgery: a prospective multicentre surveillance study.
DOI: 10.1186/1754-9493-3-13 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical haemostatic agents are used to help achieve haemostasis during surgery when standard surgical techniques are insufficient. The objective of this study was to confirm the safety profile of an equine collagen patch coated with human fibrinogen and human thrombin with particular focus on the occurrence of thromboembolic events (TEEs), major bleeding and immunological events.
METHODS: This was a non-interventional, multicentre, prospective, surveillance study in which a collagen fleece-bound fibrin sealant was prescribed in accordance with its marketing authorisation. The decision to use the sealant was based solely on current surgical practice. All patients that received the sealant and provided informed consent were included. TEEs (any coagula-based occlusion in a vessel or the heart identified by symptomatic clinical signs and/or verified by paraclinical examination), major bleeding (any bleeding that required intervention), and immunological events (hypersensitivity including anaphylaxis) that occurred during surgery, post-operative hospital stay or 6 months of follow-up were reported as adverse events. The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients experiencing a confirmed TEE.
RESULTS: A total of 3098 patients were recruited at 227 centres in 12 European countries. The most frequent types of surgery were hepatic (33%), gastrointestinal (16%) and urological (14%) and the main indication for surgery was for primary (35%) or secondary (20%) malignancy. Forty-six patients (1.5%, 95% CI 1.1-2.0%) had at least one TEE during the study. The most commonly reported TEEs were pulmonary embolism or post-procedural pulmonary embolism (n = 18) and deep vein thrombosis (n = 9). There were 64 major bleedings in 62 patients and 9 immunological events in 8 patients.
CONCLUSION: Collagen fleece-bound fibrin sealant does not appear to be associated with an increased risk of TEEs, major bleeding or immunological events in patients undergoing surgery.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov number: NCT00285623.

### PMID 19463180 (2009) — Patient safety in surgery
TITLE: Building an immune-mediated coagulopathy consensus: early recognition and evaluation to enhance post-surgical patient safety.
DOI: 10.1186/1754-9493-3-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostats, fibrin sealants, and surgical adhesives are regularly used in a variety of surgical procedures involving multiple disciplines. Generally, these adjuncts to surgical hemostasis are valuable means for improving wound visualization, reducing blood loss or adding tissue adherence; however, some of these agents are responsible for under-recognized adverse reactions and outcomes. Bovine thrombin, for example, is a topical hemostat with a long history of clinical application that is widely used alone or in combination with other hemostatic agents. Hematologists and coagulation experts are aware that these agents can lead to development of an immune-mediated coagulopathy (IMC). A paucity of data on the incidence of IMC contributes to under-recognition and leaves many surgeons unaware that this clinical entity, originating from normal immune responses to foreign antigen exposure, requires enhanced post-operative vigilance and judicious clinical judgment to achieve best outcomes.Postoperative bleeding may result from issues such as loosened ties or clips or the occurrence of a coagulopathy due to hemodilution, vitamin K deficiency, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) or post-transfusion, post-shock coagulopathic states. Other causes, such as liver disease, may be ruled out by a careful patient history and common pre-operative liver function tests. Less common are coagulopathies secondary to pathologic immune responses. Such coagulopathies include those that may result from inherent patient problems such as patients with an immune dysfunction related to systemic lupus erythrematosus (SLE) or lymphoma that can invoke antibodies against native coagulation factors. Medical interventions may also provoke antibody formation in the form of self-directed anti-coagulation factor antibodies, that result in problematic bleeding; it is these iatrogenic post-operative coagulopathies, including those associated with bovine thrombin exposure and its clinical context, that this panel was convened to address.The RETACC panel's goal was to attain a logical consensus by reviewing the scientific evidence surrounding IMC and to make recommendations for the clinical recognition, diagnosis and evaluation, and clinical management of these complications. In light of the under-recognition and under-reporting of IMC, and given the associated morbidity, utilization of health care resources, and potential economic impact to hospitals, the panel engaged in a detailed review of peer-reviewed reports of bovine thrombin associated IMC. From that clinical knowledge base, recommendations were developed to guide clinicians in the recognition, diagnosis, and management of this challenging condition.

### PMID 19267301 (2009) — Drug delivery
TITLE: Controlled release of substances bound to fibrin-anchors or of DNA.
DOI: 10.1080/10717540802605608 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin sealants have been proposed as depot matrices for substances due to their biocompatibility, advantageous biological properties, and widespread use in wound healing. This study showed possibilities for a continuous and controlled release of pharmaceutically active substances out of a fibrin matrix. Substances of interest were linked to naturally occuring fibrin-anchors, (i) thrombin, (ii) fibronectin, and (iii) DNA. Fibronectin and thrombin bind fibrin by a specific binding moiety and DNA by charge. Fibrin clots were prepared from Tisseel Fibrin Sealant (Baxter AG, Vienna) by mixing 100 mg/ml fibrinogen, the substance of interest, and 4 U/ml of thrombin. Chemical crosslinking of proteins was performed with EDC using standard reaction conditions. Modification of proteins with biotin and PPACK was performed with N-hydroxysuccinimid activated compounds. With fibrin-anchors pharmaceutically active substances, i.e., tumor necrosis factor (TNF), albumin, and plasmid-DNA, were continously released over 10 days. In conclusion, the naturally occuring proteins fibronectin and thrombin with a fibrin binding moiety or DNA can be used as fibrin-anchors.

### PMID 19009862 (2008) — Archivio italiano di urologia, andrologia : organo ufficiale [di] Societa italiana di ecografia urologica e nefrologica
TITLE: Laparoscopic nephron sparing surgery: a multi-institutional European survey of 592 cases.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: Laparoscopic Nephron Sparing Surgery (LNSS) is a technically challenging procedure. Technical aspects and the outcome of LNSS are investigated. A total of 592 LNSS procedures were collected from 12 Centres, either in extraperitoneal or transperitoneal fashion. Mean tumor size was 2.2 cm. Eight centers reported on tumor position for a total of 407 cases with 338 exophytic tumors (83%) and 69 deep lesions (17%). Four centers, accounting for 185 cases, did not report on tumor position. All the centers performed their LNSS by clamping the hilum. The warm ischemia time was &lt; 30 min in all the centers. The positive margin rate was 2% (12/592). Hemostatic agents and/or sealant or tissue glues were used in 86% of cases (511/592). Types of sealants used included: gelatine matrix (Floseal), fibrin gel (Tissucol), bovine serum albumin (BioGlue) and cianacrylate (Glubran). Two Centres never used sealants, one center used only sealants without suturing and 9 centers used a combination of sealants and bolstering-sutures. The intraoperative open conversion rate was 3.5% (21/592). Postoperative complications included bleeding in 15/592 (2.5%) and urine leak in 13/592 (2.1%). No tumor seeding was reported. LNSS has similar results of open partial nephrectomy. The use of hemostatic agents and/or sealants or tissue glues during LNSS is largely diffuse in European centers and may be an effective add on reducing bleeding and urine leakage when used in combination with bolstering-suturing.

### PMID 18855289 (2008) — Minimally invasive neurosurgery : MIN
TITLE: Postoperative management of incidental durotomy in minimally invasive lumbar spinal surgery.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0028-1082313 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Unintended durotomy is a relatively common complication in spine surgery, with a reported incidence up to 14%. Traditional management has been mandatory bed rest for at least 48 h following repair, with or without placement of a drain. With the muscle-splitting approach and decreased potential (dead) space created during minimally invasive spinal surgery (MISS), there is less potential likelihood of symptoms such as spinal headaches or cerebrospinal fluid fistulas. We reviewed the cases of 5 patients undergoing lumbar MISS complicated by an incidental dural tear. Surgical treatment consisted of primary repair and/or use of DuraGen followed by application of either DuraSeal or Tisseel. Although the duration of bed rest varied, postoperative management involved early mobilization less than 48 h after surgery without the use of a drain. One patient was mobilized early on the second postoperative day, 2 patients were mobilized the morning after surgery, and 2 patients were mobilized immediately upon recovery from anesthesia. None of the patients developed symptoms related to durotomy. Although this represents a small series, early postoperative mobilization appears to be a reasonable option and results in shorter hospitalization.

### PMID 18728598 (2008) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Polyethylene glycol hydrogel dural sealant may reduce incisional cerebrospinal fluid leak after posterior fossa surgery.
DOI: 10.1227/01.neu.0000335034.08274.d2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Incisional cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak remains a significant cause of morbidity, particularly after posterior fossa surgery, with ranges between 4 and 17% in most series. We aimed to determine whether the use of a new polyethylene glycol (PEG) dural sealant product (DuraSeal; Confluent Surgical, Waltham, MA) is effective at preventing incisional CSF leak after posterior fossa surgery.
METHODS: One hundred cases of posterior fossa surgery with the PEG dural sealant applied at the time of dural closure were prospectively observed from May 2005 to April 2006. All patients underwent posterior fossa craniotomy or craniectomy. Clinical histories were followed to document cases of incisional CSF leak, pseudomeningocele, meningitis, wound infection, and interventions required to treat a CSF leak or pseudomeningocele. A retrospective cohort of 100 patients treated in a similar fashion but with fibrin glue augmented dural closure served as controls.
RESULTS: In the PEG group, two of 100 (2%) patients developed an incisional CSF leak postoperatively. By comparison, 10 of 100 (10%) patients in whom fibrin glue was used developed an incisional CSF leak. This difference was statistically significant, with a P value of 0.03. There were no significant differences in the rates of pseudomeningocele, meningitis, or other postoperative interventions.
CONCLUSION: The application of PEG dural sealant to the closed dural edges may be effective at reducing incisional CSF leak after posterior fossa surgery.

### PMID 18656762 (2008) — The Journal of hand surgery
TITLE: Comparative analysis of biomechanical performance of available "nerve glues".
DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2008.02.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare a variety of potentially useful artificial and biological sealants applied to sutured nerve repairs to decrease gapping at the repaired site.
METHODS: Fifty-seven fresh-frozen cadaveric nerve specimens were transected and repaired with two 8-0 nylon epineural sutures placed 180 degrees apart. The specimens were divided into 5 groups. Four groups received augmentation of the repair with application of either autologous fibrin glue, Tisseel fibrin glue, Evicel fibrin glue, or DuraSeal polyethylene glycol-based hydrogel sealant, and the fifth group had no glue. Each nerve construct was mounted in a servohydraulic materials testing machine and stretched at a constant 5 mm/min displacement rate until failure. A noncontact video analysis permitted normalization of stretch within the repair region. Statistical analysis was performed via analysis of variance followed by Tukey-Kramer post hoc pairwise comparison when indicated.
RESULTS: Resistance to gapping as measured through normalized stiffness (N/mm/mm) was greater for the Tisseel group, Evicel group, and DuraSeal group versus the no-glue group only. The stiffness of the autologous group approached significance versus the no-glue group. There were no significant differences in stiffness between any of the nerve glue groups. There was no statistical difference for the peak load at failure between any of the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Avoidance of gapping at the nerve repair site is crucial in achieving successful nerve regeneration. Commercially available tissue sealants (Tisseel, Evicel, and DuraSeal), when used to augment 2-suture nerve repairs, as in our protocol, help prevent this initial gapping. None of the tissue sealants tested, however, increased the ultimate load to complete failure of the repair.

### PMID 18954621 (2008) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Autologous fibrin sealant reduces the incidence of prolonged air leak and duration of chest tube drainage after lung volume reduction surgery: a prospective randomized blinded study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2008.02.079 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Prolonged air leak is reported in up to 50% of patients after lung volume reduction surgery. The effect of an autologous fibrin sealant on the intensity and duration of air leak and on the time to chest drain removal after lung volume reduction surgery was investigated in a randomized prospective clinical trial.
METHODS: Twenty-five patients underwent bilateral thoracoscopic lung volume reduction surgery. In each patient, an autologous fibrin sealant was applied along the staple lines on one side, whereas no additional measure was taken on the other side. Randomization of treatment was performed at the end of the resection on the first side. Air leak was assessed semiquantitatively by use of a severity score (0 = no leak; 4 = continuous severe leak) by two investigators blinded to the treatment.
RESULT: Mean value of the total severity scores for the first 48 hours postoperative was significantly lower in the treated group (4.7 +/- 7.7) than in the control group (16.0 +/- 10.1) (P &lt; .001), independently of the length of the resection. Prolonged air leak and mean duration of drainage were also significantly reduced after application of the sealant (4.5% and 2.8 +/- 1.9 days versus 31.8% and 5.9 +/- 2.9 days) (P = .03 and P &lt; .001).
CONCLUSIONS: Autologous fibrin sealant for reinforcement of the staple lines after lung volume reduction surgery significantly reduces prolonged air leak and duration of chest tube drainage.

### PMID 18633016 (2008) — Anesthesia and analgesia
TITLE: Anaphylactic reaction after systemic application of aprotinin triggered by aprotinin-containing fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1213/ane.0b013e31817e6043 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a 67-yr-old male after multiple surgical procedures for treatment of arterial occlusive disease who suffered an anaphylactic reaction after administration of aprotinin (Trasylol) prior to urgent coronary artery bypass surgery. The patient had been treated with aprotinin-containing fibrin sealant in 2004 and in 2007, 2 wk before coronary artery bypass surgery. The postoperative serologic screening revealed positive results for qualitative aprotinin-specific IgG, highly elevated quantitative aprotinin-specific IgG and moderately elevated aprotinin-specific IgE antibodies.

### PMID 22436857 (2008) — Innovations (Philadelphia, Pa.)
TITLE: Surgical feasibility of the injection of fibrin sealant in cardiac fat pads to reduce the incidence of postoperative atrial fibrillation after coronary artery bypass grafting or valve surgery: a pilot study.
DOI: 10.1097/IMI.0b013e31817f82e6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: : Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common complication following coronary artery bypass grafting or valve surgery.The autonomic nervous system is an important determinant in the development of AF. We have assessed the role of injection of fibrin sealant (FS) as a method to modify conduction in the fad pads, to mimic temporary denervation and to reduce the incidence of postoperative AF in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting or valve surgery.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: : Twenty eligible patients who underwent coronary bypass grafting or aortic valve surgery in our Institution were included in this pilot - study.Detection of AF after surgical intervention was based on patient symptomatology and on daily electrocardiograms obtained on all patients. Telemetry was used in all patients for the entire hospitalization period.
RESULTS: : 20% of the studied population (n = 4) developed postoperative AF. At the time of discharge one patient (5%) had persistent AF.Postoperative mortality was 5% (n = 1) and not cardiac related. None of the patients required permanent pacemaker implantation.
CONCLUSIONS: : This first human study of FS injected into the anterior fad pads following low to moderate risk open heart surgery shows, that this procedure is safe and feasible. Moreover, CM -1 injection appears to reduce the need for postoperative intervention and/or treatment of AF by diminishing its incidence.

### PMID 18381876 (2008) — Asian cardiovascular &amp; thoracic annals
TITLE: Fibrin sealant for left ventricular rupture after mitral valve replacement.
DOI: 10.1177/021849230801600215 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Despite safer surgical procedures, left ventricular rupture remains a rare but potentially lethal complication of mitral valve replacement. The use of fibrin sealant has substantially improved the outcome of many difficult bleeding episodes after cardiac surgery. We describe a case of left ventricular rupture successfully treated with fibrin sealant combined with external Teflon-pledgeted sutures.

### PMID 18373121 (2008) — World journal of surgery
TITLE: Intraoperative application of fibrin sealant does not reduce the duration of closed suction drainage following radical axillary lymph node dissection in melanoma patients: a prospective randomized trial in 58 patients.
DOI: 10.1007/s00268-007-9461-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Patients suffering from malignant melanoma often require radical lymph node dissection of the axillary nodal basin. The effects of intraoperative application of fibrin sealant following radical axillary lymph node dissection (RALND) on the incidence of postoperative lymphatic secretion are discussed. To study the effect of intraoperatively applied fibrin sealant following RALND a randomized patient-blinded trial was carried out.
METHODS: Fifty-eight patients with axillary lymph node metastases of malignant melanoma underwent therapeutic RALND and were randomized into two groups: 29 patients received 2 cc of fibrin glue intraoperatively and 29 patients were only irrigated with 0.9% saline. The amount of drainage was recorded every 24 h. The main outcome criterion was the duration of drain placement in the wound. Minor criteria were the total amount of fluid and the length of hospital stay. Statistical analysis was performed using Spearman's log-rank correlation and paired t-test.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference between the nonfibrin group 5 days (range = 3.6-5.7 days) and the fibrin group 5 days (range = 4.1-8.5 days) (p = 0.701). The total amount of fluid for the nonfibrin group (410 cc, range = 362-727 cc) and that for the fibrin group (503 cc, range = 369-1098 cc) (p = 0.605) and the length of postoperative hospital stay of 6 days (range = 5.4-7) vs. 7 days (range = 5.9-10.7), respectively, were not different between both groups (p = 0.387).
CONCLUSION: Considering our study results, we cannot recommend the use of 2 cc of fibrin glue intraoperatively in the prevention of lymphatic secretion in patients undergoing RALND for metastatic melanoma.

### PMID 18356068 (2008) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealant in coronary artery surgery - the devil is always in the detail!
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2008.02.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016420">Comment, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 18243004 (2008) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: The optimal technique for combined application of fibrin sealant and bioabsorbable felt against alveolar air leakage.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2007.12.036 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The combination of fibrin sealant and bioabsorbable sheet is known to provide a better sealing effect on alveolar air leakage compared to the single use of fibrin sealant. However, there is little evidence that reveals the optimum techniques for their combined application. Presently we developed a novel Rub + Soak B method that comprises the attachment of thrombin-impregnated sheet to the fibrinogen-rubbed lung tissue area. This study aimed to evaluate its sealing effect compared to various combined application techniques.
METHODS: Experiment I: The viscosity and osmolality of each fibrin sealant component were measured. Experiment II: Pleural defects produced by electrocauterization in retrieved swine lungs (n=24) were covered with fibrin sealant and polyglycolic acid felt by using the following five techniques: concomitant spraying of fibrinogen and thrombin solutions over the pleural defect area (Group I, Control); rubbing the thrombin solution on the area, attaching the felt soaked in the fibrinogen solution, and applying the remaining thrombin and fibrinogen solutions (half the original quantity) alternately to the area (Group II, Rub + Soak A); rubbing the fibrinogen solution on the area, attaching the felt soaked in the thrombin solution, and applying the remaining fibrinogen and thrombin solutions alternately to the area (Group III, Rub+Soak B); rubbing the fibrinogen solution on the area, attaching the dry felt, and spraying both the remaining solutions concomitantly (Group IV, Rub+Spray); and spraying both the solutions, attaching the dry felt, and respraying the remaining solutions over the area (Group V, Spray Sandwich). The minimum seal-breaking airway pressure was compared among the groups. Samples were histologically assessed.
RESULTS: Experiment I: The fibrinogen solution was 34.8 times more viscous and had 3.5 times higher osmolality than the thrombin solution. Experiment II: The seal-breaking pressure was significantly higher in Group III than in Groups I, II, and V (p&lt;0.05). Histologically, clot penetration into the tissue was significant in Group III.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel Rub+Soak B technique was the most effective and reasonable combination technique wherein the sealing mechanism was supported by the physical properties of the fibrin sealant components.

### PMID 18096397 (2008) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealant in coronary artery bypass grafting surgery; reflection on risk and benefit.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2007.11.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016420">Comment, Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 17914632 (2008) — Journal of materials science. Materials in medicine
TITLE: Comparative in vitro study of the proliferation and growth of ovine osteoblast-like cells on various alloplastic biomaterials manufactured for augmentation and reconstruction of tissue or bone defects.
DOI: 10.1007/s10856-007-3238-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In this in vitro study ovine osteoblast-like cells were cultured on seven different alloplastic biomaterials used for augmentation and for reconstruction of bone defects in dental and craniomaxillofacial surgery. The aim of this study was to examine the growth behaviour (viability, cell density and morphology) of ovine osteoblast-like cells on the investigated biomaterials to get knowledge which biomaterial is qualified to act as a cell carrier system in further in vivo experiments. The biomaterials were either synthetically manufactured or of natural origin. As synthetically manufactured biomaterials Ethisorb, MakroSorb, PalacosR, and PDS film were used. As biomaterials of natural origin BeriplastP, Bio-Oss and Titanmesh were investigated. The cell proliferation and cell colonization were analyzed by a proliferation assay and scanning electron microscopy. Osteoblast-like cells proliferated and attached on all biomaterials, except on Beriplast. On Ethisorb the highest cell proliferation rate was measured followed by PalacosR. Both biomaterials offer suitable growth and proliferation conditions for ovine osteoblast-like cells. The proliferation rates of Bio-Oss, MakroSorb, PDS-film and Titanmesh were low and SEM examinations of these materials showed less spread osteoblast-like cells. The results showed that ovine osteoblast-like cells appear to be sensitive to substrate composition and topography. This in vitro study provides the basis for further in vivo studies using the sheep model to examine the biocompatibility and the long-term interaction between the test material and tissue (bone regeneration).

### PMID 18959674 (2008) — Artificial organs
TITLE: The hemodynamic behavior of arterial anastomosis using fibrin sealant: experimental study in swine.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1525-1594.2008.00638.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The wide use of biological sealants as a reinforcement for arterial sutures and the small experimental base in literature motivated this study. Our aim was to evaluate the flow, tear pressure, and the need of reinforcement stitches in sutured arteries after a cross-section. This research project complied with the Helsinki convention. The Tissucol (Baxter) fibrin sealant was used in all experiments. The femoral and carotid arteries of 17 swine from the same breed (weighing from 15 to 20 kg) were cross-sectioned after heparinization and subjected to anastomoses using a single continuous plane of 7-0 prolene. We worked with 68 artery samples, 34 in the treatment group and 34 in the control group. For each animal, one carotid and one femoral artery randomly received fibrin sealant with the contralateral side being used as a control. The need and the number of reinforcement stitches were recorded. Ten minutes after protamine infusion, the animals were sacrificed and the arteries were catheterized respecting 1 cm proximal and distal. The arteries were measured and placed on a flow meter to evaluate the flow rate of 10 mL of 0.9% NaCl in a 50 cm high column. The arteries were then subjected to air infusion at increasingly higher pressures (stepwise increases of 25 mm Hg), the grafts were dipped in 0.9% NaCl solution, the first air leakage was observed, and the tear pressure recorded. Data was analyzed with EpiInfo 6 data manager. The external diameters and thickness of the arteries were similar in both the treatment and control group. There was no significant difference between the groups regarding the tear pressure (P = 0.329), flow rate (P = 0.943), and the number of samples with a tear pressure above 200 mm Hg. However, the sealant reduced the number of reinforcement stitches necessary (P = 0.029). We conclude that fibrin sealant reduces the need of additional stitches; however, it does not change the tear pressure nor significantly reduces the flow.

### PMID 18797168 (2008) — European surgical research. Europaische chirurgische Forschung. Recherches chirurgicales europeennes
TITLE: Adhesive strength of fibrinogen-coated collagen patch or liquid fibrin sealant in an experimental liver resection model in pigs.
DOI: 10.1159/000155879 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of sealing bile ducts by determining the adhesive strength of 2 different sealing agents, i.e. a fibrinogen-coated collagen patch (TachoSil) and a liquid fibrin sealant (Tissucol), in an experimental partial liver resection model in pigs.
METHODS: Pigs underwent laparotomy and partial resection of the left medial liver lobe. A 16-Ch silicon catheter was introduced into the common bile duct. Pigs were randomly assigned to 2 groups (n = 4 each). In group 1, TachoSil was applied on the resection surface, and in group 2 Tissucol was applied. After 2 h, pressure in the intrabiliary system was gradually increased.
RESULTS: No significant differences in the hemostasis times between TachoSil and Tissucol were observed (210.0 +/- 12.9 vs. 208.8 +/- 14.2 s; p = 0.9506). The pressure that could be resisted with Tissucol was significantly lower compared to TachoSil (77.0 +/- 8.6 vs. 131.8 +/- 16.3 mm Hg; p = 0.0405).
CONCLUSIONS: The application of TachoSil on the resection surface is equally effective in obtaining hemostasis and in sealing of biliary ducts as Tissucol. The adhesive strength of TachoSil on the resection surface, however, is superior to Tissucol.

### PMID 18781379 (2008) — Pharmaceutical research
TITLE: A fibrin glue composition as carrier for nucleic acid vectors.
DOI: 10.1007/s11095-008-9719-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Gene delivery from biomaterials has become an important tool in tissue engineering. The purpose of this study was to generate a gene vector-doted fibrin glue as a versatile injectable implant to be used in gene therapy supported tissue regeneration.
METHODS: Copolymer-protected polyethylenimine(PEI)-DNA vectors (COPROGs), naked DNA and PEI-DNA were formulated with the fibrinogen component of the fibrin glue TISSUCOL and lyophilized. Clotting parameters upon rehydration and thrombin addition were measured, vector release from fibrin clots was determined. Structural characterizations were carried out by electron microscopy. Reporter and growth factor gene delivery to primary keratinocytes and chondrocytes in vitro was examined. Finally,chondrocyte colonized clots were tested for their potency in cartilage regeneration in a osteochondral defect model.
RESULTS: The optimized glue is based on the fibrinogen component of TISSUCOL, a fibrin glue widely used in the clinics, co-lyophilized with copolymer-protected polyethylenimine(PEI)- DNA vectors (COPROGs). This material, when rehydrated, forms vector-containing clots in situ upon thrombin addition and is suitable to mediate growth factor gene delivery to primary keratinocytes and primary chondrocytes admixed before clotting. Unprotected PEI-DNA in the same setup was comparatively unsuitable for clot formation while naked DNA was ineffective in transfection. Naked DNA was released rapidly from fibrin clots (&gt;70% within the first seven days) in contrast to COPROGs which remained tightly immobilized over extended periods of time (0.29% release per day). Electron microscopy of chondrocytecolonized COPROG-clots revealed avid endocytotic vector uptake. In situ BMP-2 gene transfection and subsequent expression in chondrocytes grown in COPROG clots resulted in the upregulation of alkaline phosphatase expression and increased extracellular matrix formation in vitro. COPROG-fibrinogen preparations with admixed autologous chondrocytes when clotted in situ in osteochondral defects in the patellar grooves of rabbit femura gave rise to luciferase reporter gene expression detectable for two weeks (n=3 animals per group). However, no significant improvement in cartilage formation in osteochondral defects filled with autologous chondrocytes in BMP-2-COPROG clots was achieved in comparison to controls (n=8 animals per group).
CONCLUSIONS: COPROGs co-lyophilized with fibrinogen are a simple basis for an injectable fibrin gluebased gene-activated matrix. The preparation can be used is complete analogy to fibrin glue preparations that are used in the clinics. However, further improvements in transgene expression levels and persistence are required to yield cartilage regeneration in the osteochondral defect model chosen in this study.

### PMID 18649870 (2008) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: The pleural and human fibrin glue sandwich: a quick and effective post-pneumonectomy bronchial stump coverage technique.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2008.01.022 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Protection of the bronchial stump after pneumonectomy reduces the incidence of bronchopleural fistula. However, which technique provides the most satisfactory results remains open for debate.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We describe a study in which a bronchial stump coverage technique was performed using 2 layers of human fibrin glue (Tissucol; Baxter, Deerfield, IL USA) with an interposed patch of parietal pleura. From July 2005 to June 2007, this technique was used in 31 consecutive patients after standard pneumonectomy by a single surgeon.
RESULTS: None of the patients developed early or late bronchopleural fistula, and no clinical adverse reaction was recorded. During the same period, alternative stump coverage techniques were used by different surgeons in 71 pneumonectomies. In this group, the rate of fistula was 6% (4 patients).
CONCLUSION: These preliminary data demonstrate the feasibility of the technique and suggest that it is at least equivalent to the other type of flaps used. The main advantages of this technique are the restoration of the natural separation between the mediastinum and pleural cavities, as well as the reduced operating time (duration 5 minutes).

### PMID 18468639 (2008) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Fibrin sealant (Tissucol) enhances tissue integration of condensed polytetrafluoroethylene meshes and reduces early adhesion formation in experimental intraabdominal peritoneal onlay mesh repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2007.12.796 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The laparoscopic intraabdominal peritoneal onlay mesh repair (IPOM) is a common technique for the reinforcement of multiple ventral hernias or defined defects after laparotomies. However, the placement of synthetic meshes in the intraabdominal cavity can be associated with severe complications. Adhesions frequently originate from the implant and protruding parts of fixation devices, presenting a serious clinical problem with potentially detrimental consequences. This study was designed to assess the impact of fibrin sealing with Tissucol (FS; Baxter, Vienna, Austria) on adhesion formation to condensed polytetrafluoroethylene meshes (Motif Meshes, MM; Proxy Biomedical, Galway, Ireland) as well as on tissue integration of these implants in experimental IPOM repair in rats. It was tested whether FS application allowed the reduction of sutures for mesh fixation without increasing the risk of mesh dislocation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixteen rats were assigned to the implantation of MM with four nonresorbable sutures (Synthofil; Ethicon, Norderstedt, Germany) with additional fibrin coating with 0.2 mL FS or to MM fixation with six nonresorbable sutures without FS (n = 8 per group). MM with 2 cm in diameter were implanted in open IPOM by a laparatomy. The observation period of 17 days ensured assessment of adhesions after the full degradation of FS. Adhesions were rated with the score suggested by Vandendael. Histology was performed.
RESULTS: All eight MMs without FS sealing elicited severe (grade III) adhesions, whereas fibrin-sealed MM were rated mild in 1, moderate in 5, and severe in 2 cases. The superior finding in the FS group was statistically significant. Impaired integration of sutured-only MM was observed in four cases, whereas all FS-sealed MM were well integrated.
CONCLUSIONS: FS improves the tissue integration, reduces early adhesion formation to cPTFE implants, and allows reduction of perforating fixation devices in experimental IPOM repair.

### PMID 18392910 (2008) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: The assessment of quality of life in a trial on lightweight mesh fixation with fibrin sealant in transabdominal preperitoneal hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-008-0365-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Chronic pain is a major concern in open and laparoscopic hernia repair. Study groups have adopted a variety of tools to assess postoperative (postOP) pain and quality of life (QoL). Unfortunately, modifications of existing tests and self-designed questionnaires are common, yielding unvalidated results and making comparison of data difficult. The aim of this study was to assess the QoL in transabdominal preperitoneal mesh repair (TAPP) with fibrin sealant (FS) for lightweight mesh fixation, applying the standardised Short Form 36 (SF36) questionnaire in its unmodified design. The SF36 has already been validated and implemented in a large number of studies. In this trial the physical-health-component summary measure (PHM), summarising the physical health-related scales, served as the primary outcome parameter.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: After informed written consent was obtained, TAPP with fibrin mesh sealing was performed in 11 non-selected consecutive patients by a single surgeon. A direct control group (e.g. TAPP with staples) was not enrolled, because a favourable change in the QoL in patients subjected to the mesh sealing approach was the tested hypothesis and not the comparison of techniques. The macroporous mesh (TI-Mesh, GfE, Germany) was fixed with 1 ml of FS (FS, Tisseel, Tissucol, Baxter Biosciences, Austria), and the QoL and pain were assessed preoperatively and 1 year postOP using the SF36 survey and the visual analogue score (VAS).
RESULTS: After 12 months, recurrences or complications were observed. The analysis of the unmodifed SF36 revealed a highly significant improvement in the PHM, based on significant changes of all physical-health-related scales. The scale 'social functioning' (SOCIAL), which belongs to the mental-health-related scale, had also significantly improved. The VAS was significantly reduced after 1 year.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite a small number of patients (n = 11), a strikingly significant improvement in physical health and reduction of pain was detected with the unmodified SF36 and the VAS 1 year after TAPP repair with fibrin-sealed lightweight meshes. We suggest the use of the unmodified SF36 for QoL in hernia repair in order to assess all aspects of recovery (physical and mental) and to facilitate comparison of data.

### PMID 18365278 (2008) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: The use of fibrin sealant to prevent major complications following laparoscopic gastric bypass: results of a multicenter, randomized trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-008-9885-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Published interim results have shown that fibrin sealant (Tissucol/Tisseel Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria) may be effective in preventing anastomotic leaks and internal hernias following laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (LRYGBP). We report the final results of a multicenter, randomized clinical trial evaluating the use of fibrin sealant in LRYGBP.
METHODS: Between January 2004 and December 2005, 340 patients aged 21-65 years with a body mass index (BMI) of 40-59 kg/m(2) undergoing LRYGBP were randomized (1:1) to two treatment groups: fibrin sealant group (applied to gastrojejunal and jejunojejunal anastomoses and over mesenteric openings), and control group (no fibrin sealant; suture of the mesenteric openings). Operative time, early and late complications, reinterventions, time to oral diet initiation, and length of stay were assessed.
RESULTS: Overall, 320 patients were included into the study: 160 in the control group and 160 in the fibrin sealant group. All patients completed follow-up assessments at 6 and 12 months, and 60.9% completed assessments at 24 months. There were no significant differences between groups with respect to demographics, operative time, oral diet initiation, hospital stay, and BMI reduction at 6, 12, and 24 months. The incidence of anastomotic leak was numerically, but not significantly, greater in the control group. The overall reintervention rate for specific early complications (&lt;30 days) was significantly higher in the control group (p = 0.016). No deaths or conversions to open laparotomy occurred.
CONCLUSION: The use of fibrin sealant in laparoscopic RYGBP may be beneficial in reducing the reintervention rate for major perioperative (&lt;30 days) complications. Larger studies are needed.

### PMID 18095052 (2008) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Randomized, controlled, blinded trial of Tissucol/Tisseel for mesh fixation in patients undergoing Lichtenstein technique for primary inguinal hernia repair: rationale and study design of the TIMELI trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-007-0315-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Complications associated with sutured mesh fixation following open groin hernia repair have prompted surgeons to evaluate methods of atraumatic fixation such as the use of human fibrin glue. Small trials with Tissucol/Tisseel fibrin glue (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, IL, USA) have shown promising results that warrant further investigation.
METHODS: TIMELI (Tissucol/Tisseel for MEsh fixation in LIchtenstein hernia repair) is an international, controlled, randomized, patient- and evaluator-blinded study that is comparing mesh fixation with Tissucol or sutures in patients with inguinal hernia. The primary endpoint evaluates the incidence of disabling complications (chronic pain and/or numbness and/or groin discomfort) at 12 months post-surgery.
RESULTS: Patient enrolment started in February 2006 and ended on 19 April 2007, with a total of 325 patients recruited. Initial results are expected in early 2008.
CONCLUSIONS: TIMELI is a major international trial that will provide important information on the efficacy and safety of Tissucol, compared with sutures, for mesh fixation in patients undergoing Lichtenstein technique for primary inguinal hernia repair.

### PMID 18080308 (2008) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
TITLE: Mechanical and chemical characteristics of an autologous glue.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.31705 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The study evaluates the mechanical and chemical characteristics of autologous surgical glue made by mixing ultrafiltered plasma with glutaraldehyde (GTA). Human albumin 200 g/L mixed with different concentrations of GTA (25, 50, 75, or 100 g/L) was used as a single protein set-up for testing tensile strength, elasticity, and rate of crosslinking. Subsequently, ultrafiltered canine or human plasma to obtain autologous glue replaced human albumin. BioGlue, a surgical glue, and Tissucol Duo, a fibrin sealant, were used as controls. Tensile strength of human albumin 200 g/L mixed with 75 g/L GTA is 825 +/- 109 N versus 672 +/- 167 N for BioGlue. Ultrafiltered canine plasma showed a maximum tensile strength of 634 +/- 137 N when mixed with GTA 75 g/L. For human plasma, the maximum tensile strength of 436 +/- 69 N was reached after mixing with GTA 25 g/L. Autologous glue had a higher elasticity of 144 +/- 66 N versus 322 +/- 104 N for BioGlue at maximum load. Autologous glues for vascular repair can be easily prepared out of the patient's plasma. The optimal characteristics, compared to BioGlue, are obtained for ultrafiltered canine and human plasma by mixing with a GTA concentration of 50-75 g/L and 25-50 g/L, respectively. The autologous glue will exert less tensile strength than BioGlue but has a better compliance. In case where no plasma can obtained from the patient, mixing human albumin 200 g/L with GTA 75 g/L can be an alternative to BioGlue.

### PMID 17628597 (2008) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Adverse effects associated with the use of porcine cross-linked collagen implants in an experimental model of incisional hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2007.03.090 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Porcine cross-linked collagen (PermaCol, PCL; TSL, Aldershot, United Kingdom) has been proposed as permanent biomaterial in incisional hernia repair. We evaluated the biocompatibility of PCL in an established animal model.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In 10 Sprague Dawley rats, two hernias per animal were created in the abdominal wall left and right of the linea alba (1.5 cm in diameter), and the peritoneum was spared. The lesions were left untreated for 10 days, until incisional hernias developed. These defects were covered with non-perforated (out-of-the-box, n = 12) or perforated (modified; n = 8) PCL (2 x 2 cm). In a first step, 12 non-perforated implants were tested in a short-term observation period of 17 days. Eight of these non-perforated implants were fibrin sealed (0.3 mL, Tissucol; Baxter, Vienna, Austria), whereas four non-perforated implants were sutured with non-resorbable material. In a second step, perforations were added as modification to PCL to facilitate drainage of fluids, cell ingrowth, and transgression of fibrin sealant. All perforated implants were fibrin sealed and included in a long-term observation period of 3 months. The observation periods allowed the evaluation of the complete degradation of the fibrin sealant fixation after 2 weeks and of the implant integration in a chronic timeframe. Implant sites were analyzed macroscopically and histologically.
RESULTS: All PCL samples elicited strong local inflammation with signs of foreign body reaction. Integration of perforated PCL appeared limited after 3 months. Three animals had to be euthanized prior to intended time points because of transcutaneous migration of implants.
CONCLUSIONS: In an experimental model of incisional hernia repair, PCL does not integrate well in the abdominal wall and shows poor biocompatibility.

### PMID 17623245 (2008) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Comparing fibrin sealant with staples for mesh fixation in laparoscopic transabdominal hernia repair: a case control-study.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-007-9458-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Laparoscopic hernia repair is not as popular as cholecystectomy. We have performed more than 3,000 laparoscopic herniorrhaphies using the trans-abdominal (TAPP) technique. To prevent recurrences we fix the polypropylene mesh with staples. The use of fibrin glue for graft fixation is a possible alternative.
METHODS: We have performed 3,130 laparoscopic hernia repairs over 14 years. For mesh fixation we used titanium clips and observed a small number of complications. In July 2003 we started using fibrin glue (Tissucol(R)). The purpose of this retrospective longitudinal study was to evaluate if the use of fibrin sealant was as safe and effective as conventional stapling and if there were differences in post-operative pain, complications and recurrences.
RESULTS: From July 2003 to June 2006 we performed 823 laparoscopic herniorrhaphies. Fibrin glue (Tissucol(R)) was used in 88 cases. Two homogeneous groups of 68 patients (83 cases) treated with fibrin glue and 68 patients (87 cases) where the mesh was fixed with staples, were compared. Patients with relevant associated diseases or large inguino-scrotal hernias were excluded. Operative times were longer in the group treated with fibrin glue with a mean of 35 minutes (range 22-65 mins) compared to the group treated with staples (25 minutes, range 14-50 mins). The time of hospital stay was the same (24 hours). Post-operative complications, that were more frequent in the stapled group, included trocar site pain, hematomas, intra-operative bleedings and incisional hernias. No significant difference was observed concerning seromas, chronic pain and recurrence rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Less post-operative pain, and a faster return to usual activities are the main advantages of laparoscopic repair compared to the traditional approach. The use of fibrin sealant reduces in our experience the risk of post- and intra-operative complications such as bleeding and incisional hernia; recurrence rates are similar, but the operative time is longer.

### PMID 18794413 (2008) — Archives of facial plastic surgery
TITLE: Efficacy of fibrin sealant (human) (Evicel) in rhinoplasty: a prospective, randomized, single-blind trial of the use of fibrin sealant in lateral osteotomy.
DOI: 10.1001/archfaci.10.5.339 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To determine whether patients receiving fibrin sealant placed in a single lateral osteotomy site during rhinoplasty will note substantial improvement in pain, bruising, swelling, and overall healing compared with the untreated side and to determine whether blinded observers detect a substantial difference in bruising and swelling on the basis of review of standard postoperative photographs.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective, randomized, single-blind, controlled trial of the use of fibrin sealant (human) (Evicel; Johnson &amp; Johnson-Wound Management, Somerville, New Jersey) in 10 consecutive patients undergoing lateral osteotomy in rhinoplasty. Written consent was obtained from all participants. Each patient was randomized for the use of fibrin sealant on either the right or the left side with the contralateral side acting as the control. Patients were evaluated on postoperative days 1, 7, and 21 with standard photographic views and a patient questionnaire. The blinded observers consisted of 5 raters familiar with the outcomes and results of rhinoplastic surgery. The observers evaluated all photographs and completed a grading scale to define bruising and swelling on each side.
RESULTS: The mean patient age was 41 years (age range, 21-66 years). Half of the patients were women. The blinded observer Wilcoxon rank sum test revealed a statistically significant difference on postoperative day 1 for bruising (P&lt; .03; Wilcoxon critical z value, 1.99) and swelling (P&lt; .01; 2.41). Similar findings were discovered on postoperative day 7 for both bruising and swelling (P&lt; .03). On postoperative day 21, bruising retained statistical significance (P&lt; .05); however, swelling did not achieve statistical significance. Patient questionnaires were evaluated and significance was determined for the treated compared with the untreated side of the nose on postoperative days 1, 7, and 21. Categories included pain, bruising and swelling, and overall rate of healing. The Wilcoxon rank sum test revealed no significance for pain or overall rate of recovery (P&gt; .06) on postoperative days 1, 7, or 21. However, bruising and swelling both achieved statistical significance. On postoperative day 1, both pain and swelling scales achieved a significance of P&lt; .01 (Wilcoxon critical z value, 2.34). On postoperative day 7, bruising achieved significance at P&lt; .005 (Wilcoxon critical z value, 2.63) and swelling achieved significance at P&lt; .01 (2.45). Both bruising and swelling achieved equal significance on postoperative day 21 (P&lt; .01; Wilcoxon critical z value, 2.57 and 2.45, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant applied to a lateral osteotomy site significantly reduced bruising and swelling per patient report on postoperative days 1, 7, and 21. Physician observation reported significant reduction in bruising on postoperative days 1, 7, and 21 and reduction in swelling on postoperative days 1 and 7. The ease of application and versatility of fibrin sealant enable rapid healing after rhinoplasty and produce increased patient satisfaction.

### PMID 18561990 (2008) — Urology
TITLE: Application of Evicel to cavernous nerves of the rat does not influence erectile function in vivo.
DOI: 10.1016/j.urology.2008.03.046 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of the fibrin sealant, Evicel, on the neuroregulatory control of penile erections in an experimental rat model.
METHODS: Two groups of rats were used: sham-operated rats with exposure of the bilateral cavernous nerves (CNs) and application of saline vehicle (500 microL), and rats treated with direct application of Evicel (500 microL) bilaterally to the CNs. At 14 and 45 days after application of Evicel to the CNs, the CNs were stimulated to measure the in vivo erectile responses. Additionally, we evaluated the neuronal nitric oxide synthase immunoreactivity in the dorsal CNs of the penis and changes in the smooth muscle and collagen deposition in the penis using a trichrome stain.
RESULTS: Evicel application to the CNs did not have any detrimental effect on the neurogenic erectile responses in vivo at 14 or 45 days after application. The neuronal nitric oxide synthase expression in the dorsal CNs of the penis was unchanged after Evicel application at all points studied, and we saw no change in the histomorphometric analysis findings of smooth muscle and collagen deposition in the penis.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the hemostatic agent, Evicel, is safe in an experimental rat model of erection physiology, with no detrimental effects on neuroregulatory control of erection.

### PMID 19561795 (2008) — P &amp; T : a peer-reviewed journal for formulary management
TITLE: Pharmaceutical approval update.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topics include bendamustine (Treanda) for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, hepatitis B immune globulin (HepaGam B) to prevent hepatitis B infection following liver transplantation, and a fibrin sealant (Artiss) used in skin graft surgery for burn patients.

### PMID 18354285 (2008) — Journal of burn care &amp; research : official publication of the American Burn Association
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of a fibrin sealant for adherence of autologous skin grafts to burn wounds: results of a phase 3 clinical study.
DOI: 10.1097/BCR.0b013e31816673f8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: The objective of this phase 3, multicentered, prospective, randomized, evaluator-blinded, clinical study was to compare skin graft adherence utilizing a fibrin sealant containing 4 IU/ml thrombin (FS 4IU VH S/D [FS 4IU VH S/D will be marketed under the trade name ARTISS upon licensure in the United States]) to graft adherence utilizing staples in burn patients requiring wound excision and skin grafting. FS 4IU VH S/D was compared with staples in 138 patients. Patients had burn wounds measuring &lt; or =40% of total body surface area with two comparable test sites measuring between 1 and 4% total body surface area each. Wound closure at day 28 was assessed using test site planimetry and review of day 28 photographs by three independent blinded evaluators (primary endpoint analysis). Secondary efficacy measures included hematoma/seroma on day 1, engraftment on day 5, and wound closure on day 14. Investigator and patient-reported outcomes were also assessed. The proportion of test sites with complete wound closure at day 28 was 70.3% in FS 4IU VH S/D treated sites and 65.8% in stapled sites, as assessed by planimetry. Blinded review of day 28 photographs confirmed that the rate of complete wound closure was similar between the two treatments, although the overall assessed rates of closure were lower than those determined by planimetry: FS 4IU VH S/D (43.3%) and staples (37.0%). The lower limit of the 97.5% confidence interval of the difference between FS 4IU VH S/D and staples was -0.029, which is above the predefined noninferiority margin of -0.1. Therefore, FS 4IU VH S/D is at least as efficacious as staples at the 97.5% one-sided level for complete wound closure by day 28. Hematoma/seroma on day 1 occurred at significantly (P &lt; .0001) fewer FS 4IU VH S/D-treated sites (29.7% [95% CI 22.2-38.1%]) compared with stapled sites (62.3% [95% CI 53.7-70.4%]). Engraftment on day 5 was deemed to be 100% in 62.3% (95% CI 53.7-70.4%) of the FS 4IU VH S/D-treated sites and 55.1% (95% CI 46.4-63.5%) of the stapled sites (P = .0890). Complete wound closure by day 14 occurred in 48.8% (95% CI 39.9-57.8%) of the FS 4IU VH S/D treated sites and 42.6% (95% CI 34.0-51.6%) of the stapled sites (P = .2299). FS 4IU VH S/D scored significantly better than staples for all investigator-assessed outcomes, namely quality of graft adherence (P &lt; .0001), preference for method of fixation (P &lt; .0001), satisfaction with graft fixation (P &lt; .0001), and overall quality of healing (P &lt; .0001). Likewise, FS 4IU VH S/D scored significantly better than staples for all patient-assessed outcomes, namely anxiety about pain (P &lt; .0001) and treatment preference (P &lt;.0001). The safety profile of FS 4IU VH S/D was excellent as indicated by the lack of any related serious adverse experiences. These findings demonstrate that FS 4IU VH S/D is safe and effective for attachment of skin grafts, with outcomes at least as good as or better than staple fixation.

### PMID 18282265 (2008) — Wound repair and regeneration : official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue Repair Society
TITLE: Bioactivity and stability of endogenous fibrogenic factors in platelet-rich fibrin.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-475X.2007.00344.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) is an autologous fibrin sealant (FS) enriched with a platelet concentrate (&gt; 1,000,000 platelets/microL) produced by the automated Vivostat system and used to enhance wound healing. The effects of PRF were compared with supernatant from thrombin-activated platelet concentrate, recombinant human platelet-derived growth factor (rhPDGF) isoforms, and a homologous FS in cultured normal human dermal fibroblasts. Also, the release of selected endogenous growth factors from PRF and their stability against proteolytic degradation were studied. The proliferative effect of PRF exceeded that of FS and rhPDGF-BB, although it was lower than thrombin-activated platelet concentrate possibly due to sustained growth factor release from platelets in PRF. Anti-PDGF antibody blocked the mitogenic effect of rhPDGF-BB but not that of PRF in growth-arrested fibroblasts. PRF promoted secretion of carboxyterminal propeptide of type I collagen into conditioned medium while rhPDGF-AB had no significant effect on collagen biosynthesis. Limited proteolysis of PDGF-AB and no proteolysis of transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) in PRF were observed with trypsin treatment, whereas rhPDGF-AB and rhTGF-beta1 in bovine serum albumin, matching the total protein concentration of PRF, were almost completely degraded after 24 hours at 37 degrees C. To conclude, PRF provides sustained release and protection against proteolytic degradation of endogenous fibrogenic factors important for wound healing.

### PMID 18179680 (2008) — Vox sanguinis
TITLE: Platelet-rich plasma and platelet gel preparation using Plateltex.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1423-0410.2007.01027.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The platelet gel is made by embedding concentrate platelets within a semisolid (gel) network of polymerized fibrin. It is believed that this blood component will be used more and more in the treatment of several clinical conditions and as an adjunctive material in tissue engineering. Several systems are available to produce platelet-rich plasma (PRP) for topical therapy. Recently, a new system became commercially available, Plateltex. Here we report the technical performance of this system in comparison with the performance of other commercially available systems: PRGF, PRP-Landesber, Curasan, PCCS, Harvest, Vivostat, Regen and Fibrinet.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Both the PRP and the gel were prepared according to the manufacturer's directions. The blood samples of 20 donors were used. The yield, the efficiency, and the amount of platelet-derived growth factor AB (PDGF-AB), transforming growth factor beta, vascular endothelial growth factor and fibroblast growth factor were measured in the resulting PRP. The feature of the batroxobin-induced gelation was evaluated.
RESULTS: The yield, the collection efficiency and the growth factor content of Plateltex were comparable to those of most of the other available systems. The gelation time was not dependent on the fibrinogen concentration; however, it was strongly influenced by the contact surface area of the container where the clotting reaction took place (P &lt; 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Plateltex provided platelet recovery, collection efficiency and PDGF-AB availability close to those provided by other systems marketed with the same intended use. Batroxobin, the enzyme provided to induce gelation, acts differently from thrombin, which is used by most other systems. Platelets treated with thrombin become activated; they release their growth factors quickly. Furthermore, thrombin-platelet interaction is a physiological mechanism that hastens the clot-retraction rate. On the contrary, platelets treated with batroxobin do not become activated; they are passively entrapped within the fibrin network, and their growth factor release occurs slowly. In these conditions, the clot retraction takes longer to occur. According to these differences between thrombin and batroxobin, it is expected that batroxobin-induced PRP activation will tailor slow release of the platelet content, thus, providing longer in loco availability of trophic factors. In selected clinical conditions, this durable anabolic factor availability might be preferable to quick thrombin-induced growth factor release.

### PMID 17806107 (2008) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part B, Applied biomaterials
TITLE: Evolution of fibrinogen-coated collagen patch for use as a topical hemostatic agent.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.b.30916 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Human fibrinogen and thrombin have been combined and coated onto a collagen patch for use as a topical hemostatic agent. These agents have now been used for many years to induce rapid hemostasis and tissue sealing after various indications including thoracic-, plastic-, pediatric-, liver-, and minimally invasive surgery. The only ready-to-use fibrinogen-coated collagen patch at this moment, the third-generation surgical patch (SP-3), contains no bovine aprotinin (antifibrinolytic protein) in contrast to its precursor SP-2, and is thus devoid of bovine-derived components. In vitro studies have shown equal bioequivalence between SP-2 and SP-3. Various experiments in animal models under normal, stressful, and hyperfibrinolytic conditions showed that SP-3 has comparable tissue sealing properties and also outperformed fibrin sealants alone in some studies. The results from these pre-clinical bridging studies showed that aprotinin is not essential for the therapeutic efficacy of SP-3. In conclusion, SP-3 has evolved into a rapid, ready-to-use adjunct to primary measures for tissue sealing and hemostasis, suitable in cardiovascular-, thoracic-, neuro-, spleen-, kidney-, and liver-surgery.

### PMID 19068706 (2008) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Congenital chylothorax treated with video-assisted thoracic surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 35-day-old female was referred to our department because of congenital chylothorax. Medical treatment with dietary restriction was undertaken for 5 weeks without resolution of the effusion. A video-assisted thoracic surgery was performed. The mediastinal pleura was covered with fibrin glue. The postoperative course was satisfactory. She was discharged with resolution of the effusion. Video-assisted thoracic surgery offers an effective means of treating chylothorax.

### PMID 19021081 (2008) — Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift (1946)
TITLE: [Massive pleural effusion complicating chronic pancreatitis. Treatment by endoscopic closure of a pancreatic-mediastinal fistula].
DOI: 10.1055/s-0028-1100946 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: HISTORY AND CLINICAL FINDINGS: A 53-year-old man was admitted because of anuria, dyspnea and a septic temperature. The patients' history included chronic alcoholism, chronic pancreatitis, COPD and a right nephrectomy because of nephrolithiasis. Urosepsis was initially suspected.
INVESTIGATIONS: The patients' clinical condition and nutritional state were severely reduced. Laboratory findings revealed severe systemic inflammation (leucocyte count: 22.4/nl, CRP: 324 mg/l). Computed tomography showed a large left-sided pleural effusion, encapsulated abdominal fluid below the diaphragm and alongside the pancreatic tail. After aspiration of the pleural effusion the diagnosis of an exsudate with elevated concentration of lipase (56,000 U/l) was confirmed. Endoscopic ultrasound showed a 3-4 cm pseudocystic mass originating in the region of the pancreatic tail. The ERP depicted chronic pancreatitis with strictures and destruction of the pancreatic duct. Two fistulae were identified, one proximal to a ductal stricture in the pancreatic head and a second one in the pancreatic tail which corresponded to the reported pseudocyst.
TREATMENT AND CLINICAL COURSE: The patient was admitted to the ICU with symptoms of impending sepsis. The pleural effusion was treated with CT-guided chest drainage. The initial endoscopic attempt at stent closure of the fistula failed because it was possible to pass through the ductal stricture only with a thin hydrophilic wire and small-lumen catheter. However, injection of fibrin glue into the proximal pancreatic duct over a length of 2 cm obliterated the fistula and the pleural effusion was resolved.
CONCLUSION: Pancreatic-pleural or pancreatic-mediastinal fistula is a rare complication of pancreatitis associated with unilateral pleural effusion. Combined internal endoscopic drainage and external chest drainage is the treatment of choice. After failure of routine endoscopic therapy, endoscopic closure of fistulas using fibrin glue might offer an alternative treatment strategy.

### PMID 18364447 (2008) — Thorax
TITLE: A new bronchoscopic treatment of tracheomediastinal fistula using autologous adipose-derived stem cells.
DOI: 10.1136/thx.2007.083857 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Tracheal fistulas represent a challenging management problem. The standard treatment in most cases is based on surgical procedures. Various endoscopic treatment modalities have been proposed in patients at high surgical risk but the results are often unsatisfactory. The fistulas frequently recur with additional complications and sometimes death. The case history is reported of a patient with a tracheomediastinal fistula resulting from laser treatment of tracheal cancer. The fistula was treated by bronchoscopic injection of autologous adipose-derived stem cells (ASC) suspended in fibrin glue. The patient's stem cells were isolated from lipoaspirate according to a standard-ised procedure. No complications due to treatment with ASC occurred during the follow-up period and no fistula-related symptoms were detected. Postoperative bronchoscopic examination of the wall and base of the fistula revealed re-epithelialisation and neovascularisation that led to successful closure. To our knowledge, this is the first report of treatment of tracheal fistula by autologous cell therapy. Further studies are needed to confirm whether this new method should become routine practice.

### PMID 19707440 (2008) — Biologics : targets &amp; therapy
TITLE: Clinical use of topical thrombin as a surgical hemostat.
DOI: 10.2147/btt.s2435 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: When surgical ligation of bleeding fails, or is not possible, surgeons rely on a number of hemostatic aids, including thrombin. This review discusses the history, pharmacology and clinical application of thrombin as a surgical hemostat. The initial thrombin was bovine in origin, but its use has been complicated by the formation of antibodies that cross react with human coagulation factors. This has been associated with life threatening bleeding and in some circumstances anaphylaxis and death. Human thrombin, isolated from pooled plasma of donors, has been developed in an effort to minimize these risks, but its downside is the potential of transmitting blood-borne pathogens and limited availability. Recently a recombinant thrombin has been developed and approved for use by the FDA. It has the advantage of being minimally antigenic and devoid of the risk if viral transmission. Thrombin is often used in conjunction with other hemostatic aids, including absorbable agents (like gelfoam, collagen, and cellulose), and with fibrinogen in fibrin glues. The last part of this review will discuss these agents in detail, and review their clinical applications.

### PMID 18449414 (2008) — Thrombosis and haemostasis
TITLE: Plasma-derived biological medicines used to promote haemostasis.
DOI: 10.1160/TH07-10-0592 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Several biological medicines derived from human and animal plasmas can effectively improve haemostasis in individuals with inherited or acquired defects in haemostasis. Factor VIII and factor VIII/vWF and factor IX concentrates are used to treat haemophilia A, von Willebrand disease and hemophilia B respectively. Cryoprecipitates are used to treat hypofibrinogenemia and von Willebrand disease where desmopressin (DDAVP) is ineffective or when plasma-derived factor VIII/vWF concentrates are unavailable. Thrombin-containing topical haemostatic agents and fibrin sealants are used to control perioperative bleeding. Intravenous immunoglobulin has several uses, including management of patients with autoimmune thrombocytopenias and patients with acquired factor VIII deficiency. Similar to most protein-based biological medicines, all the above products can elicit some level of antibody response, with clinical consequences that vary from mild anaphylaxis to loss of product efficacy. An ongoing potential safety concern with any biological medicine derived from blood/plasma is transmission of blood-borne pathogens. This safety concern has lessened significantly in the past decade as a result of the institution of more effective pre- and post-donation screening that tests for potential pathogens, and institution of pathogen reduction strategies to which many plasma-derived biological medicines are now routinely subjected. This article considers the manufacture, standardization, clinical efficacy and adverse event profiles of the plasma-derived biological medicines currently used to promote haemostasis in patients with inherited or acquired functional defects in haemostasis. It also considers approaches employed to minimize infectivity of biological medicines derived from human and animal plasmas and to manage patients who develop antibodies (inhibitors) to clotting factor concentrate infusions.

### PMID 18544302 (2008) — Vascular
TITLE: Management of surgical hemostasis: topical agents.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016456">Historical Article, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative control of bleeding during any surgical procedure is vital for achieving a positive patient outcome. Hemostasis can be achieved through practical and effective systemic or topical approaches. A variety of hemostatic methods can be employed, ranging from simple manual pressure application with one finger to electrical tissue cauterization, systemic administration of blood products, and systemic administration or topical application of procoagulation agents. The key to surgical success is critically dependent on knowledgeable use of a method appropriate for the level of bleeding experienced by the patient. Topical agents can be effective as adjuncts to aid in hemostasis when bleeding is not controllable with pressure application, vessel ligation, or electrocautery. Such adjunctive hemostatic treatments include topical gelatins, collagens, oxidized celluloses, thrombin and fibrin sealants, synthetic glues, and glutaraldehyde-based glues. As with the use of systemically delivered hemostatic agents, topical treatments also carry risks with their use, and their efficacy has not been extensively studied in large randomized, placebo-controlled prospective studies. The effective use of topical agents is highly dependent on the surgeon's experience or preference and their availability in the surgical setting. In this article, we review the currently available topical hemostatic agents, compare their efficacy, and give general recommendations for their use in the operating room.

### PMID 17329015 (2007) — European urology
TITLE: Use of haemostatic agents and glues during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy: a multi-institutional survey from the United States and Europe of 1347 cases.
DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2007.02.035 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (LPN) is a technically challenging procedure for the management of renal tumours. Major complications of LPN include bleeding and urine leakage. Haemostatic agents (HAs) and/or glues may reduce haemorrhage and urine leakage. We sought to examine the current practice patterns for urologists performing LPN with regard to HA use and its relationship with bleeding and urine leakage.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A survey was sent via e-mail to urologists currently performing LPN in centres in the United States and Europe. We queried the indications for HA/glue usage, type of HAs/glues used, and whether concomitant suturing/bolstering was performed. In addition, the total number of LPNs performed, laparoscopic tools used to resect the tumour, tumour size, and tumour position were queried.
RESULTS: Surveys suitable for analysis were received from 18 centres (n=1347 cases). HAs and/or glues were used in 1042 (77.4%) cases. Mean tumour size was 2.8cm, with 79% of the tumours being defined as exophytic and 21% deep. The HAs and glues used included gelatin matrix thrombin (FloSeal), fibrin gel (Tisseel), bovine serum albumin (BioGlue), cyanoacrylate glue (Glubran), oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel), or combinations of these. Sixteen centres performed concomitant suturing/bolstering. The overall postoperative bleeding requiring transfusion and urine leakage rates were 2.7% and 1.9%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of HAs and/or glues is routine in most centres performing LPN. The overall haemorrhage and urine leakage rates are low following LPN. More studies are needed to assess the potential role of HAs and/or glues in LPN.

### PMID 17638564 (2007) — Journal of endourology
TITLE: Effects of commonly used hemostatic agents on the porcine collecting system.
DOI: 10.1089/end.2007.9960 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Topical hemostatic agents have been particularly useful for preventing bleeding in tubeless percutaneous nephrolithotomy. In the present study, we investigated the effect of gelatin matrix hemostatic sealant (FloSeal), fibrin glue (Tisseel,), polyethylene glycol polymers (CoSeal), and bovine serum albumin/ glutaraldehyde (BioGlue) in the pig urinary collecting system after injection through a percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) tract.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Percutaneous nephrostomy was performed in 40 kidneys in 24 domestic pigs. Animals were divided into four groups of six each: (1) FloSeal; (2) Tisseel; (3) CoSeal; and (4) BioGlue. In 16 animals that tolerated the procedure, the contralateral kidney was used as a control for PCN only. All tracts were dilated to 30F with the Amplatz dilator, and 2 mL of the hemostatic agent was injected into the collecting system before pulling back to seal the puncture.
RESULTS: Among the control PCN kidneys, no obstruction was detected at the end of a 5-day period. However, three of six kidneys injected with FloSeal, Tisseel, or CoSeal and four of six kidneys injected with BioGlue were obstructed. In each of these cases, there was an associated retroperitoneal urinoma.
CONCLUSION: FloSeal, Tisseel, CoSeal, and BioGlue, if injected directly into the porcine collecting system, can result in significant obstruction that does not resolve over a 5-day period. Until there are clinical data to the contrary, we believe that when using one of these hemostatic agents in association with a tubeless percutaneous procedure, a retrograde occlusion balloon catheter should be considered to prevent inadvertent injection of these materials into the collecting system.

### PMID 18067790 (2007) — Chinese medical journal
TITLE: Transplantation of neonatal cardiomyocytes plus fibrin sealant restores myocardial function in a rat model of myocardial infarction.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Most cardiac regenerative approaches can restore injured heart muscles. In this study, we investigated if fibrin sealant could help neonatal cardiomyocytes restore myocardial function in a rat model of myocardial infarction.
METHODS: The left anterior descending artery in adult female Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats was ligated to make a myocardial infarction model. Neonatal ventricular cardiomyocytes from one-day male SD rats were isolated, labeled and cultured. The cells were injected into the infarcted area three weeks later. The animals were randomized into four recipient groups: (1) cardiomyocytes plus fibrin sealant (group CF, n = 10); (2) cardiomyocytes alone (group C, n = 10); (3) fibrin sealant recipients alone (group F, n = 10); (4) control group (n = 10). Four weeks after transplantation, echocardiography and Langerdoff model were used to assess heart function. Immunohistochemical staining and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were performed to track the implanted cardiomyocytes and detect the sex-determining region Y gene on Y chromosome.
RESULTS: Echocardiography showed the fraction shortening (FS) in groups CF, C, F and control group was (27.80 +/- 6.32)%, (22.29 +/- 4.54)%, (19.24 +/- 6.29)% and (20.36 +/- 3.29)% respectively with statistically significant differences in group CF compared with the other groups (P &lt; 0.05). The Langendoff model revealed that the left ventricular development of peak pressure (LVDPmax, mmHg) in groups CF, C, F and control group was 104.81 +/- 17.05, 80.97 +/- 21.60, 72.07 +/- 26.17 and 71.42 +/- 17.55 respectively with statistically significant differences in group CF compared with the other groups (P &lt; 0.05). Pathological examination and PCR indicated that transplanted cardiomyocytes in group CF survived better than those in the other groups.
CONCLUSION: Transplanted neonatal cardiomyocytes plus fibrin sealant can survive in myocardial infarctioned area and improve heart function greatly in rat models.

### PMID 17761433 (2007) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Fibrin glue in coronary artery bypass grafting operations: casting out the Devil with Beelzebub?
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2007.07.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Fibrin sealants are frequently used in aortocoronary bypass operations. Although they are considered to be clinically safe, we performed a retrospective analysis of our data to examine the possible side effects of Tissucol fibrin sealant, namely the acute thrombosis of grafts and native coronary arteries resulting in severe myocardial damage and patient deaths.
METHODS: The data of 2716 patients (2001 male, 715 female) who received an aortocoronary bypass operation from November 1995 to December 1999 were studied retrospectively. Two groups (group 1: received Tissucol, group 2: no sealant used) were compared with respect to an a priori selected set of demographic and clinical variables and with respect to their effect on the outcome using bivariate tabulation. Multiple exploratory assessments of factors possibly related to fatal outcome were done by multiple logistic regression.
RESULTS: Nine hundred ninety patients (group 1) received Tissucol, 1726 patients (group 2) did not receive it. Mean patient age was 64+/-9.1 years. Group 1 had a higher risk of death (7.8% vs 2.8%, p&lt;0.001). The peak values of creatine kinase &gt;500 and creatine kinase-myocardial band &gt;50 were higher in group 1 than in group 2, p&lt;0.001. Adjusted odds ratios for the risk of fatal outcome were: 2.01 for the use of Tissucol, 2.71 for patient age &gt;70 years, 2.02 for aortic cross clamp time &gt;90 min, 3.95 for postoperative ventricular fibrillation, 6.35 for postoperative cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 4.55 for postoperative aortocoronary reoperation.
CONCLUSION: In our analysis an increased risk of myocardial injury or even death was found in coronary artery bypass grafting patients when Tissucol fibrin sealant was used intraoperatively.

### PMID 17505437 (2007) — The Journal of cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Evaluation of the topical hemostatic efficacy and safety of TISSEEL VH S/D fibrin sealant compared with currently licensed TISSEEL VH in patients undergoing cardiac surgery: a phase 3, randomized, double-blind clinical study.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017428">Clinical Trial, Phase III, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: AIM: TISSEEL VH is the only commercially available fibrin sealant indicated as an adjunct to conventional methods of hemostasis during cardiac surgery. A next generation fibrin sealant (TISSEEL VH S/D) has been developed in frozen, ready-to-use form with an added virus inactivation step (solvent/detergent [S/D] treatment) to provide added safety and convenience to the currently licensed product. This study was performed to compare efficacy and safety of the two products.
METHODS: Phase 3, prospective, randomized, double-blind, multicenter study to compare TISSEEL VH S/D to TISSEEL VH during cardiac surgery. The primary efficacy endpoint was the proportion of patients who achieved hemostasis at the primary treatment site within 5 min, and maintained hemostasis until surgical closure.
RESULTS: The proportion of patients who achieved hemostasis at the primary treatment site within 5 min, and maintained hemostasis until surgical closure was 88.2% for TISSEEL VH S/D and 89.6% for TISSEEL VH in the intent-to-treat population. The difference in proportions, TISSEEL VH S/D minus TISSEEL VH, was 1.4% with a standard error of 3.70%. The lower 97.5% confidence bound of this difference was 8.6%, which is above the predefined noninferiority margin of 15%. Therefore, TISSEEL VH S/D is at least as efficacious as TISSEEL VH. The safety profile of TISSEEL VH S/D was very similar to that of currently licensed TISSEEL VH as assessed by the safety endpoints.
CONCLUSION: TISSEEL VH S/D is safe and effective for use as an adjunct to hemostasis in patients undergoing cardiac surgery.

### PMID 17383592 (2007) — Translational research : the journal of laboratory and clinical medicine
TITLE: New method to prepare autologous fibrin glue on demand.
DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2006.08.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin-based sealants are commonly employed to arrest bleeding after surgery. Usually, fibrinogen obtained from pooled human plasma is used to prepare sealants, with attendant risk of blood-borne infections. Availability of autologous fibrinogen would eliminate this risk. To prepare autologous fibrin sealant, fibrinogen was precipitated from human plasma using protamine. Under optimal conditions (10-mg/mL protamine and 22 degrees C), 96 +/- 4% of clottable fibrinogen was recovered by a simple and inexpensive technique. Nearly 50% of the plasma factor XIII was also recovered with the fibrinogen. Using bovine thrombin, the fibrinogen was clotted (1) in a specially designed mold to measure tensile strength and (2) in a lap joint between 2 aortic vessel strips to measure adhesion strength. Tensile and adhesion strengths increased with increasing fibrinogen concentration, and they were increased by the addition of calcium chloride. The addition of aprotinin and -aminocaproic acid to the fibrinogen concentrate before clotting had no effect on the mechanical properties of the clots. After adding thrombin to sealant containing 15-mg/mL fibrinogen, maximum tensile strength was achieved in 1-5 min, and maximum adhesion strength was reached in 5-15 min. For the sealant with 30-60-mg/mL fibrinogen and added calcium, the tensile strength was equivalent to that of the commercial fibrin sealant Tisseel. The adhesion strength of sealant with 30-60-mg/mL fibrinogen exceeded the adhesive strength of Tisseel under identical conditions. Autologous fibrin sealant is an attractive alternative to commercial sealants. It can be readily prepared from 5-mL plasma or more and exhibits mechanical properties equivalent to those of the leading commercial sealant.

### PMID 17363261 (2007) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Safety of the use of Tissucol Duo S in cardiovascular surgery: retrospective analysis of 2149 patients after coronary artery bypass grafting.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2007.01.071 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Fibrin sealant is widely used in almost all fields of surgery and has proved to be an effective therapeutic tool in cardiothoracic surgery. Nevertheless, there have been concerns about early bypass graft occlusion associated with the use of fibrin glue. This analysis has been performed to assess the risks and benefits of Tissucol Duo S in coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) surgery.
METHODS: Two thousand one hundred forty-nine patients were included in this retrospective study, 879 (40.9%) were intra-operatively treated with Tissucol Duo S fibrin glue, 1270 (59.1%) did not receive fibrin glue (control group). Patient characteristics were documented according to the EuroScore. Intra- and postoperative data were collected. Primary endpoint of this study was the 30-day all-cause mortality rate in the Tissucol Duo S treated group compared to the control group.
RESULTS: Mean age was 66.6+/-9.4 years, 76.3% of the patients were male. There was an increased 30-day-mortality rate in the Tissucol Duo S group compared to the control group (8.5 vs 3.5%, p&lt;0.001). In order to determine if and to what extent the apparent fibrin effect might be due to confounding effects from covariates, an adjustment for potential confounding was done. However, multivariable adjustment did not reduce the risk of fibrin glue below an odds ratio of 2.2.
CONCLUSION: Although the apparent increase in mortality risk associated with the use of fibrin glue could not be eliminated statistically, we consider Tissucol Duo S fibrin glue a safe and effective therapeutic tool in CABG surgery when it is applied correctly. Due to the retrospective character of this study some detailed information about the indication for the use of fibrin glue and its application is missing which may be important cofactors for mortality. For further clarification a prospective randomized study may be useful.

### PMID 17318690 (2007) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Laparoscopic spray application of fibrin sealant effects on hemodynamics and spray efficiency at various application pressures and distances.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-007-9235-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Laparoscopic resections of parenchymal organs are increasingly performed. However, little is known about the effects of laparoscopic fibrin sealant spray applications on intraabdominal pressure (IAP) and hemodynamics.
METHODS: Cardiac and pulmonary monitoring was performed via two central venous pressure lines in the thoracic and abdominal vena cava, a pulmonary artery catheter, and a peripheral artery line. Air was sprayed into the abdomen at pressures of 2, 3, and 4 bar for 30 s. According to the group, a valve on a trocar was open or closed. To optimize fibrin sealant application, the sealant was sprayed at three different application pressures (2, 2.5, and 3 bar) and distances (2, 3.5, and 5 cm).
RESULTS: All spray simulations caused a significant increase in the IAP. During the first 10 s of spraying, the IAP increase was 5 mmHg or less, but rose rapidly during the last 20 s of spraying. The IAP increase resulted in decreased pulmonary compliance. Pulmonary resistance and the central venous pressures of both the thoracic and abdominal vena cava increased. At application pressures of 3 and 4 bar, the IAP increase was greater than 2 bar of pressure, reaching IAP values exceeding 35 mmHg. Spray mist formation was primarily dependent on application pressure, whereas clot formation and surface coverage depended on both application pressure and distance. The best results were achieved with an application pressure of 2.5 bar and a distance of 5 cm from the surface.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that fibrin sealants can be used safely in laparoscopic procedures. Keeping the spray periods short and allowing air to escape from the abdomen can minimize the IAP increase. According to our results, a laparoscopic spray application of fibrin sealant should start with an insufflation pressure of 10 mmHg, an application pressure of 2.5 bar, and an application distance of 5 cm with a valve on the trocar left open.

### PMID 17258022 (2007) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Bronchial artery aneurysm treated with aortic stent graft and fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2006.06.082 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchial artery aneurysm occurs rarely but can cause a life-threatening hemorrhage when it ruptures. The traditional therapy has been aneurysm resection or transcatheter arterial embolization. We report a case of mediastinal bronchial artery aneurysm which could not be occluded with transcatheter arterial embolization and instead was treated with a thoracic aortic stent graft and embolization with fibrin sealant.

### PMID 17215739 (2007) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: The potential utility of fibrin sealant dressing in repair of vascular injury in swine.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000251595.45451.d0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A previous study in which fibrin sealant dressing (FSD) secured hemostasis in major arterial hemorrhage for 96 hours suggested the applicability of this dressing in damage control operations after severe trauma. The objective of this study was to determine the effective duration of FSD hemostatic function in vivo and to examine its potential utility for definitive repair of a major arterial injury in swine.
METHODS: High pressure bleeding in an infrarenal aortotomy was controlled by placing FSD on the wound with 4-minute compression (n = 15). If hemostasis was achieved, the abdominal cavity was closed. Surviving animals were killed at 2, 4, 6, and 8 weeks and aortotomy sites collected for histology.
RESULTS: FSD stopped arterial hemorrhage after 4-minute compression in 14 of 15 (93%) pigs. Dressings failed in two pigs at 36 and 53 minutes after treatment. Twelve (80%) animals recovered and resumed normal activities. Of the remaining 12, two developed rebleeding at the aortotomy site on days 8 and 11 and were killed; another was killed because of idiopathic low hematocrit on day 10. Nine pigs survived until scheduled to be killed, maintaining hemostasis with stable hematological values. In the surviving animals, serial computed tomography scans showed formation of a pseudoaneurysm at the aortotomy site, which resolved after 2 to 3 weeks. The initial vascular defect and pseudoaneurysm were filled with fibroblast-myoblast collagen rich tissues covered by endothelium.
CONCLUSION: FSD can seal an arterial injury, stop high pressure bleeding, and prevent rebleeding for at least 7 days. The dressing may be most beneficial in damage control operations. If combined with an elective interventional radiologic procedure (e.g. embolization or stenting), it may also offer an alternative to suture repair of vascular injuries in cases where profuse bleeding obstructs visualization.

### PMID 17118635 (2007) — Experimental and toxicologic pathology : official journal of the Gesellschaft fur Toxikologische Pathologie
TITLE: The long-term neurocompatibility of human fibrin sealant and equine collagen as biomatrices in experimental spinal cord injury.
DOI: 10.1016/j.etp.2006.07.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: While fibrin sealant (FS) and equine collagen (EC) have been used as scaffold materials in experimental spinal cord injury (SCI), questions concerning neurocompatibility still remain. In this study, we assessed potential adverse effects, as well as functional and histological impact of FS and EC in subtotal hemisection of the thoracic spinal cord (SC) in rats.
METHODS: 124 male rats were randomly assigned to four main groups (n=31): Sham (SH), Lesion only (L), fibrin sealant (GFS) and equine collagen group (GEC). SH animals received laminectomy only; all other animals underwent subtotal lateral hemisection at T9. Treatment consisted of application of FS or EC into the lesion gap in GFS and GEC, which was left empty in L. GFS, GEC, L and SH were each further divided into 4 subgroups: One subgroup, consisting of 10 rats was subjected to behavioural and reflex testing before surgery and followed up on days 1,7, 14, 21, 28 post op and then sacrificed. Haemalaun or cresyl violet (CV) was used to identify neutrophils in parasagittal cord sections which were obtained on day 1 (n=7). Sections stained for quantification of microglia/macrophages using ED-1 on day 3 (n=7), day 7 (n=7) and day 28 (n=7 out of 10). Additionally, neural filament (NF) staining was chosen to detect axonal regeneration and the length of ingrowth into FS and EC, Luxol blue for myelination, Von Willebrand factor for vascularisation, and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) staining for detection of astrocytes in glial scars on day 28.
RESULTS: No adverse effects were observed in the treatment groups. Compared to L, GFS and GEC performed significantly better in the Basso, Beattie, Bresnahan (BBB) score and hopping responses. Proprioceptive placing was markedly improved in FS and EC compared to L. Axonal regrowth was found in GFS and GEC--the regrowth in the GFS was accompanied by myelination and vascularisation. Glial scarring occurred in all groups. Discussion Both biomatrices improved functional recovery compared to L and no adverse effects were perceived.

### PMID 17710287 (2007) — Brazilian oral research
TITLE: Effects of fibrin sealer and resorbable gelatin on the repair of osseous defects in rat tibia.
DOI: 10.1590/s1806-83242007000300006 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Gelfoam - a biologically resorbable gelatin sponge - has the function of restricting hemorrhage, providing platelet rupture, and supporting fibrin threads. Beriplast - a fibrinogen-thrombin compound - is used to adhere tissues, to consolidate sutures and in hemostasis. The objective of this study was to perform a histological analysis of the effects of haemostatic agents on osseous repair. These materials were inserted into surgical sites in young rat right and left tibiae. After the observation periods of 7, 14, 30 and 45 days, according to the bioethic protocol, the animals were killed, the tibiae were removed and fixed in 10% formalin and decalcified in equal parts of formic acid and sodium citrate solutions. After routine processing, the specimens were embedded in paraffin for microtomy. Analysis of the results demonstrated that the haemostatic agents are effective in controlling hemorrhage; they stimulate osteogenesis, featuring a pattern of osseous tissue formation similar to the control pattern, although the amount of osseous trabeculae was superior, especially in the Gelfoam group in the periods of 7 and 14 days; 30 days after surgery, the delay in tissue healing in the control group in relation to the experimental groups started to decrease, and the control and experimental groups exhibited similar tissue repair after 45 days, when all the groups exhibited secondary osseous tissue.

### PMID 17564938 (2007) — Strabismus
TITLE: Sutureless closure of the conjunctiva with a commercial fibrin sealant in extraocular muscle surgery for strabismus.
DOI: 10.1080/09273970701405321 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Suturing is a time-consuming process and patients may suffer from sutures because of discomfort and tearing. This prospective study was done to determine the efficacy of an available commercial fibrin sealant for conjunctival wound closure following extraocular muscle surgery for strabismus.
METHODS: Fibrin sealant (Beriplast) was used in 48 conjunctival wounds of 25 patients with strabismus during the period February 2004 to May 2005. There were 12 males and 13 females, whose mean age was 9.3 years.
RESULTS: No allergic reactions, chemosis or infections were seen, but suturing was necessary a day after surgery in 3 wounds of 2 cases (3/48 eyes, 6%). All conjunctival wounds were healed at the end of the second week.
CONCLUSION: The use of Beriplast for conjunctival wound closure is an effective method that is easy to apply and should be considered a solution in strabismus surgical practice.

### PMID 17326141 (2007) — Journal of biomedical materials research. Part A
TITLE: Comparative in vitro study of the proliferation and growth of human osteoblast-like cells on various biomaterials.
DOI: 10.1002/jbm.a.31191 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: In vitro studies about the growth behavior of osteoblasts onto biomaterials is a basic knowledge and a screening method for the development and application of scaffolds in vivo. In this in vitro study human osteoblast-like (HOB) cells were cultured on seven different biomaterials used in dental and craniomaxillofacial surgery, respectively. The tested biomaterials were synthetic biodegradable (MacroPore, Ethisorb, PDS, Beriplast P) and nonbiodegradable polymers (Palacos) as well as calcium phosphate cement (BoneSource) and titanium. The cell proliferation and cell colonization were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy and EZ4U-test. Statistical analysis were performed. HOB-like cells cultivated on Ethisorb showed the highest proliferation rate. The proliferation rate was statistically significant compared with Palacos, MacroPore, and BoneSource. Whereas, Beriplast, PDS, and titanium yielded lower proliferation rates. However, there was no statistically significant difference compared with Palacos, MacroPore, and BoneSource. SEM analysis showed no significant difference in individual cell features and cell colonization. But an infiltration and a growth of HOB-like cells throughout the porous structure of Ethisorb, which is formed by crossing fibers, is a striking different feature (macrotopography). This feature can explain the highest proliferation rate of Ethisorb. The results showed that HOB-like cells appear to be sensitive to substrate composition and topography. Moreover, the basis for further studies with such biomaterial/osteoblast constructs in vivo are provided. Further focusing points are developing techniques to fabricate three-dimensional porous biomaterial/cell constructs, studying the tissue reaction and the bone regeneration of such constructs compared with the use of autologous bone.

### PMID 17992308 (2007) — Revista brasileira de cirurgia cardiovascular : orgao oficial da Sociedade Brasileira de Cirurgia Cardiovascular
TITLE: Hemodinamic behavior of arterial anastomosis using fibrin sealant: experimental study in swine.
DOI: 10.1590/s0102-76382007000100015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the flow, tear pressure, the need of reinforcement stitches in sutured arteries reinforced or not using fibrin sealant after a cross-section.
METHOD: Tissucol fibrin sealant was used. The femoral and carotid arteries of seventeen swine from the same breed (weighing from 15 to 20 kg) were cross-sectioned after heparinization and subjected to anastomoses using a single continuous plane of prolene 7-0. We worked with 68 artery samples, 34 in the Treatment Group and 34 in the Control Group. For each animal, one carotid and one femoral artery randomly received fibrin sealant with the contralateral side being used as a control. The need and the number of reinforcement stitches were recorded. Ten minutes after protamine infusion, the animals were sacrificed and the arteries were catheterized. The arteries were measured and placed on a flow meter. The arteries were then subjected to air infusion at increasingly higher pressures (stepwise increases of 25 mmHg), the grafts were dipped in saline solution, the first air leakage was observed and the tear pressure recorded.
RESULTS: The external diameters and thickness of the arteries were similar in both the Treatment and Control Group. There was no significant difference between the groups regarding the tear pressure (p=0.329), flow rate (p=0.943) and the number of samples with a tear pressure above 200 mmHg. However, the sealant reduced the number of reinforcement stitches necessary (p=0.029).
CONCLUSION: Fibrin sealant reduces the need of additional stitches.

### PMID 17968186 (2007) — Annals of surgery
TITLE: Use of human fibrin glue (tissucol) versus staples for mesh fixation in laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal hernioplasty.
DOI: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e318158a3ae | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter, Comment
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 17629999 (2007) — Surgery
TITLE: Quantification of pain in laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) inguinal hernioplasty identifies marked differences between prosthesis fixation systems.
DOI: 10.1016/j.surg.2007.02.013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Various systems exist for prosthesis fixation in hernia repair. These techniques vary in terms of postoperative complications and pain. This study compares prosthesis fixation techniques employed in laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) hernioplasty using a visual analog scale (VAS) to quantify postoperative pain.
METHODS: Patients (n = 600) underwent TAPP inguinal hernia repair in a randomized prospective study. Prostheses were fixed with Protak (Tyco, Norwalk, Conn), (Group A; n = 150), EndoANCHOR (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., Cincinnati, Ohio) (Group B; n = 150), EMS (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc.) (Group C; n = 150), or Tissucol (Baxter Healthcare, Milan, Italy) (Group D; n = 150). Patients were interviewed up to 1 month post-intervention. Post-operative pain was evaluated on a 0- to 10-point VAS (0 = no pain, 10 = maximum pain). Morbidity, length of stay, return to work and recurrence were also assessed.
RESULTS: Overall, 803 hernias were treated: 397 patients (66.2%) had unilateral hernias and 203 (33.8%) had bilateral hernias. In total, 96 (12%) hernias were recurrences and 707 (88%) were primary. Postoperative pain ranged from VAS1 to VAS2 (mild pain) between 12 hours and 72 hours with Tissucol (Group D), and it was higher in Groups A-C: Maxima ranged from VAS4 (moderate pain) with EMS to VAS7 (severe pain) with Protak at 48-hour follow-up. Significant differences in length of stay occurred, no recurrence or conversion rates were observed among groups, and morbidity was generally lower with Tissucol. Patients in Group D (Tissucol) also returned to work sooner than did Groups A-C (Protak, EndoANCHOR, and EMS).
CONCLUSIONS: We found differences in postoperative pain among different laparoscopic TAPP prosthesis fixation methods. The use of the biocompatible fibrin sealant Tissucol seems to reduce significantly postoperative pain, complications, and resumption to work times compared with other systems.

### PMID 17629041 (2007) — Hepato-gastroenterology
TITLE: Fibrin glue treatment for simple and complex anal fistulas.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND/AIMS: Surgical management of anal fistulas is associated with considerable morbidity, mainly related to anal sphincter injury. However, treatment with fibrin glue is a safe and simple method associated with less discomfort and complications. A prospective trial was conducted at our institute to evaluate the use of fibrin glue (Tissucol, Baxter, The Netherlands) for simple and complex anal fistulas.
METHODOLOGY: From November 2001 until March 2004, 34 patients (22 male, 12 female, median age 40 years) were treated with Tissucol. Twenty-three (67%) fistulas were classified as simple (subcutaneous, intersphincteric and transsphincteric) and 11 (33%) as complex (suprasphincteric, extrasphincteric and/or associated with Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis or HIV).
RESULTS: Twenty-six patients were treated once, 5 patients were treated twice, 2 patients were treated 3 times and 1 patient underwent 4 Tissucol treatments. After a median follow-up of 7 months, 13 of 23 simple fistulas (56%) and 6 out of 11 complex fistulas (54%) healed, accounting for an overall closure rate of 55%. Complications occurred in two patients, who both developed a perineal abscess after glue instillation.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin glue treatment is safe and effective in 55% of the patients with anal fistulas. It is a good alternative to conventional surgery.

### PMID 17537117 (2007) — Wound repair and regeneration : official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue Repair Society
TITLE: Treatment of recalcitrant venous leg ulcers with autologous keratinocytes in fibrin sealant: a multinational randomized controlled clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-475X.2007.00231.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: In a multicenter trial, the effect of a commercially available combination of autologous keratinocytes (3-6 x 10(6)/mL) with fibrin sealant (Tissucol Duo S Immuno, Baxter Hyland Immuno) on the healing of recalcitrant venous leg ulcers (duration &gt;3 months) was compared with standard care. The primary endpoint was time to healing, and the secondary endpoint was number of healed ulcers in both groups. Both groups received compression therapy with short-stretch bandages. Forty-four (38.3%) of the 116 patients who had BioSeed-S treatment achieved complete healing of the target ulcer compared with 24 (22.4%) of 109 patients who received standard treatment. The advantage for treatment with BioSeed-S over standard treatment was statistically significant (chi-square test: p=0.0106). Time to complete healing of ulcers: the log-rank test for equality over strata revealed a superiority of treatment with BioSeed-S+compression (median: 176 days) over compression+standard care (median &gt;201 days) (p&lt;0.0001). This study, to date the largest multicenter study with autologous keratinocytes, provides evidence for its efficacy in the treatment of patients with therapy-resistant chronic venous leg ulcers.

### PMID 17514387 (2007) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Laparoscopic repair of inguinal hernias using an intraperitoneal onlay mesh technique and a Parietex composite mesh fixed with fibrin glue (Tissucol). Personal technique and preliminary results.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-007-9355-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Laparoscopic repair of inguinal hernias is usually achieved by totally extraperitoneal (TEP) or transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) techniques. The intraperitoneal onlay mesh (IPOM) could be an interesting alternative as it is much easier to perform and faster to execute. This technique is subject to correct selection of indications and to demonstration of its safety.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From January 2003 to January 2006 we performed 61 laparoscopic hernia procedures on 60 selected patients (60 males with a mean age of 60 and mean weight of 76 kg) with an IPOM technique combining the Parietex composite mesh (12 cm circular model) and a fibrin glue (Tissucol) for its fixation. The glue was diluted to increase fixation time and applied to the mesh prior to positioning on the hernia defect.
RESULTS: Mean operative time was 10 minutes. Mean hernia diameter was 2.5 cm (+/- 0.8 cm). 10 hernias were direct, 51 were indirect and 10 out of 61 were recurrent. We did not convert any of the laparoscopic procedures. Mean hospital stay was one day; mean recovery time for working and general physical activities was five days. Patients were checked after one week, 1-3-6 months and 1-2 years. Average follow up time was 23.7 months. 1.6 % of patients showed short-term complications: one trocar site haematoma. No additional complications were reported; particularly, we had no recurrence, no seroma, no mesh migration, and no bowel obstruction or fistula.
CONCLUSION: Results of this study show intraperitoneal (IP) tolerance to this kind of mesh and the safety of its fixation with Tissucol. The absence of recurrence and complications could be a good reason to extend the indication of IPOM hernia repair. However, these preliminary results should be confirmed by longer follow-up.

### PMID 17497595 (2007) — International journal of sports medicine
TITLE: Sutureless tension-free hernia repair with human fibrin glue (tissucol) in soccer players with chronic inguinal pain: initial experience.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-964992 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chronic groin pain is a common symptom experienced by soccer players, resulting in many athletes undergoing prolonged periods of conservative treatment. In a high proportion of these cases, however, the cause of groin pain is due to impalpable hernias, thus nullifying the usefulness of a conservative approach. Of the current surgical procedures for inguinal hernia repair, the Lichtenstein technique is widely used. The present study aims to evaluate the efficacy of mesh fixation with human fibrin glue (Tissucol) in open, tension-free inguinal repair, in the treatment of soccer players with groin hernia. A sutureless Lichtenstein technique was employed in 16 consecutive soccer players with primary groin hernia. Inguinal nerves were prepared and preserved. Human fibrin glue was used for mesh fixation, in place of conventional sutures. Results were rated as excellent in all cases, with no reported intra- or postoperative complications. All patients were discharged 4 - 5 h after the operation, and all returned to full pre-injury level sporting-activity, on average, 31 days (range 24 - 42 days) post surgery. This study confirms the efficacy of sutureless tension-free hernia repair with human fibrin glue for the treatment of soccer players suffering from chronic groin pain due to impalpable groin hernia.

### PMID 17493408 (2007) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: Total spondylectomy of C2: a new surgical technique.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: According to the available sources, no case of total spondylectomy of C2 with preservation of roots, preservation of vertebral arteries and a short fixation without occipitocervical fusion has been so far described in the literature. We decided to perform a radical surgery in a man, now 27 y. o., with solitary metastasis of thyroid adenocarcinoma. In the first step, we applied the posterior surgical approach. The patient was placed prone on a standard operating table with a support of head fixed by adhesive plaster, with the upper cervical spine slightly bent forward. We made a mid-line incision, extending from the external occipital protuberance to the C7 spinous process, controlled bleeding and exposed the C0-C4 section. Subsequently, the entire posterior epistropheus was resected, including most of the pedicles and the entire articular processes for C2-C3 articulation. Both the C2 roots were preserved, however, we had to control quite a profuse bleeding from the venous plexus around the left root. During dissection, the dural sac was damaged in the region of the attachment of the left root, which was treated by suture and covered with Tissucol fibrin sealant. Screws 4.0 mm thick, were inserted into the lateral masses of the atlas after Harms and 4.0mm screws into the C3 and C4 articular processes. On both sides, the screws were connected with 3.2 mm rods, and a transverse stabilizer was then applied to fix the two sides together. Cancellous bone grafts were harvested from the iliac crest and a massive posterolateral and posterior fusion of C1-C4 was performed. The second operation was performed after 21 days. Transoral transmandible approach without tongue splitting was applied. The patient was placed supine on a standard operating table with a support of neck, the head was fixed by adhesive plaster and slightly bent back, and tracheostomy was inserted. An arched incision through the middle of the red lip was made, extending 2 cm straight caudally and arching across the chin and neck, in the midline. On the caudal end we made a transverse inverted T incision. Subsequently, we exposed and osteotomised the mandible using the midline Z-type incision. In order to identify the space between the anterior arch of C1 and the C4 vertebral body, the Synframe retractor was inserted with one blade opening the mouth by pressure on the upper teeth and two blades pressing the tongue caudally. Then an inverted U incision through the mucosa of pharynx was made to identify paravertebral muscles. Caspar retractor was used to separate the muscles and expose C1-C3 laterally, including transversal processes with vertebral arteries. No pathological changes were manifested on the skeleton. First we removed the middle portion of the C2 vertebral body where we did not find any tumour, only sclerotic remodelling. Subsequently, we reamed the lower middle portion of the anterior arch of C1, extracted the dens and cut off the alar ligaments and the apical ligament of dens. The entire dens was then removed. Then we continued on the right side, in the intact part and extracted part of C2 in the region of the atlantoaxial joint, including the rest of the pedicle, and the anterior portion of the transversal process up to the vertebral artery. The posterior part of the transversal process was carefully rotated around the artery and also removed. All parts were extremely hard, sclerotic. The same procedure was followed on the left side where we found a 7 x 10 mm gelatinous greyish tumour in the lateral part of C2 below the atlantoaxial joint. Other parts were again sclerotic. Liquorrhea appeared again from dissection around the C2 root on the left side, the source of which we could not clearly identify. We filled the site of the probable hole with Tissucol fibrin sealant. Between the notch in the lower part of the anterior arch of C1 and the upper end plate of the C3 vertebral body we seated a shaped SynMesh cage with sharp edges providing a very good fixation. No additional fixation was needed. Again we harvested cancellous bone grafts from the iliac crest and placed them on the sides of the cage and at the front between the anterior arch of the atlas and the C3 vertebral body. Subsequently, the muscles were approximated and the mucous tissue of the pharynx repaired. The mandible was fixed by two Miniplate System plates and supported by a dental plate. Total spondylectomy of C2 with preservation of vertebral arteries and roots stabilized only by a short fixation is an extreme surgical procedure suitable only for exceptional cases of young patients with a good bone quality. With regard to potential complications it is of vital importance to consider carefully such operation and consult the proposed therapy with the patient.

### PMID 17484006 (2007) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Use of fibrin glue (Tissucol) as a hemostatic in laparoscopic conservative treatment of spleen trauma.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-007-9288-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This study aimed to evaluate the effect of fibrin glue in laparoscopic spleen-preserving procedures for traumatic rupture.
METHODS: From January 2002 to December 2005, six laparoscopic spleen-preserving procedures were performed for traumatic rupture using fibrin glue. Two of the cases had previous middle and lower abdominal surgery. Survey of the abdominal cavity was performed by inserting two 5- to 12-mm trocars, one 5-mm trocar, and a 30 degree scope. A complete survey of all the patients was performed.
RESULTS: None of the patients required laparotomy, and no postoperative bleeding occurred. The fibrin sealant achieved immediate hemostasis, and all the patients recovered without further splenic bleeding. The mean postoperative stay was 4.3 days (range, 4-5 days). All the patients were followed up for 3 to 12 months. Postoperative immunoglobulin scanning, ultrasonography, and computed tomography (CT) results were normal.
CONCLUSIONS: Laparoscopic management of spleen trauma can be used once a positive diagnosis has been made. It is useful for assessing the degree of splenic injury. A laparoscopic spleen-preserving procedure can be used safely for patients with stable vital data. It is an effective procedure for the evaluation and treatment of hemodynamically stable patients with splenic injuries for whom nonoperative treatment is controversial. The topical application of a fibrin sealant in splenic trauma achieves definitive hemostasis safely, rapidly, and reliably. It also is simple to use in either laparoscopic or open procedures.

### PMID 17387594 (2007) — Journal of materials science. Materials in medicine
TITLE: Influence of calcium chloride and aprotinin in the in vivo biological performance of a composite combining biphasic calcium phosphate granules and fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1007/s10856-006-0086-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Highly bioactive biomaterials have been developed to replace bone grafts in orthopedic revision and maxillofacial surgery for bone augmentation. A mouldable, self-hardening material can be obtained by combining TricOs Biphasic Calcium Phosphate Granules and Tissucol Fibrin Sealant. Two components, calcium chloride and antifibrinolytic agents (aprotinin), are essential for the stability of the fibrin clot. The ingrowth of cells in composites combining sealants without calcium chloride or with a low concentration of aprotinin was evaluated in vivo in an experiment on rabbits. Bone colonization was compared using TricOs alone or with the composite made from TricOs and the standard fibrin sealant. Without the addition of calcium chloride, the calcium ions released by the ceramic component interacted with the components of the sealant too late to stabilize the clot. With a low concentration of aprotinin, the degradation of the clot occurred more quickly, leading to the absence of a scaffold on which the bone cells could colonize the composite. Our results indicate that a stable fibrin scaffold is crucial for bone colonization. The low calcium chloride and low aprotinin groups have shown lower bone growth. Further studies will be necessary to determine the minimal amount of antifibrinolytic agent (aprotinin) necessary to allow the same level of osteogenic activity as the TricOs-fibrin glue composite.

### PMID 17331452 (2007) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Autologous chondrocyte implantation in the treatment of cartilage lesions of ankle joint].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE OF THE STUDY: The authors present the results of surgical treatment of talar dome cartilage defects. They used the transplantation of autologous cultured chondrocytes in the form of a solid chondral graft.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Patients with chondral lesions categorized as grades II to IV by the Anderson classification or as grades II to IV by the Berndt and Harty classification were indicated for this treatment. After preoperative MRI examination, a small sample of healthy cartilage was harvested arthroscopically from the non-weight-bearing area of the talus and was sent to the Tissue Bank in Brno for chondrocyte cultivation. After 28 to 42 days the cultured chondrocytes were formed into a solid chondral graft, implanted at the damaged site of the talar dome and fixed with fibrin glue (Tissucol).
RESULTS: Between July 2003 and October 2005 five patients, three males and two females, were treated using this method. Their age ranged from 22 to 46 years. Follow-up was 6 to 24 months, with an average of 12.6 months, and the patients were examined by MRI at 2 weeks, 2 and 6 months and at 1 year. The clinical results were evaluated on the basis of the Mazur and Weber scoring systems.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant improvement in clinical function of the ankle joint was achieved in three patients and the condition remained unchanged in one patient. In one patient, the surgical outcome was too recent for evaluation, but the MRI results indicated tendency to good incorporation of the graft.

### PMID 17297571 (2007) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Experimental comparison of type of Tissucol dilution and composite mesh (Parietex) for laparoscopic repair of groin and abdominal hernia: observational study conducted in a university laboratory.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-007-0199-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The primary objective of this observational study was to determine the best possible dilution of fibrin glue (Tissucol) to employ for prosthesis fixing in laparoscopic treatment of abdominal wall defects and, secondly, to assess its feasibility and safety.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study was carried out in a university experimental animal laboratory in accordance with all international laws, ethics regulations and quality criteria associated with animal experiments. The tests were carried out on two pigs, using four samples of mesh (Parietex). All meshes were fixed using two different Tissucol dilutions (standard with distilled water and that with calcium chloride). Follow-up evaluations were at 15 days after 30 days, with the latter consisting of traction tests and a biopsy for histological analysis.
RESULTS: No post-operative complications were observed. The collagen-coated polyester meshes showed 0% adhesions, and reperitonealization had ensued after 15 days. We saw no shrinkage or migration of any of the meshes. Histopathological analyses confirmed a greater stability, greater tissue integration and the largest number of fibroblasts in meshes fixed with a 1/10 Tissucol dilution without calcium chloride.
CONCLUSIONS: This observational study using animals showed that the 1/10 standard dilution - not that with calcium chloride - provided the best fixation and integration and prevented the formation of intraperitoneal adhesions, provided a hydrophilic collagen film-covered mesh was used.

### PMID 17245175 (2007) — Annals of surgery
TITLE: Use of human fibrin glue (Tissucol) versus staples for mesh fixation in laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal hernioplasty: a prospective, randomized study.
DOI: 10.1097/01.sla.0000245832.59478.c6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare the morbidity of fixation of prosthetic meshes using Tissucol fibrin glue versus staples in laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) repair of inguinal and femoral hernias.
SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: In patients undergoing laparoscopic hernia repair, fixation of mesh prostheses with staples may affect inguinocrural nerves causing early postoperative neuralgia and chronic neuralgia.
METHODS: Between June 2003 and February 2005, 197 patients with inguinal or femoral hernia were enrolled in this prospective, randomized study, to assess morbidity following hernia repair with staples (n = 98) or Tissucol (n = 99). The primary outcomes were early postoperative and late neuralgia recorded using a visual analog scale (VAS). The effects of neuralgia on functional status were evaluated using the modified SF-36 questionnaire. Secondary outcomes included complications such as nonspecific pain and recurrence.
RESULTS: Assessments took place at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months, with all patients completing each follow-up visit. Mean VAS scores were significantly lower in the Tissucol group versus the staples group (MANOVA, P &lt; 0.05). Higher scores for the modified SF-36 questionnaire at 1 month were demonstrated in the Tissucol group compared with the staples group (23.2 and 22.6, respectively; P &lt; 0.05). The mean recovery time for normal physical activity was significantly shorter in the Tissucol group compared with the staples group (7.9 vs. 9.1 day, respectively; P &lt; 0.001). One recurrence was seen in the fibrin glue group, which was attributable to a technical error in fixation of the mesh.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of Tissucol provides distinct advantages in laparoscopic treatment of inguinal/femoral hernias compared with conventional TAPP, including a lower incidence of postoperative neuralgia and an earlier resumption of physical and social activities.

### PMID 17177079 (2007) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Use of fibrin glue (Tissucol) in laparoscopic repair of abdominal wall defects: preliminary experience.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-006-9108-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to establish the efficacy and tolerability of human fibrin glue (Tissucol) for the nontraumatic fixation of a composite prosthesis (Parietex) in the laparoscopic repair of small to medium-sized incisional hernias and primary defects of the abdominal wall.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From October 2003 to October 2005, 40 patients underwent laparoscopic repair at the hands of one surgeon with expertise in laparoscopic surgery; all meshes were implanted in an intraperitoneal position. Follow-up visits were scheduled for 7 days and 1, 6, and 12 months. These included assessments for pain and postoperative complications.
RESULTS: Forty patients (24 females, 16 males) with a mean age of 50 years (range, 26-65 years) and a mean Body Mass Index (BMI) of 27 (range 25 to 30) were included in the study. Sixteen patients had incisional hernias, and 24 had primary defects. The size of the defects varied from 2 to 7 cm. Adhesiolysis was necessary in 92.5% of cases (25/40). There were no intraoperative complications or conversions. After a mean follow-up of 16 months (range, 3-24 months), no postoperative complications were observed. The mean surgical intervention time was 36 min (range, 12-40 min), with an average hospitalization time of 1 day.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of fibrin glue in the present study provided stable and uniform fixation of the prosthesis and minimized intraoperative and postoperative complications. Consequently, laparoscopic treatment of small to medium-sized abdominal defects using this approach is our therapeutic option of choice.

### PMID 18074908 (2007) — Acta chirurgica Belgica
TITLE: Clinical application of topical sealants in liver surgery: does it work?
DOI: 10.1080/00015458.2007.11680111 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hepatic resections are considered as a standard intervention in abdominal surgery. However there is still a remarkable complication rate. Despite all recent developments in surgical techniques during liver surgery, blood loss is still one of the main causes for postoperative morbidity and mortality. In addition to patient-dependent factors, aspects of the surgical technique play a major role, in particular with regard to the occurrence of peri-operative bleeding, fluid accumulation and bile leakage. Nowadays, the use of topical sealants is often recommended as an additional tool to decrease postoperative bleeding and bile fistula. Fibrin sealants are able not only to enhance clot formation and wound healing, but possibly work as a sealing device for the small biliary branches. In this overview we will try to evaluate the efficacy in terms of time to complete haemostasis, the need for blood transfusions and the incidence of bile leakage according to recent trials. Furthermore the clinical benefit for the liver surgery patient will be discussed.

### PMID 17713727 (2007) — Surgery today
TITLE: Staple line reinforcement with fleece-coated fibrin glue (TachoComb) after thoracoscopic bullectomy for the treatment of spontaneous pneumothorax.
DOI: 10.1007/s00595-007-3512-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: We investigated the cause of pneumothorax recurrence after thoracoscopic surgery and the effectiveness of staple line reinforcement with fleece-coated fibrin glue (TachoComb) in the prevention of postoperative pneumothorax recurrence.
METHODS: From April 3, 1992 to the end of December 2005, thoracoscopic bullectomy was performed on 499 patients of primary spontaneous pneumothorax. The causes of recurrence were investigated on 39 patients on the basis of surgical observations, preoperative chest computed tomography, and so on. The most common cause was new bulla formation (37 cases), 19 of which were apparently related to the staple line (within 1 cm of the staple lines) and 15 of which were not related to the staple line. After 2000, we stopped using forceps to grasp lungs and we have reinforced the staple line by applying fleece-coated fibrin glue.
RESULTS: The staple line reinforced with fleece-coated fibrin glue, or sprayed with fibrin glue solution and the untreated group (bullectomy only with staples) were compared, and the recurrence rates were 1.22%, 7.25%, and 10.00%, respectively (P = 0.0006021).
CONCLUSIONS: The recurrence rate after thoracoscopic bullectomy with fleece-coated fibrin glue was significantly lowered and we consider this procedure to be the treatment of choice for the management of spontaneous pneumothorax.

### PMID 17669945 (2007) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Surgical management of penetrating cardiac injuries using a fibrin glue sheet.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2007.156372 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A penetrating cardiac injury is among the most lethal of all injuries. We present a case of penetrating cardiac injuries to both ventricles. A laceration on the right ventricle was repaired using buttressed sutures, while an injury to the left ventricle was repaired using a collagen mesh dressing covered by fibrin glue (TachoComb patch) without employing cardiopulmonary bypass. The patient recovered uneventfully without a ventricular pseudoaneurysm. Our results demonstrate the usefulness of a TachoComb patch for penetrating cardiac injuries occurring adjacent to the large coronary artery in the posterior wall of the heart.

### PMID 17350855 (2007) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Local recurrence model of malignant pleural mesothelioma for investigation of intrapleural treatment.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2007.01.047 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Local recurrence remains a major problem in the treatment of malignant pleural mesothelioma. The aim of the underlying study was to establish a standardised local recurrence model in rats which enables to study different intrapleural therapies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty microlitre containing 1 x 10(6) cells of a syngeneic rat malignant mesothelioma cell line (II-45), established from mesothelioma in Fischer 344 rats exposed to asbestos, were inoculated subpleurally via a left-sided thoracotomy. Tumour size was assessed 6 days later and the tumour nodule completely resected. Evaluation of recurrence at the resection site was performed after 10 days (n=6) and 6 days (n=6). The recurrent nodule was histopathologically confirmed. In a second experiment, this new recurrence model was evaluated for the effect of intrapleural therapy with different agents: 4 ml of cisplatin-solution (100mg(2)/kg BW), cisplatin combined with the fibrin-based sealant Vivostat, 4 ml taurolidine 2%, repeated injection of 1 microg of the chemokine CCL-19 at the tumour site and 4 ml povidone-iodine in a dilution 1:10. In a control group, the chest cavity was filled with 4 ml 0.9% NaCl. The primary endpoint was the extent of tumour recurrence.
RESULTS: Six days after inoculation, all animals presented a standardised tumour nodule at the injection site of a mean diameter of 5.1 (+/-0.8)mm. Evaluation of the recurrence after 10 days showed a relapse directly at the resection site, but additional tumour nodules on the ipsi- and contralateral chest wall were found and histologically confirmed. The animals that were sacrificed 6 days after resection of the tumour nodule showed a recurrence only at the resection site with no macroscopic or microscopic evidence of other tumour. Resection of the tumour nodule combined with intrapleural application of the different agents lead to clear reduction of recurrence. The strongest effect was observed after intrapleural application of cisplatin-Vivostat with significant decrease of the longest, widest and thickest diameter of the recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: With this new recurrence model for investigation of malignant pleural mesothelioma in rats, we were able to investigate new intrapleural therapies after pneumonectomy. The intrapleural application of cisplatin-Vivostat significantly reduced the extent of local recurrence.

### PMID 17921773 (2007) — Current opinion in urology
TITLE: Tissue glues and nonsuturing techniques.
DOI: 10.1097/MOU.0b013e3282f0d683 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article details the diverse urologic applications of tissue glues and hemostatic agents over the past 3 years in the management of genitourinary injuries, surgical wounds, and complications.
RECENT FINDINGS: Biosurgical agents designed to promote tissue adhesion and hemostasis are being increasingly employed across all surgical disciplines. Fibrin sealant is the most widely utilized biosurgical product. Gelatin matrix thrombin has proven to be an efficacious hemostatic agent. Bovine serum albumin-gluataraldehyde is a new, promising tissue glue. Complex reconstructive, oncologic and laparoscopic procedures are those most appropriate for sealant use in urology.
SUMMARY: Tissue glues and hemostatic agents are effective, safe, and their use is increasing. All urologists should have a working knowledge of these adjuncts.

### PMID 17954994 (2007) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Late-period-onset chylothorax after a pulmonary resection for lung cancer: a case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 65-year-old female had been diagnosed with right lung cancer by her family physician, and she was introduced to our Department of Thoracic Surgery at Matsuyama Red Cross Hospital in May 2004. She underwent a right upper lobectomy and wedge resection of S6 with the systematic dissection of her mediastinal lymph nodes. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged on postoperative day 19. However, chylothorax was detected on a chest roentgenogram when she consulted our outpatient clinic again for dyspnea on exertion and chest pain. Chylothorax occurred in postoperative day 34. The patient initially received conservative therapy, but subsequently underwent surgical treatment and fibrin glue intubation when conservative therapy proved to be unsuccessful.

### PMID 17101608 (2006) — Journal of investigative surgery : the official journal of the Academy of Surgical Research
TITLE: Assessment of the thrombogenic effect of fibrin sealant dressing in a vascular surgery model in rabbits.
DOI: 10.1080/08941930600985744 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: This study's objective was to investigate the potential thrombogenic effects of thrombin-containing fibrin sealant dressings (FSD) in a vascular repair model. Oval-shaped pieces of the rabbit abdominal aorta and vena cava were excised, the injuries were repaired with FSD, and animals were allowed to recover. Thrombus formation was examined by (1) an infusion of indium-labeled platelets into the rabbits following FSD application and estimation of total number of platelets attached to the wounds at 2, 4, and 6 h later (short-term effect, n = 12); and by (2) morphological and histological examinations of the vessels and dressings on days 1, 3, and 7 after repair operation in another group of rabbits (long-term effect, n = 12). Application of FSD sealed the vascular injures and produced immediate hemostasis that was stable up to 1 week. The highest numbers of platelets (both native and labeled) adhered to the arterial and venous repair sites were 6.5 x 106 and 4.4 x 107, respectively, 6 h after operation. The adhered platelets, however, did not form a visible and clinically significant thrombus. In long-term experiments, no evidence of thrombus was found in the lumens of the repaired vessels or on the dressings, and no microthrombi were detected histologically in other tissues at any time point. Although vena caval injuries showed signs of healing at day 7 postoperatively, the aortic wounds expanded progressively (pseudoaneurysm) and were prone to rupture at later times. Thus, direct exposure of FSD does not cause intravascular thrombosis or thrombotic events in rabbits. The dressing appears to be safe and effective for short-term repair of vascular injuries. It may also allow healing of minor venous defects, but cannot replace conventional surgical techniques (suturing) for permanent repair of arterial damages.

### PMID 16554980 (2006) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Less chronic pain following mesh fixation using a fibrin sealant in TEP inguinal hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-006-0080-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Endoscopic hernia repair methods have become increasingly popular over the past 15 years. The postulated main advantages of the endoscopic technique are less postoperative pain, early recovery and lower recurrence rates. Fixation of the endoscopic mesh seems to be necessary to minimize the risk of recurrence. Stapling has been implicated to cause chronic inguinal pain syndromes. We performed a retrospective study on male patients who were endoscopically operated on primary inguinal hernias. Our aim was to clarify whether mesh fixation using a fibrin sealant is as safe and reliable as conventional stapling. Additionally, we compared the prevalence of chronic inguinal pain. A standardized population of 133 male patients (mean age 55.9 years) with 186 (80 unilateral; 53 bilateral) consecutive primary laparoscopic total extraperitoneal inguinal hernia repairs was assigned to two groups, depending on whether stapling or a fibrin sealant had been used for mesh fixation. A retrospective case control study was performed to conduct statistical analysis based on the following parameters: recurrence, complications, chronic inguinal pain, foreign body sensation and numbness. Hernia repairs numbering 173 (staples n=87; fibrin n=86) were followed up for a mean duration of 23.7 (11-47) months. The prevalence of chronic inguinal pain was significantly (P=0.002; Fisher exact test) higher in the stapled group-20.7% than in the fibrin sealant group with a prevalence of 4.7%. In terms of recurrence rate, complications and foreign body sensation, fewer patients were affected in the fibrin group than in the reference population, although the differences were not statistically significant. There were no major complications in either of the groups. The mean postoperative stay in hospital was 1.4 days. Fibrin sealing is as effective as stapling in providing secure mesh fixation. The fibrin group displayed a statistically significant lower prevalence of chronic pain syndromes. Mesh sealing provides adequate fixation and reduces the risk of chronic inguinal pain as a complication of the intervention.

### PMID 17152573 (2006) — Canadian journal of surgery. Journal canadien de chirurgie
TITLE: Use of fibrin sealants for the localized, controlled release of cefazolin.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants are used increasingly in surgery to reduce bleeding and improve wound healing. They have great potential as biocompatible, biodegradable drug delivery systems, because the sealant may adhere to the target tissue and allow controlled release of the drug over an extended period. We investigated the encapsulation, stability and controlled release of erythromycin and cefazolin from Beriplast fibrin sealants (Aventis Behring Canada).
METHODS: Drug-loaded clots were cast in glass vials and allowed to set. We observed the clots for drug precipitation and aggregation, and we assessed the effect of drug encapsulation on clot strength. Drug stability and release from the clots in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) was quantified by ultraviolet and visible violet absorbance spectroscopy and high-performance liquid chromatography.
RESULTS: Erythromycin was found to release slowly from the fibrin clots over the first 2 hours but then degrade rapidly. Cefazolin was found to be very stable in clots in PBS (97% stable at 2 d and 93% stable at 5 d). The drug released in a controlled manner over 2 days, with most being released during the first day. The dose of drug released could be varied by changing the amount placed in the thrombin solution. Clot thickness had no effect on the rate of cefazolin release.
CONCLUSION: Overall, the 2-day release profile and the excellent stability of the drug suggest that cefazolin-loaded fibrin sealants may offer an effective route of postoperative antibiotic delivery.
CONTEXTE: On utilise de plus en plus les agents de scellement &#xe0; la fibrine en chirurgie afin de r&#xe9;duire le saignement de la plaie et d'en am&#xe9;liorer la gu&#xe9;rison. Ces produits sont porteurs de grandes promesses comme syst&#xe8;mes biod&#xe9;gradables et biocompatibles de diffusion de m&#xe9;dicaments, car l'agent de scellement peut adh&#xe9;rer au tissu cible et permettre la lib&#xe9;ration contr&#xf4;l&#xe9;e du m&#xe9;dicament pendant une p&#xe9;riode prolong&#xe9;e. Nous avons &#xe9;tudi&#xe9; l'encapsulation, la stabilit&#xe9; et la lib&#xe9;ration contr&#xf4;l&#xe9;e de l'&#xe9;rythromycine et de la c&#xe9;fazoline par le Beriplast, agent de scellement &#xe0; la fibrine (Aventis Behring Canada).
M&#xc9;THODES: On a d&#xe9;pos&#xe9; des caillots charg&#xe9;s de m&#xe9;dicament dans des fioles en verre, o&#xf9; on les a laiss&#xe9; coaguler. Nous avons observ&#xe9; les caillots pour d&#xe9;terminer la pr&#xe9;cipitation des m&#xe9;dicaments et l'agr&#xe9;gation et nous avons &#xe9;valu&#xe9; l'effet de l'encapsulation du m&#xe9;dicament sur la r&#xe9;sistance du caillot. On a quantifi&#xe9; la stabilit&#xe9; du m&#xe9;dicament et sa lib&#xe9;ration des caillots dans une solution physiologique tamponn&#xe9;e au phosphate (PTP) par spectroscopie &#xe0; absorbance des ultraviolets et du violet visible et par chromatographie liquide &#xe0; haute performance.
R&#xc9;SULTATS: On a constat&#xe9; que l'&#xe9;rythromycine se lib&#xe8;re lentement des caillots de fibrine au cours des deux premi&#xe8;res heures, mais qu'elle se d&#xe9;grade ensuite rapidement. On a constat&#xe9; que la c&#xe9;fazoline &#xe9;tait tr&#xe8;s stable dans des caillots plong&#xe9;s dans une solution PTP (stable &#xe0; 97 % au j 2 et &#xe0; 93 % au j 5). Le m&#xe9;dicament a &#xe9;t&#xe9; diffus&#xe9; de fa&#xe7;on contr&#xf4;l&#xe9;e en deux jours, la majeure partie &#xe9;tant lib&#xe9;r&#xe9;e au cours de la premi&#xe8;re journ&#xe9;e. Il &#xe9;tait possible de varier la dose de m&#xe9;dicament lib&#xe9;r&#xe9; en modifiant la quantit&#xe9; d&#xe9;pos&#xe9;e dans la solution de thrombine. L'&#xe9;paisseur du caillot n'avait aucun effet sur le taux de lib&#xe9;ration de la c&#xe9;fazoline.
CONCLUSION: Dans l'ensemble, le profil de diffusion en deux jours et l'excellente stabilit&#xe9; du m&#xe9;dicament indiquent que les agents de scellement &#xe0; la fibrine charg&#xe9;s de c&#xe9;fazoline peuvent constituer une voie efficace de distribution d'antibiotiques apr&#xe8;s une intervention.

### PMID 17022152 (2006) — Polimery w medycynie
TITLE: [The use of the fibrin glue in the peripheral nerves reconstructions].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In this study we presented essential historical data about application of the fibrin glue in microsurgical reconstructions of the peripheral nerves. The technique of the preparation of the fibrin glue and the most important aspects of the clinical practice were described. We presented also our own experience in the use of the fibrin glue (Tissucol Kit firmy Baxter AG, Beriplast P firmy Behring), in microsurgical reconstructions of the brachial plexus and peripheral nerves. The basic principles of management were emphasized and a few clinical cases were presented. Microsurgical reconstructions of the nerves with using of the fibrin glue are atraumatic and don't cause inflammation and granuloma formation. These methods allowed to while away the time of surgical procedure and allowed to perform a microsurgical reconstruction in difficult conditions. Microsurgical reconstructions of the nerves with fibrin glue application may be used individually or in connection with suture materials.

### PMID 16924572 (2006) — Tuberkuloz ve toraks
TITLE: [The use of tissue glue and its effect on hospital cost in patients undergoing pulmonary surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Prolonged air leak following pulmonary resections is an important cause of morbidity and increased hospital costs. We compared 19 homologous/autologous tissue glue (fibrin glue) applied patients (FG group), 12 beriplast-P applied patients (beriplast group) and 27 control patients with respect to prolonged air leak, chest tube removal time and hospital costs. The mean ages for FG group (19 patients), beriplast group (12 patients) and control group (27 patients) were 48.5 +/- 14, 50.5 +/- 6.8 and 55 +/- 12.9 respectively. The groups were comparable with respect to age (p= 0.210), sex (p= 0.287) and the surgical procedure performed (p= 0.289). The incidence of prolonged air leak in FG group, beriplast group and the control group was 48%, 50% and 63%, respectively (p= 0.533). The mean chest tube removal time in FG group, beriplast group and the control group was 10.7 +/- 8.7, 9 +/- 4.1 and 8 +/- 3.1 days, respectively (p= 0.282). Mean hospital costs in FG group, beriplast group and the control group were 4633 +/- 3272 YTL, 4611 +/- 1583 YTL and 4015 +/- 911 YTL, respectively (p= 0.547). Fibrin glue had no effect on the incidence of prolonged air leak, chest tube removal time and hospital costs.

### PMID 16530994 (2006) — International journal of pharmaceutics
TITLE: Stability of Beriplast P fibrin sealant: storage and reconstitution.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2005.12.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study was performed to investigate the stability of Beriplast P fibrin sealant (FS) across a range of storage conditions, both pre- and post-reconstitution. Storage stability of the FS was evaluated during long-term refrigeration (24 months) with or without interim storage at elevated temperatures (40 degrees C for 1 week and 25 degrees C for 1 and 3 months). Stability of individual FS components was assessed by measuring: fibrinogen content, Factor XIII activity (FXIII), thrombin activity and aprotinin potency. The package integrity of each component was also checked (sterility testing, moisture content and pH). Storage stability was also evaluated by testing the reconstituted product for adhesion (tearing force testing after mixing the solutions) and sterility. Reconstitution stability was evaluated following 3-months' storage, for up to 50 h post-reconstitution using the same tests as for the storage stability investigations. Pre-defined specifications were met for fibrinogen content, Factor XIII activity, and thrombin activity, demonstrating storage stability. Package integrity and the functionality and sterility of the reconstituted product were confirmed throughout. Reconstitution stability was demonstrated for up to 50 h following reconstitution, in terms of both tearing force and sterility tests. In conclusion, the storage stability of Beriplast P was demonstrated over a range of 24-month storage schedules including interim exposure to elevated temperature, and the reconstituted product was stable for up to 50 h.

### PMID 17266838 (2006) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Therapy of severe chondral defects of the patella by autologous chondrocyte implantation].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE OF THE STUDY: The aim of this study was to present the results of treatment of deep chondral defects of the patella by transplantation of a solid chondral graft formed by autologous cultured chondrocytes.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Indications for autologous chondrocyte implantation most frequently included acute trauma to the knee, particularly the patella, which resulted in a severe focal cartilage defect. The lesions were assessed on the basis of the Bessette and Hunter classification preoperatively, and on the Outerbridge classification during arthroscopy. A sample of healthy cartilage was harvested from a non-weight-bearing area of the trochlea femoris. After cultivation of chondrocytes for 28 to 42 days in the tissue bank, a solid chondral graft, prepared with the use of fibrin glue (Tissucol), was ready for implantation.
RESULTS: Six patients, two males and four females (average age, 21.1 years; range, 13 to 39 years) were treated by this method in the period from July 2003 to October 2005. Follow-up ranged from 1 to 25 months, with an average of 18.5 months. The patients were examined postoperatively by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 2 weeks, 2 and 6 months, and at 1 year. The clinical results were evaluated by the Meyers, the Tegner and the Lysholm knee scoring systems. Two of the six patients, in whom the follow-up period was shorter than 6 months, were not included in the evaluation.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant improvement in knee function was recorded when the preoperative and final follow-up stages were compared, as well as on comparison with the healthy contralateral knee joint. MRI examination showed good graft incorporation in all patients.

### PMID 17147855 (2006) — Il Giornale di chirurgia
TITLE: [Fibrin sealant in tension free hernioplasty: our experience].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The aim of this study was to prove that it is possible to fix mesh sutureless with Tissucol in the Lichtenstein procedure. The mesh fixation with Tissucol was done in 28 patients. Respect the traditional Lichtenstein technique, which was done in the remaining 28 patients, the advantages of using Tissucol are: no surgical trauma, total mesh fixation, no pain, reduced morbidity and reduced costs. Furthermore it is a safe and reproducible method. The results are promising, even if the verification goes more carried out with consisting casuistics and longer follow-up.

### PMID 17101361 (2006) — Journal of pediatric surgery
TITLE: Long-term assessment of the treatment of recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula with fibrin glue associated with diathermy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2006.06.014 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula (RTF) is a serious common complication of the surgical treatment of esophageal atresia. We report the results of our technique of bronchoscopic treatment of RTF with fibrin glue (Tissucol), with a follow-up of over 1 decade.
METHODS: A retrospective review between 1993 and 2004 was conducted, including all patients diagnosed with RTF and treated bronchoscopically with Tissucol, with over 1 year of follow-up. The procedure was implemented under general anesthesia using a rigid neonatal bronchoscope. A magnification chamber and previous diathermia using a urethral catheter were used in the latter 4 patients. The fibrin glue was injected through a clear catheter. The number of endoscopic sessions per patient was limited to 3.
RESULTS: Seven patients were treated, with evidence of fistular closure in 6 (85%). One patient with satisfactory results, but a follow-up of 4 months, was not included. The age at bronchoscopy ranged from 14 to 20 days (mean, 16.7 days), and a total of 12 sessions were required (mean, 1.7). In the latter 4 patients, diathermia was associated with good results in all and a lower number of sessions (mean, 1.5). All patients were evaluated clinically and radiologically, and a control endoscopy was performed in 4 patients. The follow-up lasted from 2 to 11 years (mean, 7.4 years).
CONCLUSIONS: Because we started to use Tissucol (1994), other authors have reported successful isolated cases, but a relatively large series and a long-term follow-up were lacking. We consider that the success of the procedure depends on several technical factors such as an early diagnosis, before epithelium is formed in the fistula, and the use of initial diathermia, associated in the latter 4 patients. The results obtained with 85% success with a follow-up over 1 year show that the fibrin adhesive is the reference substance for the treatment of RTF; we recommend its endoscopic application associated with diathermia as initial measure.

### PMID 17063297 (2006) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Fibrin glue for mesh fixation in laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) hernia repair: indications, technique, and outcomes.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-005-0502-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The efficacy and safety of prosthesis fixation were studied by means of fibrin glue (Tissucol, Baxter Healthcare) during laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) treatment of inguinal and femoral hernias.
METHODS: Between September 2001 and December 2004, fibrin glue was used for mesh fixation during TAPP.
RESULTS: In this study, 320 hernias were treated for 230 patients (225 men and 5 women) with an average age of 45 years (range, 20-75 years). No perioperative complications were observed. After an average follow-up period of 26 months (range, 1-40 months), the only postoperative complications observed were six seromas (1.8%) and one trocar-site hematoma (0.3%). The mean operating time was 30 min for unilateral hernias and 50 min for bilateral hernias, whether primary or recurrent. Patients usually were discharged the day after surgery and returned to work after 5 days.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors' experience demonstrates that fibrin glue (Tissucol) is an effective method for mesh fixation during TAPP.

### PMID 17022151 (2006) — Polimery w medycynie
TITLE: [The use of TachoComb for the rhinorrhea repair in pituitary transsphenoidal surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: The transsphenoidal pituitary tumors surgery is often connected with intraoperative rhinorrhea. This complication might be serious if occurs again in the postoperative period. The aim of this study is to evaluate the sella reconstruction methods in patients with intraoperative rhinorrhea and comparing of their efficiency.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In the group of 259 consecutive cases operated on at the Neurosurgery Department in Cracow using the transsphenoidal approach, in 40 occured intraoperatively observed rhinorrhea. In the 26 cases we used Surgicel, artificial dura or fascia and Tissucol (I group), and in 14 TachoComb with Tissucol but in 5 also fascia or artificial dura (II group).
RESULTS: Out of the 26 patients from the I group (without TachoComb) in 5 cases occurred postoperatively rhinorrhea (3-36 days after surgery). 4 patients were reoperated, 1 patient died due to the meningitis. 2 patients suffered from the visual disturbances due to the sella overpacking (7,7%), what was visualized in the control imaging studies. In 14 cases from the II group in 2 postoperative rhinorrhea was observed (in the 7 and the 30 day after operation)--14,2%. There were no signs of meningitis, and no fatal cases. The visual disturbances as well as overpacking of the sella were not observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Using of the TachoComb in reconstructive surgery of the sella reduces the risk of the post operative CSF leak and eliminates the features of the sella overpacking and visual deterioration.

### PMID 16948992 (2006) — Archivos de bronconeumologia
TITLE: [Is endoscopic treatment of bronchopleural fistula useful?].
DOI: 10.1016/s1579-2129(06)60553-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: New endoscopic techniques have been developed as an alternative to surgical treatment of bronchopleural fistula. The objective of this study was to analyze our experience with endoscopic treatment of such fistulas.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective study of patients with bronchopleural fistula diagnosed by fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Patient characteristics, underlying disease, fistula size, and outcome of endoscopic treatment were analyzed. The endoscopic technique consisted of injection of fibrin sealants (Histoacryl and/or Tissucol) through the catheter of the fiberoptic bronchoscope.
RESULTS: Between 1997 and 2004, 18 patients were diagnosed with bronchopleural fistula by fiberoptic bronchoscopy. All were men with a mean (SD) age of 62 (12) years. Bronchopleural fistula was diagnosed after neoplastic surgery in 16 patients, in the bronchial suture after lung transplantation in 1 patient, and concurrently with pleural effusion due to hydatidosis in the remaining patient. The size of the fistula ranged from 1 mm to 10 mm (mean 3.6 [2.7] mm). Fibrin sealants were applied in 14 patients, 2 underwent direct surgery after diagnosis, and the bronchopleural fistula closed spontaneously in the remaining 2. The fibrin sealant used was Histoacryl in 12 patients and Tissucol in 2. Pleural drainage was employed simultaneously and antibiotic therapy was administered at the discretion of the surgeon. The 4 patients whose bronchopleural fistula was associated with empyema also underwent pleural lavage. In 12 patients the fistulas closed as a result of the endoscopic technique (85.7%), and no complications were observed. For 85.7%, fewer than 3 applications of fibrin sealant were necessary.
CONCLUSIONS: The success rate of closure of bronchopleural fistula with fibrin sealants injected under guidance with fiberoptic bronchoscopy is high and there are no complications. This technique can render surgery unnecessary.

### PMID 16938253 (2006) — Gastroenterologia y hepatologia
TITLE: [Endoscopic treatment of gastrointestinal fistulas with biological fibrin glue].
DOI: 10.1157/13091451 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We summarize our experience of endoscopic treatment of gastrointestinal fistulas with fibrin glue.
PATIENTS AND METHOD: We retrospectively reviewed the outcome of 30 patients with gastrointestinal fistulas (9 internal and 21 external) refractory to standard conservative treatment for at least 10 days. Once the fistula was endoscopically located, 4 to 8 ml of reconstituted fibrin glue (Tissucol 2.0) at 37 degrees C was injected through a Duplocath catheter on a weekly basis.
RESULTS: The mean age was 59 years (32-87) and 63% were men. A total of 21.9% of the patients had high output fistulas. We were able to find all fistular orifices what were located close to the surgical anastomosis. Healing time was 17 days (4-90); 2.8 sessions were required per patient (1-5) but only 2.3 sessions were required in responders. Complete sealing of fistulas was achieved in 75%; (80% in low-output, 25% in high-output and 55.5% in internal fistulas). The frequency of fistula recurrence was 3.3%. No complications related to the sealing procedure were found. Overall mortality was 10%, but only 6.6% was related to persistence of the fistula.
CONCLUSIONS: Endoscopic treatment of fistulas with biological glue has a high success rate in sealing without complications, helping to speed up the healing process and reduce costs, particularly in low-output enterocutaneous fistulas.

### PMID 16729172 (2006) — Brazilian oral research
TITLE: Effects of Tissucol and epsilon aminocaproic acid in the healing process following dental extraction in dehydrated rats.
DOI: 10.1590/s1806-83242006000100007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A histological study was conducted of the alveolar bone healing process following tooth extraction of dehydrated rats after the implantation of fibrin adhesive (TISSUCOL) associated to previous irrigation of the wound with a 5% epsilon aminocaproic acid solution (EACA). Seventy two rats were used, divided into three groups receiving different treatments after the surgical procedure. In group I, the gingival mucosa was sutured after extraction of the right upper incisor. In groups II and III, chronic dehydration was produced by water deprivation for 9 days (3 days in the preoperative period and 6 days in the postoperative period). In the animals of Group II, after tooth extraction, the gingival mucosa was sutured in the same way as performed in group I. In group III, after extraction, the dental socket was irrigated with 5% EACA, followed by implantation of the fibrin adhesive (TISSUCOL). The mucosa was sutured in the same way as performed in the other groups. At 3, 7, 15 and 21 postoperative days, the animals were sacrificed in number of 6 for each group. Specimens containing the dental socket were removed and fixed in 10% formalin and decalcified in an equal part formic acid and sodium citrate solution. After routine processing, the specimens were embedded in paraffin for microtomy. We obtained 6 microm semi-serial slices that were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for histological evaluation. The results showed that the water deprivation in the pre- and postoperative periods caused a delay in the alveolar bone healing process. The use of the fibrin adhesive (TISSUCOL) produced an improvement in the fibrinolytic picture caused by dehydration.

### PMID 16696446 (2006) — Acta medica (Hradec Kralove)
TITLE: Treatment of postparotidectomy fistulae with fibrin glue.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Although fistulae resulting from superficial parotidectomy represent a serious problem, there is still little consensus on the optimal treatment. Some suggest management by applying dressings, while others advise surgery. In recent years several other strategies have been proposed. In this manuscript, we present two cases of postparotidectomy fistulae treated by injection with fibrin tissue glue (Tissucol Duo 500, Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria). Furthermore, a review of the literature is presented. In both patients the fistulae completely healed within months without complications. A literature search revealed that this is the first time postparotidectomy fistulae were treated this way. We conclude that postparotidectomy fistulae can be effectively treated with fibrin glue. Moreover, this treatment is simple, safe and has no side effects.

### PMID 16626017 (2006) — Rozhledy v chirurgii : mesicnik Ceskoslovenske chirurgicke spolecnosti
TITLE: [The first case of management of the rectovaginal fistule using transanal endocsopic microsurgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors present an unusual and, according to the available literature data, so far unused method--management of the rectovaginal fistule, using a T.E.M. technique (transanal endoscopic microsurgery). In their case-review of a female patient, they present advantages of this technique in a case of a rare disorder - a benign rectovaginal fistule. All of the following employment of a harmonic scalpel in the T.E.M. method, as well as of a tissue adhesive Tissucol and of a surgical rectoscope in the vaginal phase of the procedure, deserve attention of surgeons and gynaecologists.

### PMID 16469211 (2006) — Obesity surgery
TITLE: Clinical evaluation of fibrin glue in the prevention of anastomotic leak and internal hernia after laparoscopic gastric bypass: preliminary results of a prospective, randomized multicenter trial.
DOI: 10.1381/096089206775565249 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Gastro-jejunal anastomotic leak and internal hernia can be life-threatening complications of laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (LRYGBP), ranging from 0.1-4.3% and from 0.8-4.5% respectively. The safety and efficacy of a fibrin glue (Tissucol) was assessed when placed around the anastomoses and over the mesenteric openings for prevention of anastomotic leaks and internal hernias after LRYGBP.
METHODS: A prospective, randomized, multicenter, clinical trial commenced in January 2004. Patients with BMI 40-59 kg/m2, aged 21-60 years, undergoing LRYGBP, were randomized into: 1) study group (fibrin glue applied on the gastro-jejunal and jejuno-jejunal anastomoses and the mesenteric openings); 2) control group (no fibrin glue, but suture of the mesenteric openings). 322 patients, 161 for each arm, will be enrolled for an estimated period of 24 months. Sex, age, operative time, time to postoperative oral diet and hospital stay, early and late complications rates are evaluated. An interim evaluation was conducted after 15 months.
RESULTS: To April 2005, 204 patients were randomized: 111 in the control group (mean age 39.0+/-11.6 years, BMI 46.4 +/- 8.2) and 93 in the fibrin glue group (mean age 42.9+/-11.7 years, BMI 46.9+/-6.4). There was no mortality or conversion in both groups; no differences in operative time and postoperative hospital stay were recorded. Time to postoperative oral diet was shorter for the fibrin glue group (P = 0.0044). Neither leaks nor internal hernias have occurred in the fibrin glue group. The incidence of leaks (2 cases, 1.8%) and the overall reoperation rate were higher in the control group (P=0.0165).
CONCLUSION: The preliminary results suggest that Tissucol application has no adverse effects, is not time-consuming, and may be effective in preventing leaks and internal hernias in morbidly obese patients undergoing LRYGBP.

### PMID 16456773 (2006) — Journal of reconstructive microsurgery
TITLE: Fibrin glue: an alternative technique for nerve coaptation--Part II. Nerve regeneration and histomorphometric assessment.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2006-932507 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The results of nerve repair with fibrin glue and microsuture were evaluated in rat nerve transection models. Ninety Wistar-Furth rat median nerves were exposed, transected, and repaired in an end-to-end fashion with one of four substances/techniques: 1) human fibrin sealant (Quixil); 2) autologous graft and human fibrin sealant (Quixil); 3) bovine fibrin sealant (Tissucol); and 4) nylon microsuture, epineurial technique. Histologic analyses were performed at 3-, 6-, and 9-month postoperative intervals, and factors evaluated included: presence of inflammatory cells (i.e., macrophages and T cells); number of Schwann cells at the repair site; number of blood vessels; fibrosis; axonal regeneration; and fiber alignment. An additional group underwent histologic analysis at 3 weeks following repair with Quixil. Surgical time of repair was also measured. Nerve repairs performed with fibrin sealants produced less inflammatory response and fibrosis, and better axonal regeneration and fiber alignment than nerve repairs performed with microsuture. In addition, the fibrin sealant techniques were quicker and easier to use. The authors conclude that fibrin sealant represents a good alternative technique to microsuture for peripheral-nerve repair.

### PMID 16436294 (2006) — Biomaterials
TITLE: The modulation of gene expression in osteoblasts by thrombin coated on biphasic calcium phosphate ceramic.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2006.01.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: For many years, fibrin sealants were associated with bone substitutes to promote bone healing. However, the osteoblastic response to fibrin sealant components remains poorly documented. In this study, MC3T3-E1 osteoblastic cells were cultured on biphasic calcium phosphate ceramic (MBCP) coated with Tissucol components (thrombin and fibrinogen). Analysis of osteoblastic differentiation markers by RT-PCR revealed that MBCP coated with Tissucol stimulated mRNA levels for osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Of all the components of Tissucol, thrombin has been reported to affect osteoblastic behavior. Our results demonstrated that low thrombin concentrations (0.5-5 U/ml) stimulated mRNA levels for ALP, whereas high thrombin concentrations (50-100 U/ml) decreased mRNA levels for ALP and PTH/PTHrP receptor and also increased mRNA level for the osteoclastogenesis inhibitor OPG. As thrombin stimulated angiogenesis, we then wondered whether thrombin could influence the expression of angiogenic factors. Low thrombin concentrations were shown to up-regulate mRNA levels for VEGF-B and VEGF-R1, suggesting an autocrine/paracrine role for VEGF-B. Higher thrombin concentrations also up-regulated mRNA for VEGF-A and neuropilin-1. In conclusion, the association of MBCP with thrombin and fibrinogen appears to be a convenient scaffold for bone cell differentiation. Thrombin could also acts at the cellular level by increasing the angiogenic potential of osteoblasts as well as their responsiveness to thrombin and VEGF.

### PMID 16331038 (2006) — Cornea
TITLE: Pterygium surgery: conjunctival autograft using a fibrin adhesive.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ico.0000164780.25914.0a | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the efficiency and safety of using a fibrin adhesive (Tissucol Duo, Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria) to avoid the need for sutures during conjunctival autograft surgery for primary pterygium.
METHODS: Twenty patients (20 eyes) with primary nasal pterygium were subjected to conjunctival autograft surgery. The free conjunctival graft placed over the bare sclera was fixed to the surrounding conjunctiva and cornea using the fibrin glue. An occlusive patch was applied. The outcome of surgery and any possible complications were periodically assessed.
RESULTS: Mean patient age was 54.9 years (28-75 years). The mean follow-up time was 26.05 +/- 3.15 (SD) weeks. The time of surgery was 15 to 20 minutes. During the postoperative course, none of the patients felt pain, and only 5/20 (25%) had the mild sensation of the presence of a foreign body. In 18/20 (90%) patients, the conjunctival autograft was observed to be correctly positioned and fixed in all the follow-up exams. No sutures were used during or after surgery. There were no cases of regrowth of the pterygium.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate the safety and efficiency of Tissucol Duo as a conjunctival adhesive for pterygium autograft surgery as treatment of primary pterygium. Because of its fast and easy application, this product considerably reduces the time of surgery. Its use also avoids complications derived from sutures and diminishes the sensation of a foreign body in the eye following surgery.

### PMID 17001576 (2006) — Endoscopy
TITLE: Autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat) for mesh fixation in laparoscopic transabdominal preperitoneal hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2006-944609 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND STUDY AIMS: The use of fibrin glue derived from humans or animals has been reported as an alternative method of mesh fixation, instead of staples, in inguinal hernia repair. However, fibrin sealants involve the potential risks of virus transmission or immunological reactions to foreign proteins. This risk could be avoided by using autologous fibrin derived from the patient. A feasibility study on the use of autologous fibrin was therefore carried out in patients undergoing laparoscopic transabdominal inguinal hernia repair.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In a series of 10 patients undergoing laparoscopic transabdominal inguinal hernia repair, autologous fibrin was produced from 120 ml of the patient's blood during the hernia repair. The process took an average of 20 min. The perioperative and postoperative results were compared with those in a control group of 20 patients in whom conventional fibrin was used.
RESULTS: Producing and applying the autologous fibrin was uncomplicated. No differences in the outcome were observed between the two groups. One patient in the conventional fibrin group developed a seroma. None of the patients reported persistent pain. No recurrences were observed after a mean follow-up period of 9 months (range 6 - 12 months) in the conventional fibrin group and 7 months (range 6 - 8 months) in the autologous fibrin group.
CONCLUSIONS: This feasibility study suggests that autologous fibrin sealant allowed adequate mesh fixation that did not differ from that in a control group in whom conventional fibrin glue was used. Autologous fibrin may be an interesting alternative for a variety of laparoscopic and endoscopic applications.

### PMID 16959690 (2006) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: A pilot study of the effects of Vivostat patient-derived fibrin sealant in reducing blood loss in primary hip arthroplasty.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029606291406 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: A pilot study evaluated the effectiveness of Vivostat patient-derived fibrin sealant in reducing blood loss in patients who underwent primary hip arthroplasty. Eighty adult patients undergoing elective surgery were randomized to receive either Vivostat sealant or control (no additional hemostatic treatment). Patients allocated Vivostat sealant donated 120 mL of blood, which was then processed perioperatively to produce a fibrin sealant that was applied to the bleeding wound surfaces just before closure. Transfusion requirements, blood loss during surgery, drain volumes, and daily hematocrit and hemoglobin levels were measured. Hospitalization times, adverse events, and postoperative wound complications were also monitored. Blood loss during surgery and wound drainage volume was lower in the Vivostat group than in the control group, although the differences were not significantly different. Transfusion requirements (median, 270 mL of packed red blood cells) and hospitalization times (both median 7 days) were the same for both groups. No adverse events related to the use of Vivostat occurred. There were indications of a possible reduction in the incidence of postoperative wound oozing (15% vs 25%) and hematomas (6% vs 11%) with the use of Vivostat compared with the control group, although differences were not statistically significant. In conclusion, in this pilot study, use of Vivostat patient-derived fibrin in hip arthroplasty was not associated with a significant reduction in blood loss. Further studies, with larger numbers of patients, may be warranted to investigate a possible benefit of Vivostat in reducing postoperative wound complications.

### PMID 16907874 (2006) — Vox sanguinis
TITLE: Platelet content and growth factor release in platelet-rich plasma: a comparison of four different systems.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1423-0410.2006.00815.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Different systems for preparation of platelet-rich plasma are commercially available, but data for comparison of these systems have not been published so far.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the performance of Vivostat PRF Preparation Kit, PCCS Platelet Concentrate Collection System, Harvest SmartPReP 2 APC 60 Process, and Fibrinet Autologous Fibrin &amp; Platelet System. The preparations provided by these systems are platelet concentrates with high numbers of platelets in a small volume of plasma and PDGF-AB is released continuously during the 5 days after preparation.
RESULTS: Vivostat PRF Preparation Kit, PCCS Platelet Concentrate Collection System, Harvest SmartPReP 2 APC 60 Process are comparable in platelet yield and total amount of released PDGF-AB after 120 h while with Fibrinet the lowest platelet yield and PDGF-AB content of supernatant was achieved. The ability of growth factor release was equal in all four systems.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, all four systems for preparation of platelet-rich plasma investigated result in considerable growth factor release. In what extent the total content of PDGF-AB as a consequence of platelet yield has an impact on wound healing has to be further investigated.

### PMID 16675097 (2006) — European urology
TITLE: Autologous fibrin glue using the Vivostat system for hemostasis in laparoscopic partial nephrectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2006.03.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Haemostasis remains the greatest challenge during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy. Use of fibrin sealant currently is increasing. We describe first a technique for achieving effective haemostasis during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy using the Vivostat system.
METHODS: Ten patients underwent laparoscopic partial nephrectomy. Autologous fibrin sealant was prepared with the Vivostat system and applied to the resection bed. This system is an automated medical device for the preparation of an autologous fibrin sealant, generating up to 5 ml of sealant from 120 ml of the patient's blood. The concentration of fibrin and the volume of sealant are stable; the sealant may be kept at room temperature for up to 8 hours before application without a loss of properties and effectiveness. The patients were evaluated for acute and delayed bleeding.
RESULTS: Mean patient's age was 54 years (range, 31-68). Haemostasis was immediate in all cases after application of the sealant for 1 to 2 minutes to the resection site; no additional haemostatic measures were required. Mean warm ischemia time was 23 minutes (range, 20-27); mean blood loss was 90 cc (range, 20-200). Pre-operative and post-operative serum haemoglobin did not differ significantly (mean, 14.9 vs 12.6g/dl) and creatinine values (mean, 0.91 vs 0.95 ng/ml). Mean operative time was 136 minutes (range, 60-180). No postoperative bleeding or other complications occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, immediate haemostasis was achieved and maintained after the kidney was reperfused. Our initial experience with the Vivostat system in laparoscopic partial nephrectomy has been encouraging.

### PMID 16515926 (2006) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Intrapleural topical application of cisplatin with the surgical carrier Vivostat increases the local drug concentration in an immune-competent rat model with malignant pleuromesothelioma.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtcvs.2005.08.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We sought to investigate whether intrapleural topical application of cisplatin with a surgical carrier has a prolonged local tissue level in comparison with cisplatin solution while reducing systemic toxicity.
METHODS: Forty immune-competent Fischer rats were inoculated with 10(6) mesothelioma cells. Ten days later, left pneumonectomy with tumor debulking was performed. Twenty animals underwent local application of cisplatin solution (100 mg/m2), whereas the same quantity of cisplatin was topically applied as a gel with the Vivostat (Vivolution) system in 20 other animals. In each group 5 subgroups of 4 animals were defined according to the harvesting time of blood and tissue samples (2, 4, 24, and 72 hours and 1 week) after local therapy. Platinum concentrations in serum and tissue and systemic toxicity were analyzed.
RESULTS: Platinum concentrations in tissue were significantly higher in the gel group (group 1) than in the solution group (group 2) at 1, 3, and 7 days after therapy (1510, 1224, and 1069 pg/mg for group 1 vs 598, 382, and 287 pg/mg for group 2; P = .007, P = .005, and P = .0002, respectively). Laboratory findings showed renal insufficiency in the animals of the solution group at 1 week, with values of 98 mmol/L versus 7.7 mmol/L for urea and 410 mumol/L versus 43 mumol/L for creatinine (P = .02 and P = .01, respectively), which was confirmed by means of pathologic analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Intrapleural administration of cisplatin with the carrier Vivostat significantly provides sustained higher platinum concentrations up to 1 week in tissue in comparison with application of cisplatin solution without conferring systemic toxicity in this model.

### PMID 16488275 (2006) — The Urologic clinics of North America
TITLE: Hemostatic agents and tissue glues in urologic injuries and wound healing.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ucl.2005.10.004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Biosurgical preparations designed to promote surgical hemostasis and tissue adhesion are now available to the urologist and are increasingly being used across all surgical disciplines. Fibrin sealant and gelatin thrombin matrix are the two most widely used bio-surgical adjuncts in urology. Complex reconstructive, oncologic, and laparoscopic genitourinary procedures are those most appropriate for sealant use. This article details the diverse urologic applications of biosurgical products in the management of urologic injuries and the promotion of wound healing.

### PMID 17049141 (2006) — Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)
TITLE: Cost-effectiveness of cell salvage and alternative methods of minimising perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion: a systematic review and economic model.
DOI: 10.3310/hta10440 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To compare patient outcomes, resource use and costs to the NHS and NHS Blood Transfusion Authority (BTA) associated with cell salvage and alternative methods of minimising perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic databases covering the period 1996-2004 for systematic reviews and 1994-2004 for economic evidence.
REVIEW METHODS: Existing systematic reviews were updated with data from selected randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that involved adults scheduled for elective non-urgent surgery. Any resource use or cost data were extracted for potential use in populating an economic model. Relative risks or weighted mean difference of each outcome for each intervention were assessed, taking into account the number of RCTs included in each outcome and intervention and the presence of any heterogeneity. This allowed indirect comparison of the relative effectiveness of each intervention when the intervention is compared with allogeneic blood transfusion. A decision analytic model synthesised clinical and economic data from several sources, to estimate the relative cost-effectiveness of cell salvage for people undergoing elective surgery with moderate to major expected blood loss. The perspective of the NHS and patients and a time horizon of 1 month were used. The economic model was developed from reviews of effectiveness and cost-effectiveness and clinical experts. Secondary analysis explored the robustness of the results to changes in the timing and costs of cell salvage equipment, surgical procedure, use of transfusion protocols and time horizon of analysis.
RESULTS: Overall, 668 studies were identified electronically for the update of the two systematic reviews. This included five RCTs, of which two were cell salvage and three preoperative autologous donation (PAD). Five published systematic reviews were identified for antifibrinolytics, fibrin sealants and restrictive transfusion triggers, PAD plus erythropoietin, erythropoietin alone and acute normovolaemic haemodilution (ANH). Twelve published studies reported full economic evaluations. All but two of the transfusion strategies significantly reduced exposure to allogeneic blood. The relative risk of exposure to allogeneic blood was 0.59 for the pooled trials of cell salvage (95% confidence interval: 0.48 to 0.73). This varied by the type and timing of cell salvage and type of surgical procedure. For cell salvage, the relative risk of allogeneic blood transfusion was higher in cardiac surgery than in orthopaedic surgery. Cell salvage had lower costs and slightly higher quality-adjusted life years compared with all of the alternative transfusion strategies except ANH. The likelihood that cell salvage is cost-effective compared with strategies other than ANH is over 50%. Most of the secondary analyses indicated similar results to the primary analysis. However, the primary and secondary analyses indicated that ANH may be more cost-effective than cell salvage.
CONCLUSIONS: The available evidence indicates that cell salvage may be a cost-effective method to reduce exposure to allogeneic blood transfusion. However, ANH may be more cost-effective than cell salvage. The results of this analysis are subject to the low quality and reliability of the data used and the use of indirect comparisons. This may affect the reliability and robustness of the clinical and economic results. There is a need for further research that includes adequately powered high-quality RCTs to compare directly various blood transfusion strategies. These should include measures of health status, health-related quality of life and patient preferences for alternative transfusion strategies. Observational and tracking studies are needed to estimate reliably the incidence of adverse events and infections transmitted during blood transfusion and to identify the lifetime consequences of the serious hazards of transfusion on mortality, health status and health-related quality of life.

### PMID 16448914 (2006) — Oral surgery, oral medicine, oral pathology, oral radiology, and endodontics
TITLE: The use of autologous fibrin glue for closing sinus membrane perforations during sinus lifts.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tripleo.2005.04.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Sinus lift procedures depend greatly on fragile structures and anatomical variations. These procedures may cause sinus membrane perforations, which can lead to graft infection and early failure. The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of autologous fibrin glue in the management of large perforations of the maxillary sinus membrane occurring during sinus lifts. After elevating the sinus membrane in the bilateral maxillary sinuses of 6 adult female mongrel dogs, a laceration (about 2.0 cm in length) was made in the membrane and either repaired with autologous fibrin glue or covered with a bioabsorbable collagen membrane as a control. Wounded areas were biopsied 2 weeks after the operation. Wounds repaired with autologous fibrin glue showed newly formed continuous epithelium across the previous perforation site. However, extensive fibrosis, inflammatory infiltration, and absent epithelium were observed in wounds treated with the collagen membrane control. Our results support the clinical use of autologous fibrin glue for repairing sinus membrane perforations.

### PMID 17670393 (2005) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Surgical treatment for rupture of left ventricular free wall after acute myocardial infarction.
DOI: 10.1510/icvts.2004.100321 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Left ventricular (LV) free wall rupture particularly in blow-out type is still one of the fatal complications after myocardial infarction. Seven patients had LV rupture following acute myocardial infarction. LV rupture was divided into two categories: blow-out type (true rupture) in 5 cases, or oozing type (incipient rupture) in 2 cases. All patients were in deep shock condition and underwent surgery on emergency basis. Patch and glue (fibrin glue) technique was applied for oozing type patients, while direct closure using buttress sutures with additional sutured patch and glue (including GRF glue) technique for blow-out type patients. Surgery was performed on heart beating without cardioplegic arrest. Complete homeostasis and circulatory recovery were obtained in all cases. One blow-out type patient (14.3%), who had preoperative cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA), died of multiple organ failure. Four patients (57.1%) who had preoperative CPA or were in prolonged deep shock resulted in vegetative condition regardless of rupture type. Two patients (28.5%) of blow-out type were successfully rescued without any severe brain complications. No recurrence of free wall rupture was demonstrated during follow-up in all cases. Fifty-seven percent of patients had postoperative vegetative condition because of inadequacy of cardiopulmonary resuscitation including delayed circulatory support. Our surgical procedure provided sufficient circulatory recovery and survival without recurrence, even in patients with blow-out type rupture, as long as prompt resuscitation was performed.

### PMID 15854990 (2005) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Effective use of fibrin glue for acute aortic dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2003.12.059 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The use of gelatin-resorcine-formalin (GRF) glue for reconstruction of the vascular wall in the context of acute aortic dissection has become more common. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that use of the GRF glue results in higher rates of postoperative redissection. We describe an alternative method of reinforcing the dissected aorta with fibrin glue that may avoid this complication. A fabric sheet is presoaked in fibrinogen solution and then placed within the false lumen. Thrombin solution is then applied to the fabric sheet. That results in obliteration of the false lumen and effective reinforcement of the dissected wall.

### PMID 15828244 (2005) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Sutureless technique for oozing type postinfarction left ventricular free wall rupture].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report our experience using a sutureless technique for oozing type postinfarction left ventricular free wall rupture. Several materials such as fibrin seat, autologous or heterologous pericardial patch, fibrin glue, and geratin-resorcin-formaldehyde (GRF) glue have been used. Nine patients, who developed postinfarction left ventricular free wall rupture, underwent surgical repair using a sutureless technique between 1999 and 2004. All patients survived and discharged our hospital without any postoperative complications. And all are alive an exellent condition in 5 to 44 months. A sutureless technique for the treatment of oozing type postinfarction left ventricular free wall rupture is simple, effective, and associated with a favorable outcome.

### PMID 16283851 (2005) — Journal of endourology
TITLE: Evaluation of hydrogel tissue sealant in porcine laparoscopic partial-nephrectomy model.
DOI: 10.1089/end.2005.19.1122 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Laparoscopic partial nephrectomy (LPN) is technically challenging with a steep learning curve, primarily because techniques used to control bleeding on the cut surface of the kidney can be ineffective, inconsistent, or challenging. Hemostatic techniques can include intracorporeal suturing, vascular coagulation (argon-beam coagulator, bipolar cautery, laser), and application of various tissue sealants. There is no uniformity of opinion regarding which hemostatic technique is optimal for this application. CoSeal, a hydrogel (Baxter Healthcare Corp, Deerfield, IL), has been effective following vascular surgery but has not been applied to a partial-nephrectomy model. We evaluated the effectiveness of this hydrogel in controlling bleeding and sealing the collecting system by comparing it with intracorporeal suturing and fibrin sealant (Tisseel; Baxter) in a porcine laparoscopic partial-nephrectomy model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bilateral synchronous upper-pole partial nephrectomies were performed in two groups of 18 farm pigs, and the three hemostatic techniques (suturing, Tisseel, CoSeal) were applied. In the first group, partial nephrectomies were performed and the pigs sacrificed 3 days postoperatively (acute group). In the second group, the pigs were euthanized 6 weeks postoperatively (chronic group). In both groups, weight, blood pressure, estimated blood loss, weight of the partial and completion nephrectomy specimen, presence/ absence of urinary leak on retrograde study, histopathologic findings, and complications were recorded.
RESULTS: The mean weight, blood pressure, estimated blood loss, histopathology findings, and weight of the partial and completion nephrectomy specimens were similar in the three groups. CoSeal did not adhere well to the renal parenchyma compared with Tisseel. All three animals in the acute CoSeal group and three of the six pigs in the sutured group had small urinary leaks during retrograde ureteral study, whereas none of the pigs in the fibrin-glue cohort had urinary leaks. There was one complication (urinary leak) in the CoSeal group, necessitating sacrifice of the animal on postoperative day 8 because of sepsis.
CONCLUSIONS: CoSeal is not as effective as fibrin glue in adhering to the cut renal surface and sealing the collecting system during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy.

### PMID 15865520 (2005) — Journal of endourology
TITLE: What happens to hemostatic agents in contact with urine? An in vitro study.
DOI: 10.1089/end.2005.19.312 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: As the indications for topical hemostatic agents increase in urology, the question arises: what happens to these agents when they enter the urinary collecting system? To answer this question, we performed a series of in-vitro experiments mixing three hemostatic agents with normal and sanguineous urine.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Four commercially available topical hemostatic products: oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel; Ethicon, Somerville, NJ), fibrin sealant (Tisseel VH Kit; Baxter Health Care Corporation, Irvine, CA), gelatin matrix hemostatic sealant (FloSeal; Baxter Health Care), and polyethylene glycol (CoSeal; Cohesion Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) were studied. Human urine (10 mL) was added to samples of each substance; this was done in triplicate. The 12 sample tubes were then capped and placed on a tube shaker at slow speed and 37 degrees C. Observations regarding consistency of the material were made at 6, 12, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hours (5 days). Gelatin matrix hemostatic sealant was further tested in urine with various amounts of blood or blood clot; observations were again recorded out to 5 days.
RESULTS: Surgicel maintained its solid form when it initially came in contact with urine, but over a period of 5 days, it transformed into a mucoid substance with visible free-floating fibers. It did not dissolve completely in urine within 5 days. Gelatin matrix was immediately transformed by urine into a fine colloidal suspension that did not change over the 5 days of the study. Fibrin glue, after mixing of the two components (fibrinogen and thrombin) directly in the urine, and polyethylene glycol immediately formed a solid clot at the bottom of the test tube on contact with the urine. When the mixture of fibrin sealant was allowed to form for 15 minutes and then added to urine, it again maintained a solid form. After 72 hours, the fibrin glue became a semisolid gelatinous plug. On analysis at 5 days, the fibrin sealant clot had transformed into a cohesive mucoid gel, and the polyethylene glycol clot had not changed. The gelatin matrix hemostatic sealant, when in contact with blood or blood clot, appeared to either become part of a clot or to remain in a colloidal suspension. At 5 days, all clots had dissolved to fine particulate suspensions, and the gelatin matrix appeared as a fine suspension.
CONCLUSION: Fibrin glue and oxidized regenerated cellulose maintain a solid form when initially placed in direct contact with urine and then assume a semisolid gelatinous state, which is still present at 5 days. Polyethylene glycol forms a solid clot initially and does not change after 5 days. Only hemostatic gelatin matrix remained as a fine particulate suspension in both normal and sanguineous urine. The implications of these findings with regard to sealing the renal parenchyma or small violations of the collecting system after percutaneous or laparoscopic surgery await in-vivo testing.

### PMID 16374275 (2005) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Comparison of hemorrhage control agents applied to lethal extremity arterial hemorrhages in swine.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000187655.63698.9f | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: QuikClot powder (QC), chitosan dressing (CD), and fibrin sealant dressing (FSD) are new hemostatic products touted to be more effective in controlling severe extremity bleeding than the current standard gauze dressing. All have been utilized in the global war on terrorism. Our objective was to evaluate the hemostatic efficacy of these three products in a model of severe extremity arterial hemorrhage that could not be stopped by standard gauze treatment.
METHODS: A model of severe extremity arterial hemorrhage was developed in swine that was 100% fatal with standard gauze application and manual compression. The Army Field Bandage (AFB) was the standard gauze control. Anesthetized animals (n = 60, 15/group, 37.7 +/- 2.5 kg) were splenectomized and instrumented. A reproducible femoral artery injury was created using a 6 mm aortic punch, and free bleeding was allowed for 45 seconds. Each hemostatic agent was applied twice with three-minute compressions. All products were applied on actively bleeding wounds through a pool of blood. Fluid resuscitation was started with the first compression and titrated to a mean pressure of 65 mm Hg. Animals were observed for 180 minutes or until death. Endpoints were percent survival, survival time, blood loss, resuscitation volume, wound temperatures and tissue histology. Data are expressed as mean +/- SD and analyzed by Fisher's exact, logrank, and nonparametric ANOVA tests.
RESULTS: Baseline physiologic parameters were similar among groups. AFB did not produce hemostasis. QC also showed no hemostatic benefit, and QC treatment markedly increased maximum wound temperatures to an average of 70.8 +/- 4.2 degrees C (p &lt; 0.001). CD stopped bleeding temporarily in only one animal. There were no survivors in the AFB, QC, or CD groups. CD numerically prolonged survival time (58.9 +/- 21.1 minute) compared with the control (38.4 +/- 24.7 minutes, p = 0.045) but the difference was not significant. FSD reduced bleeding (p &lt; 0.05) and prevented exsanguination in 10/15 (2/3) animals, and resulted in a significantly longer average survival time (p &lt; 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: FSD was superior to other currently utilized hemostatic products in controlling lethal arterial hemorrhage in this model of a fatal extremity wound. CD showed some hemostatic benefit. The exothermic reaction of QC was significant and resulted in gross and histologic tissue changes of unknown clinical significance. Controlled human studies with the promising products are required.

### PMID 16212458 (2005) — Journal of endovascular therapy : an official journal of the International Society of Endovascular Specialists
TITLE: Fibrin glue aneurysm sac embolization at the time of endografting.
DOI: 10.1583/05-1574MR.1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To describe the procedural details for primary prevention of type II endoleak with fibrin glue injection into the aneurysm sac at the time of endografting.
TECHNIQUE: After deployment of the main stent-graft component, the angiographic pigtail catheter is withdrawn, leaving the 0.035-inch standard guidewire between the endograft and the native aorta. Through a brachial-femoral arterial guidewire loop, an 11-cm-long, 6-F introducer is advanced over the wire into the contralateral iliac artery. After deployment of the contralateral iliac extension, a 23-cm, 5-F sheath is advanced over the wire into the aneurysm sac. The wire and vessel dilator are removed, leaving the cannula in the sac. To prevent distal embolization of the sealant, a balloon is inflated in the contralateral limb to secure it to the native vessel before 5 mL of fibrin sealant are injected into the sac via a double-syringe delivery system inserted through the sheath. The balloon is left in place for 1 minute after sealant injection. In 64 consecutive patients in whom this technique has been used, sac embolization has been successful. There have been no intraoperative complications or in-hospital mortality. Over a mean follow-up of 9.3+/-4.4 months (range 1-18), only 1 lumbar endoleak has been detected on surveillance imaging.
CONCLUSIONS: This preventive strategy appears to be an effective approach and the best therapeutic choice for preventive management of type II endoleak.

### PMID 16096535 (2005) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Hemostatic efficacy of two advanced dressings in an aortic hemorrhage model in Swine.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000171458.72037.ee | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: An effective hemostatic agent capable of stopping severe arterial bleeding and sustaining hemostasis over a prolonged time is required. The U.S. Army recently distributed fibrin sealant (under an Investigational New Drug-approved protocol) and chitosan dressings among deployed medics for treating severe external hemorrhage on the battlefield. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of these dressings, as compared with the standard gauze army field dressing, to provide initial and sustained hemostasis up to 96 hours in a lethal uncontrolled arterial hemorrhage model.
METHODS: Anesthetized pigs were splenectomized and chronically instrumented for fluid/drug administration and continuous monitoring of vital signs. An infrarenal aortotomy was created using a 4.4-mm aortic hole punch and free bleeding was allowed for 5 seconds. While bleeding profusely, a dressing was applied and pressed into the wound for 4 minutes (occluding the distal flow) and then released. If hemostasis was not obtained, the dressing was replaced with a new one (maximum, two dressings per experiment) with another 4-minute compression. If hemostasis was achieved, the abdomen was closed; the animal was then recovered and monitored up to 96 hours. Initial hemostasis, duration of hemostasis, survival time, blood loss, and other variables were measured.
RESULTS: Application of army field dressing (gauze) did not stop the arterial hemorrhage and led to exsanguination of all the pigs (n = 6) within 10 to 15 minutes of the injury. Chitosan dressing produced initial hemostasis in five of seven pigs. However, the dressings failed to maintain hemostasis for more than 1.6 hours (range, 28-102 minutes), resulting in secondary bleeding and death of the animals. Fibrin sealant dressing produced initial hemostasis in all the pigs (n = 6) and maintained hemostasis in five cases, with one failure at 2.2 hours. These pigs resumed normal activities and lived for the 96-hour experiment duration. Computed tomographic images and histologic sections of the aortas from surviving fibrin sealant dressing-treated animals showed formation of pseudoaneurysms and early granulation tissue at the aortotomy site. The posttreatment blood loss, duration of hemostasis, and survival time were significantly different in the fibrin sealant dressing group than the chitosan dressing and army field dressing groups.
CONCLUSION: Both chitosan dressing and fibrin sealant dressing stopped initial arterial bleeding that could not be controlled by the standard army field dressing. However, although the fibrin sealant dressing secured hemostasis for up to 4 days, the chitosan dressing consistently failed within 2 hours after application. There may be a risk of rebleeding for high-pressure arterial wounds treated with chitosan dressings, particularly in situations where definitive care is delayed substantially.

### PMID 16022636 (2005) — Journal of long-term effects of medical implants
TITLE: Fibrin sealant tissue adhesive--review and update.
DOI: 10.1615/jlongtermeffmedimplants.v15.i3.20 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: The field of surgical tissue adhesives is rapidly developing, with multiple products now available. Fibrin sealant, the first widely available tissue adhesive, continues to be used in traditional as well as in new and creative ways. The product is now fully mature as a hemostatic agent in cardiac, liver, and spleen surgery. It is also useful as a sealant in a variety of clinical applications, including procedures such as colonic anastomosis, as well as in seroma prevention following soft tissue dissection. Newer uses such as reduced suture vascular and intestinal anastomosis, fistula closure, surgery in patients with hemophilia, and laparoscopic/endoscopic procedures are being studied in both laboratory and clinical settings. The most recent additions to the capabilities of fibrin sealant include the use of this tissue adhesive as a slow-release drug delivery system and as a substrate for cellular growth and tissue engineering. This article will review the basis of fibrin sealant effectiveness and will also cover the recent developments in the rapidly evolving employment of this material.

### PMID 15876541 (2005) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Fibrin sealant treatment of splenic injuries during oesophagectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2005.02.045 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The incidence of 'accidental' splenectomy during oesophagectomy varies from 4 to 42% and leads to an increase in sepsis, anastomotic leakage and mortality. Therefore, preservation of the spleen should be the aim of treatment whenever splenic injury occurs. We describe the use of fibrin glue delivered as a thin film by a spray applicator for rapid and definitive haemostasis of grades 1 and 2 splenic injuries in patients undergoing oesophagectomy.

### PMID 16293923 (2005) — Internal medicine (Tokyo, Japan)
TITLE: Anaphylaxis to aprotinin in fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.44.1088 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 50-year-old man with chronic otitis media was admitted to our hospital for investigation of lung cancer. He had received repeated instillations of fibrin sealant (Bolheal) in myringoplasty 7 times over 12 months. During the lower lobectomy, soon after fibrin sealant was applied to seal bronchopleural fistulas, systolic blood pressure decreased to 60 mmHg. Treatment with epinephrine and dopamine was required until his condition improved 2 days later. The specific IgE antibody was detected for the solution for fibrinogen and factor XIII containing bovine aprotinin. Cross-reactivity between purified aprotinin and the solution was noted by competitive ELISA inhibition tests.

### PMID 17344973 (2005) — Arquivos brasileiros de oftalmologia
TITLE: [A study of the applicability of biological adhesives to the insertion of an external ocular muscle in rabbits--II. Experiment II--Measurement of the distances from the nasal and temporal muscles to the limbus and of the extent of tissue adhesion].
DOI: 10.1590/s0004-27492005000600007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Measure the extent of mioscleral adhesion on the fortieth postoperative day.
METHODS: Fifteen New Zealand rabbits were divided into three groups of five rabbits. They were operated on to server the insertion of the rectus muscle in the eye and then to reinsert it. Group SP, polyglactin (Vicryl) was used as control. In group AF, fibrin adhesive (Beriplast-P) was used, and in group AC, cyanoacrylate adhesive (Histoacryl). Before severing muscle insertion, the distances between the muscle attachments of the limbus to the medial and lateral borders were measured. After forty-five days, the operation was again performed and the measurements were taken once more.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference between the studied adhesives in terms of tissue adhesion and of the distances from the muscle to the limbus before and after surgery.
CONCLUSION: The found tissue adhesion was probably due to the scarring process and was not dependent on the studied materials.

### PMID 16202059 (2005) — Transfusion medicine (Oxford, England)
TITLE: Bacteriological study of autologous cryoprecipitate-derived fibrin glue as the operative sealant.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-3148.2005.00604.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue (FG) is frequently used to seal and cover the anastomoses in many operations such as cardiovascular surgery or orthopaedic surgery. However, in case of gastrointestinal surgery, anastomoses are potentially contaminated, and FG may promote bacterial growth, increasing the risk of leakage. The purpose of this study was to examine the effect of cryoprecipitate-derived FG (CryoFG) on bacterial growth. Bacterial growth on the CryoFG and on the commercial FG (Beriplast P) was evaluated and compared with that on control medium. In addition, the complement activities were evaluated by heat inactivation or addition of guinea-pig complement to the experimental settings. The CryoFG inhibited the growth of Escherichia coli, whereas the commercial FG had no effect. Heat inactivation of the CryoFG inhibited the bactericidal effect of CryoFG. Addition of guinea-pig complement to the heat-inactivated CryoFG could almost restore the bactericidal activity, suggesting the important role of complement. This study showed that the CryoFG preserved the complement activity, which inhibited the in vitro growth of E. coli. Therefore, we concluded that the application of the CryoFG for gastrointestinal surgical anastomoses not only would be safe but also has the advantage of reducing bacterial infection.

### PMID 16108751 (2005) — Journal of laparoendoscopic &amp; advanced surgical techniques. Part A
TITLE: Tissue adhesives for repairing inguinal hernia: a preliminary study.
DOI: 10.1089/lap.2005.15.424 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: AIM: To investigate the efficacy of tissue adhesives for closing the orifice of the inguinal hernia sac (IHS) as an alternative method for treating inguinal hernia.
METHODS: Five-week-old male Lewis rats (n=4) were used, because Lewis rats have a large patent IHS. The rats were divided into 9 groups (n=6 in each) according to the type of tissue adhesive used: G1, fibrin glue (Beriplast); G1b, Beriplast plus blood; G2, microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene); G2b, Avitene plus blood; G3, fibrinogen-based sealant (TachoComb); G3b, TachoComb plus blood; G4, synthetic absorbable sealant (Advaseal); G5, bilateral single port laparoscopic injection of octylcyanoacrylate (Dermabond); and G6, sham operation (control group). In G1-G4, surgery was performed through a midline lower abdominal incision. In G5, a 5-mm laparoscope was inserted in the epigastrium, a fine catheter was passed through the side port of the laparoscope into the right HIS, and 0.2 mL Dermabond was injected. The left IHS was treated in the same way. All rats were sacrificed 3 months after treatment, and IHS patency was examined macroscopically. All rats in G5 and G6 were mated 50 days after treatment to check fertility.
RESULTS: All rats survived until sacrifice. At sacrifice, all IHS were patent in G6. All IHS were also patent in G1-G4, but all IHS were closed at the internal ring in G5. In G5 there were no adhesions between the orifice of the closed sac and the small bowel in 5/6, and only minor adhesions in 1/6. G5 fertility (5/6: 83%) was the same as for the control group (G6).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that laparoscopic injection of Db into the IHS is simple, safe, reliable, virtually scarless, and may be a reasonable alternative to standard open surgical inguinal hernia repair.

### PMID 16088181 (2005) — European surgical research. Europaische chirurgische Forschung. Recherches chirurgicales europeennes
TITLE: Commercial fibrin sealants are not equivalent in a rabbit liver-resection model which quantitatively evaluates hemostasis and formation of adhesions.
DOI: 10.1159/000085963 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A rabbit partial liver resection model was used to determine the hemostatic effectiveness of a new fibrin sealant. Persistent bleeding, with a mean bleeding time of 372 s and blood loss of 18 ml, from a resected lobe of the liver was achieved after rabbits in the untreated control group had been infused continuously with unfractionated heparin over 20 min with 0.2 IU/ml at a rate of 1 ml/min. Spraying the resected surface with the new fibrin sealant, Quixil, reduced bleeding to &lt; 1 ml and the post-resection bleeding times was 25 s. Bleeding time, blood loss and the volume of sealant used in the rabbit model were inversely correlated with the thrombin concentration in the sealant. In direct comparisons with Tissucol and Beriplast, Quixil was associated with the shortest bleeding times, the lowest volume of sealant used and the lowest score of abdominal adhesions.

### PMID 15953052 (2005) — Wound repair and regeneration : official publication of the Wound Healing Society [and] the European Tissue Repair Society
TITLE: Wound healing and degradation of the fibrin sealant Beriplast P following partial liver resection in rabbits.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1067-1927.2005.130315.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The objective of this study was to investigate the degradation kinetics of the fibrin sealant (FS) Beriplast P in an experimental liver surgery model in rabbits. A partial liver resection was performed in 21 rabbits, and the wound area covered with Beriplast P to ensure hemostasis. Wound healing of the resection sites was evaluated morphologically over 11 weeks. Degradation of the FS was evaluated by measuring the thickness of the remaining fibrin layer. Plasma samples were analyzed for antibodies against fibrinogen, albumin, thrombin, fibrin, and factor XIII. No postoperative hemorrhage was observed, indicating successful hemostasis throughout. The FS was degraded with a half-life of about 25 days postapplication and was completely replaced by granulation tissue within 9 weeks. The FS degradation and tissue development followed the general stages of wound healing: inflammation and resorption, proliferation, organization and production of collagen, maturation, and scarring. An immune reaction was elicited against the main four human proteins of the FS. The antibody titers peaked on day 14, with a gradual decrease thereafter. We conclude that the FS accomplished hemostasis, facilitated healing in accordance with natural processes, and was completely degraded over time. In humans, the reduced immunogenicity of the FS would potentially increase its degradation half-life.

### PMID 15950364 (2005) — European journal of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive biology
TITLE: Effectiveness of antiadhesion barriers in preventing adhesion after myomectomy in patients with uterine leiomyoma.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2005.04.012 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Myomectomy often causes adhesion formation and decreases subsequent fertility. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of several antiadhesion barrier materials in preventing adhesion after myomectomy.
METHODS: We prospectively classified 63 women undergoing myomectomy alone into four groups according to the type of antiadhesion material used: Hyaluronic acid-carboxymethylcellulose film (Seprafilm) (n = 21, Group 1), Dextran 40 (10% Dextran 40 Low Injection) (n = 17, Group 2), factor 13 with fibrinogen (Beriplast) (n = 12, Group 3) and control (n = 13, Group 4). We performed early second-look laparoscopy after the seventh post-operative day in all patients and examined adhesion formation in the abdominal cavity. The incidence of adnexal adhesions was evaluated according to the American Fertility Association (AFS) adhesion score.
RESULTS: The incidence of uterine adhesion was 14.3% in Group 1, 70.6% in Group 2, 75.0% in Group 3 and 76.9% in Group 4. Adhesion formation in Group 1 was significantly less than that in Group 2 (p = 0.0004), Group 3 (p = 0.0005) and Group 4 (p = 0.0003). The incidence of peritoneal adhesion was 14.3% in Group 1, 29.4% in Group 2, 41.6% in Group 3 and 69.2% in Group 4. Adhesion formation in Group 1 was significantly less than that in Group 4 (p = 0.001). AFS scores in Groups 1-4 were 0.38+/-1.02, 4.58 +/- 7.02, 0.83 +/- 1.99 and 8.53 +/- 8.79 (mean +/- S.D.), respectively. Group 1 had the lowest AFS score and the difference between Group 1 and Group 4 was significant (p &lt; 0.0001). The AFS score in Group 3 was also significantly less than that of Group 4 (p = 0.0009).
CONCLUSION: Seprafilm was highly effective and was superior to the other antiadhesion materials tested in preventing uterine adhesions after myomectomy.

### PMID 15808260 (2005) — Ophthalmology
TITLE: Comparison of fibrin glue and sutures for attaching conjunctival autografts after pterygium excision.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2004.08.028 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To compare the efficacy and safety of fibrin glue and suturing for attaching conjunctival autografts among patients undergoing pterygium excision.
DESIGN: Prospective, randomized, interventional case series.
PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-two patients undergoing excision of primary pterygium.
METHODS: A superior conjunctival autograft was harvested and transferred onto bare sclera after pterygium excision. Fibrin glue (Beriplast P) was used to attach the autograft in 11 eyes and nylon 10-0 suture was used to attach the autograft in 11 eyes. The patients were followed up for 2 months.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Graft success, recurrence rate, operating time, patient comfort.
RESULTS: All conjunctival autografts in both groups were successfully attached and were intact after 2 months. The average operating time for the fibrin glue group was significantly shorter (P&lt;0.001). Postoperative symptoms were fewer for the fibrin glue group than the suture group. One patient (9%) from the fibrin group experienced subconjunctival hemorrhage, and 1 patient (9%) from the suture group experienced partial graft dehiscence.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin glue is a safe and effective method for attaching conjunctival autografts. The use of fibrin glue results in shorter operating times and less postoperative discomfort.

### PMID 16400772 (2005) — Chirurgia italiana
TITLE: [Use of fibrin glue (Tissucol) for mesh fixation in laparoscopic transabdominal hernia repair].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The aim of this study was to demonstrate the efficacy and safety and report the results of prosthesis fixation by means of fibrin glue during laparoscopic treatment of inguinal and femoral hernias. From September 2001 to December 2004 we employed fibrin glue (Tissucol, Baxter, Maurepas) as a means of fixation during a transabdominal preperitoneal procedure in 230 patients (225 M, 5 F) with an average age of 45 years (range: 20-75) presenting a total of 320 hernias: 140/230 (60.8%) were monolateral and 90 (39.2%) bilateral; 267/320 hernias (83.6%) were primary and 53 (16.4%) recurrent. We had no perioperative complications. After an average follow-up of 26 months (range: 1-40) the only postoperative complications we encountered were 6 seromas (1.8%) and 1 trocar-site haematoma (0.3%). None of the patients developed scrotal haematomas. None of the patients complained of immediate or subsequent paraesthesia or cruralgia. No recurrences have occurred to date. The mean operative time was 30 minutes for monolateral hernias (range: 15-45) and about 50 minutes for bilateral hernias (range: 30-75). This was true of both primary and recurrent hernias. Patients are usually discharged on day 1 postoperatively. In the absence of pain, working activities are resumed after 5 days and sports can be practiced after 10 days. In our experience, fibrin glue (Tissucol) is the best way of fixing the mesh during a transabdominal preperitoneal procedure. It is better than mechanical devices because, though guaranteeing prosthetic stability, it is completely non-traumatic and presents none of the problems of metal clips.

### PMID 16400765 (2005) — Chirurgia italiana
TITLE: [Prospective study of laparoscopic treatment of incisional hernia by means of the use of composite mesh: indications, complications, mesh fixation materials and results].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The aim of this study was to establish the indications, safety, efficacy, feasibility and reproducibility of laparoscopic techniques in the treatment of abdominal wall defects, even of the larger kind, in order to standardise procedures and confirm the performance of the composite mesh used (Parietex, Sofradim, Trevoux, France). From January 2001 to December 2004, 185 non-selected patients (109 females, 76 males), with a mean age of 56 years (range: 26-77) and a mean BMI of 30 (range: 26-40) were included in the study; 162 patients (87.5%) had incisional hernias and 23 patients (12.5%) primary wall defects. The size of the defects treated ranged from 4 cm to 26 cm (mean: 12.1 cm). All patients underwent laparoscopic repair and all meshes were placed intraperitoneally. Over a mean follow-up period of 29 months (range: 1-48), we observed 11 postoperative complications (6.7%): 7 seromas (4.3%) which were still present after 4 weeks, one of which turned septic after several attempts at percutaneous evacuation and in which the prosthesis had to be removed laparoscopically; 3 (1.8%) experienced persistent neuralgia which disappeared after 2 months' treatment with NSAIDs, and also one case of trocar-induced haematoma. We had 4 recurrences (2.4%), all within 1 to 3 months of surgery; 1 in the size group measuring less than 9 cm and 3 in the larger defect group. Adhesiolysis was performed in 98% of all incisional hernia cases and in 7 cases (4.3%) we had to repair iatrogenic lesions of the small bowel. In 4 patients (2.5%), because of thick adhesions (1 patient) or bowel loop fixation to the previous surgical scar (3 patients), we caused complete bowel perforation repaired by laparoscopic suture. Mean operative time was 65.6 minutes (range: 28-130) and the mean hospital stay was 2.1 days (range: 1-5). We had no conversions and no mortality. We also reviewed the main methods of mesh fixation and believe that the best system at the moment is the EndoAnchor (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, Ohio) device, although in future the best option is likely to be fixation with non-traumatic biological glue (Tissucol, Baxter, Maurepas), which we have already used in a series of 16 patients with optimal results and no recurrences. The results emerging from this clinical trial confirm the safety and efficacy of laparoscopic repair techniques, of this kind of mesh and of the anchoring devices used as well as the reproducibility of this technique for the intraperitoneal repair of primary and incisional abdominal wall defects, including even those of large size.

### PMID 16178794 (2005) — Current drug targets. Immune, endocrine and metabolic disorders
TITLE: Drug targets in colonoscopic polypectomy: biological sealants with special reference to fibrin-glue (tissucol).
DOI: 10.2174/1568008054863736 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: The increasing outpatient use of colonoscopy in the diagnostic study and prophylaxis of colon diseases has allowed early identification of polypoid neoformations, thus indicating their increased incidence during the asymptomatic phase. In this respect, the application of biological sealants immediately before the polypectomy has represented a novel therapeutic strategy in the treatment of these preneoplastic lesions. The injection of biological sealants with needle under the polyp peduncle or sub-mucosa has demonstrated a protective action on the electrocoagulated area, an anti-haemorrhagic effect owing to the strengthened seal of the eschar that is formed, and a facilitated tissue regeneration, respectively. The author report his experience acquired over the past five years with regard to the use of biological sealant in colonoscopic polypectomy and conclude that biological sealants, a human fibrin glue, which utilises components of the human plasma, may allow a more generous removal of neoformations, the absence of post-polypectomy complications and, consequently, the dramatic reduction of time of patient's admission in the hospital. In fact, all patients were discharged after two hours from polypectomy, thus implying a better quality of life for patients, in the absence of post-operative complications and a reduction of non-medical costs.

### PMID 16132188 (2005) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Mesh fixation with human fibrin glue (Tissucol) in open tension-free inguinal hernia repair: a preliminary report.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-005-0020-z | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The Lichtenstein technique for inguinal hernia repair is easy to learn and associated with few complications. However, recent studies have suggested that this technique is inferior to some 'sutureless' repair systems in terms of perceived difficulty, operating time, surgeon satisfaction, etc.
METHODS: We employed a sutureless Lichtenstein technique in 80 consecutive patients with primary unilateral inguinal hernia, to assess patient and trainee surgeon outcomes. Human fibrin glue was used in place of conventional sutures.
RESULTS: The mean operating time was 36 min and all patients were discharged 5-6 h after the operation. On a 100-point visual analogue scale, the surgeons rated the difficulty of the operation as low (mean score, 31), and perceived satisfaction as high (mean score, 84). No complications were observed at 12-month follow-up.
CONCLUSION: This study confirms the efficacy of mesh fixation with human fibrin glue, and supports the viability of a sutureless Lichtenstein procedure.

### PMID 15946469 (2005) — Obesity surgery
TITLE: Drain erosion and gastro-jejunal fistula after one-anastomosis gastric bypass: endoscopic occlusion by fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1381/0960892053923842 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Leakage and fistula are feared complications after gastro-intestinal anastomosis. A 36-year-old female underwent an one-anastomosis gastric bypass. The 24-h routine radiological study before oral intake showed a tiny leak, which was treated by NPO and I.V. fluids. After 5 days, despite output reduction, total parenteral nutrition was commenced. After 8 days, the leak remained with reduced output. It was then occluded endoscopically by fibrin glue. To our surprise, we found the drain that we had left behind the anastomosis, inside the gastric pouch. We began withdrawing the drain and occluded the defect with 4 ml Tissucol. After 48-h of no output, a repeat radiological study showed persistence of the leak. 6 days later, a radiological study demonstrated total closure of the leak.

### PMID 15921738 (2005) — Biomaterials
TITLE: Biochemical characterization of autologous fibrin sealants produced by CryoSeal and Vivostat in comparison to the homologous fibrin sealant product Tissucol/Tisseel.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.04.014 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Different principles for production of "autologous fibrin sealant" have been established, and commercial devices employing these methods are nowadays available and used in clinical routine. Users might anticipate for these autologous fibrin sealants features comparable to commercial homologous fibrin sealants, used in surgical routine for many years. However, only little is known about biochemical properties, formation, cross-linking and stability of fibrin sealant clots produced for autologous use with the aid of commercially available devices. We have investigated protein composition, formation and stability of clots obtained from autologuous fibrin sealants produced with commercially available devices (CryoSeal and Vivostat) and compared these parameters to those of the industrially produced homologous fibrin sealant Tissucol/Tisseel. The CryoSeal product is a mixture of many plasma proteins; the Vivostat product and Tissucol/Tisseel appear as comparatively pure plasma derivatives. The products differ in their protein composition and concentrations, including their concentration in fibrin. Significant fibrin alpha and gamma-chain cross-linking by FXIIIa occurs only in Tissucol/Tisseel clots. In test tubes CryoSeal and Vivostat (tranexamic acid-free formulation) fibrin clots liquefy within 1-2 days, but Vivostat (tranexamic acid containing formulation) clots were stable for 4 days and showed partial liquefaction after 5 days. Tissucol/Tisseel clots, containing the protease inhibitor aprotinin, appeared unchanged over the observation period of 5 days. In an in vitro model mimicking in vivo conditions (diffusion of protease inhibitors and proteolytic digestion) clot liquefaction occurs at day 1 for all autologous fibrin sealants clots, with an observable delay for the tranexamic acid containing Vivostat, and day 5 for Tissucol/Tisseel clots. Characterization of the CryoSeal and Vivostat fibrin sealants and Tissucol/Tisseel and their performance show a clear difference in biochemical properties.

### PMID 15891811 (2005) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Lichtenstein inguinal hernioplasty: sutures versus glue.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-005-0334-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: This was a prospective, randomised study undertaken from January 2001 to July 2003 firstly to assess the possibility of using glues to fix meshes, secondly to verify whether or not this leads to a higher hernia recurrence rate, and thirdly to assess post-operative pain.
METHODS: This study covered a total of 55 patients with bilateral hernias who presented similar characteristics on both sides and on whom fixation of the mesh was undertaken differently, depending on the side. On the right side polypropylene sutures were used (prolene 2/0), while on the left, attachment was done using glue (Tissucol).
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Results were similar in both inguinal regions, although there was less post-operative pain and less inflammatory reaction on the left side. There was no hernia recurrence in the follow-up at the end of 1 year.

### PMID 15860154 (2005) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Treatment of talar chondral lesions by solid chondral graft -- first experience].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The aim of this report is to draw attention to new possibilities of treating chondral lesions of the talus, using a solid chondral graft consisting of autologous chondrocytes grown on a three-dimensional matrix of the tissue glue Tissucol. This method is used in grade II to grade IV chronic lesions and grade IV acute lesions, as classified according to the Berndt and Harty system. Patients' age at implantation should not exceed 40 years. When a lesion is found by arthroscopy on the talar dome, a part of cartilage from a non-weight-bearing surface, most frequently the neck of the talus or the anterior edge of the tibia, is collected. The cartilage is sent to the tissue bank. The preparation of a chondral graft (fragmentation, isolation and cultivation of chondrocytes) takes from 15 to 35 days. After shaping the graft from chondrocytes and Tissucol tissue glue in a special mould, transplantation is carried out. In 2003 we used this method in two patients. They both were male sportsmen, football players, aged 35 and 30 years, respectively. At the time of this report, the former patient was 8 months and the latter 3 months after implantation. The first patient, aged 35, was without complaints at 8 months after implantation. The other patient, a 30-year-old football player, who was still followed up, was without complaints and continued with rehabilitation and full weight-bearing of the extremity. Magnetic resonance imaging performed 3 months post-operatively showed good incorporation of the chondral graft in both patients.

### PMID 15761734 (2005) — Archives of orthopaedic and trauma surgery
TITLE: In vivo biological performance of composites combining micro-macroporous biphasic calcium phosphate granules and fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1007/s00402-004-0748-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Fibrin glues are currently used by surgeons and can facilitate the handling of biomaterials. Combining fibrin glue with calcium phosphate bioceramics gives a mouldable composite that cements the granules into the implantation site. In addition to the mechanical aspect of the composite, it has been suggested that the mixture also promotes wound healing. These human blood derivatives contain natural (aprotinin) or synthetic (tranexamic acid) antifibrinolytic substances. We compared the bioactivity of two composites combining calcium phosphate granules with two different types of fibrin glue, one with aprotinin and the other with tranexamic acid.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The composite was composed of fibrin glue (Tissucol) and 1 to 2 mm granules of biphasic calcium phosphate granules (MBCP) with a volume ratio of 1 for 2. Bone cavities were drilled in 12 New Zealand rabbits and filled with a composite with aprotinin-fibrin glue on the right condyle and one with tranexamic acid-fibrin glue on the left condyle. The rabbits were randomized into two groups: 3 and 6 weeks of delay. Light microscopy, scanning electron microscopy and image analysis were performed.
RESULTS: No adverse reactions were observed in either sample. Bony ingrowth associated with bioceramic resorption by osteoclastic TRAP-positive cells was noted. No significant difference was observed between the two composites. The bony ingrowth and ceramic resorption were qualitatively and quantitatively similar with both composites.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated that the choice of a natural (aprotinin) or synthetic (tranexamic acid) antifibrinolytic agent in the fibrin sealant associated with calcium phosphate granules and used as a bone substitute had no effect on the bioactivity of the composite. It remained efficient in bone reconstruction, no adverse effects were observed, and the bony ingrowth was qualitatively and quantitatively equivalent with the two types of fibrin sealant.

### PMID 15754141 (2005) — Journal of materials science. Materials in medicine
TITLE: MBCP biphasic calcium phosphate granules and tissucol fibrin sealant in rabbit femoral defects: the effect of fibrin on bone ingrowth.
DOI: 10.1007/s10856-005-6443-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: An ageing population implies an increase in bone and dental diseases, which are in turn a source of numerous handicaps. These pathologies are an expensive burden for the European health system. As no specific bioactive materials are efficient enough to cope with this burden, we have to develop an injectable, mouldable, self-hardening bone substitute to support bone tissue reconstruction and augmentation. New, highly bioactive and suitable biomaterials have been developed to replace bone grafts in orthopedic revision and maxillofacial surgery for bone augmentation. These mouldable, self-hardening materials are based on the association of MBCP Biphasic Calcium Phosphate Granules and Tissucol Fibrin Sealant. The in vivo evaluation of ingrowth in relation to the composite was made in an experiment on rabbits. The results indicate that in the presence of fibrin sealant, newly-formed bone developed at a small distance from the surface of the calcium phosphate ceramic. Two different bone apposition processes were identified. Without the fibrin component (MBCP group), bone rested directly on the surface of the granules. This observation is commonly described as osteoconduction in calcium phosphate materials. On the contrary, the presence of the fibrinogen component seemed to modify this standard osteoconduction phenomenon: the newly-formed bone essentially grew at a distance from the surface of the granules, on the fibrillar network, and could be considered as an inductive phenomenon for osteogenic cell differentiation from mesenchymal stem cells.

### PMID 16525952 (2005) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Haemostasis using a ready-to-use collagen sponge coated with activated thrombin and fibrinogen.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Adequate haemostasis is an important part of any surgical procedure, but particularly so in the case of visceral organ surgery where apparently insignificant ooze can ultimately result in significant haemorrhage and coagulopathy. To achieve haemorrhage control, the surgeon may use conventional techniques (eg, suture ligation, diathermy, and swab compression), but failing this has the option of using physical coagulation tools (eg, the argon beam coagulator) and haemostasis adjuncts (eg, fibrin glues and collagen sheets). Advances in manufacturing have led to development of several other haemostatic products including absorbable gelatin sponges, cyanoacrylates, and polymer-based adhesives. One such product consists of a fixed, ready-to-use equine collagen sponge coated with human thrombin and fibrinogen. It may be applied directly to the bleeding surface, without the need for preparation or reconstitution. This chapter reviews the published evidence and compares its use to other classes of haemostasis adjuncts across a range of surgical specialties, namely hepatic, splenic, thoracic, vascular, and minimally invasive surgery. It also aims to highlight the apparent advantages and limitations of the fibrinogen and thrombin-coated collagen sponge compared to other commercially available haemostasis adjuncts, and identify potential applications for the product.

### PMID 15923121 (2005) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: The sealing effect of fibrin glue against alveolar air leakage evaluated up to 48 h; comparison between different methods of application.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2005.02.044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: There is little experimental evidence to show how much positive airway pressure fibrin sealants can actually withstand, and in particular, how this effect changes over time. In the present study, we experimentally evaluated the sealing effect of fibrin glue against alveolar air leakage up to 48 h after application.
METHODS: Beagles were used (n = 48). Under thoracotomy, approximately 5 x 10 mm defects (2 mm depth) were made on the lung surface. Fibrin glue sealants were applied to this defect in three ways. In rubbing and spray method, fibrinogen was rubbed, followed by spraying of both fibrinogen and thrombin solutions. In double layer method, fibrinogen was dripped, followed by thrombin. Collagen fleece, coated with fibrinogen and thrombin (TachoComb) was also tested. The minimum positive airway pressure which produced air leakage was measured for each sealed defect (seal breaking pressure, cmH2O) at 0, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 48 h after application (n = 6 at each time point).
RESULTS: The seal-breaking pressure increased over time in all of the application methods. At 6 h, differences between methods were not significant but three defects in RS reached 70 cmH2O, the maximum pressure tested, compared with none in other two methods. At 12h, the seal-breaking pressure was significantly higher in RS compared with the other two methods (rubbing and spray method vs TachoComb; 66+/-3 vs 47+/-17, P = 0.047, rubbing and spray method vs double layer method; 66+/-3 vs 42+/-18, P = 0.024). Beyond 24 h, sealing pressure reached close to 70 cmH2O in all the methods.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that the sealing effect of fibrin glue is relatively unstable up to 12h after its application. Rubbing and spray method may help the fibrin seal to reach its full strength faster compared with the other two methods.

### PMID 15724475 (2005) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Autologous fibrin sealant preparing system in coronary artery bypass grafting].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Autologous fibrin sealant (AFS) which is not based on the conventional method of co-administering fibrinogen, thrombin and aprotinin was prepared by Vivostat system, and was used in coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). The purpose of this study was to investigate the safety and efficacy of the AFS prepared by the Vivostat system. In 6 of 68 cases of CABG, normal AFS was not prepared due to device failures. AFS was prepared and sprayed in 62 cases. There were the total of 230 anastomosis sprayed AFS and the bleeding could not seen in 225 anastomosis. Surgical hemostatic procedures (4 cases) were or other sealant usage (1 case) was performed 5 bleeding anastomosis sites. The rate of hemostasis at the anastomosis using AFS was 97.8%. This study was conducted in patients undergoing CABG. In this group of patients, a number of commercial available fibrin sealant products are routinely used. The usefulness of Vivostat as medical device to prepare and administer AFS was confirmed in this study.

### PMID 16261893 (2005) — Chinese medical sciences journal = Chung-kuo i hsueh k'o hsueh tsa chih
TITLE: Reconstruction of the sellar floor following transsphenoidal surgery using gelatin foam and fibrin glue.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To introduce a new principle of sellar reconstruction and to evaluate the effectiveness of absorbable gelatin foam and fibrin glue for sellar reconstruction.
METHODS: A total of 176 consecutive patients who underwent surgery for pituitary adenomas, cysts, chordomas, or subdiaphragmatic craniopharyngiomas in the sella turcica between January 2001 and April 2003 at Peking Union Medical College Hospital were enrolled. Different techniques of sellar closure and indications for each specific condition were retrospectively reviewed.
RESULTS: Seventy-seven (43.7%) patients developed a visible cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage during surgery. Intra-operative CSF leakage were repaired simply with gelatin foam and fibrin glue in 62 (35.2%) patients, and with autologous fat graft and sellar floor reconstruction in 15 (8.5%) patients. Postoperative CSF rhinorrhea occurred only in 1 case. There were no visual deterioration, allergic rhinitis, meningitis, pneumocranium, granulomas, or other complications associated with the reconstruction procedure.
CONCLUSION: The procedure of using gelatin foam and fibrin glue and principle of cranial base reconstruction is safe and effective in preventing postoperative complications following transsphenoidal surgery.

### PMID 15936392 (2005) — Surgical neurology
TITLE: Method for measuring sinus and vein pressure during surgery: technical note.
DOI: 10.1016/j.surneu.2004.07.046 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Measurement of dural sinus or drainage vein pressure is useful for determining the appropriate treatment for some patients. We report a novel measurement procedure that reduces bleeding from the needle puncture site as well as further tearing of the wall.
METHODS: The vessel is punctured through the patch by gelatin sponge with fibrin sealant and a siliconized elastic needle is introduced. After obtaining the desired measurements, the needle is withdrawn through the fibrin sealant-bearing patch whose presence facilitates sealing of the puncture site. To further decrease the incidence of complications due to incomplete hemostasis, an additional identically prepared path is placed over the site.
RESULTS: We have used this method in several operations and have encountered no complications. Our method also makes it possible to safely approach the drainers of pial arteriovenous malformations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our method is easy and convenient and prevents the leakage of blood from the puncture site and further tearing of the venous wall.

### PMID 16136287 (2005) — World journal of surgery
TITLE: Randomized trial comparing Quixil surgical sealant with Kaltostat hemostatic dressing to control suture line bleeding after carotid endarterectomy with ePTFE patch reconstruction.
DOI: 10.1007/s00268-005-7863-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Following carotid endarterectomy (CEA), patch angioplasty provides a significant reduction in the risk of perioperative complications. The expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) patch is strong, is resistant to infection, and has low thrombogenicity; but it remains unpopular because of its tendency of prolonged bleeding at the suture line. We aimed to investigate whether the application of Quixil sealant to the suture line could improve the time to achieve hemostasis and reduce local blood loss when compared to a standard topical hemostat Kaltostat. A prospective, randomized trial of 20 patients undergoing CEA was undertaken. Patients were randomized to receive either Quixil sealant (treatment group) or topical Kaltostat (controls) as a hemostatic agent to the patch suture line. Hemostasis was defined as no bleeding at the suture line for 1 minute. Statistical analysis was performed using the Mann-Whitney test. The two groups had a similar age and sex distribution. The mean age was 71 years, and there were seven men and three women in each group. The time to achieve hemostasis was significantly lower in the Quixil group (median 2.5 minutes, range 1-4 minutes) compared to the controls (median 17 minutes, range 7-59 minutes) (p &lt; 0.001). Blood loss after clamp release was also significantly reduced in the Quixil group; median 24.5 ml (range 5.5-105.0 ml) versus 203 ml (range 54.5-817.0 ml) (p &lt; 0.001). This study has demonstrated that Quixil human surgical sealant is an effective sealant of ePTFE patch suture holes and does not compromise the patch repair. It could be used during other vascular procedures involving ePTFE.

### PMID 16177407 (2005) — AJR. American journal of roentgenology
TITLE: Pulmonary radiofrequency ablation complicated by subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum treated with fibrin sealant injection.
DOI: 10.2214/AJR.04.0235 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 16111949 (2005) — Gastrointestinal endoscopy
TITLE: Endoscopic debridement of paraesophageal, mediastinal abscesses: a prospective case series.
DOI: 10.1016/j.gie.2005.03.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Mediastinal abscesses after esophageal perforation or postoperative leakage nearly always require surgical intervention.
METHODS: Patients with paraesophageal abscesses were treated with EUS-guided or endoscopic mediastinal puncture if the abscess was &gt;2 cm and sepsis was present. Abscess cavities were entered with a 9.5-mm endoscope after balloon dilation to allow irrigation and drainage. Debris was removed with a Dormia basket. Concomitant pleural effusions were treated with transthoracic drains. Patients received intravenous antibiotics and enteral/parenteral nutrition.
RESULTS: Twenty patients fulfilled the entry criteria. Simple drainage was sufficient in 4 cases, and puncture was impossible in one case. Of the 15 treated patients (age 39-76 years, 5 women) the etiology of perforation was Boerhaave's syndrome (n = 8), anastomotic leak (n = 3), and iatrogenic perforation (n = 4). Debridement was successful in all cases and required a median of 5 daily sessions (range 3-10). All patients became apyrexial, with a C-reactive protein &lt; 5 mg/L within a median of 4 days (range 2-8 days). Esophageal defects were closed with endoclips (n = 7), fibrin glue (n = 4), metal stents (n = 1), or spontaneously healed (n = 3). One patient died from a massive pulmonary embolism one day after successful debridement (mortality 7%). No other complications were seen. Median follow-up was 12 months (range 3-40 months).
CONCLUSIONS: Nonoperative endoscopic transesophageal debridement of mediastinal abscesses appears safe and effective.

### PMID 15054667 (2004) — Der Ophthalmologe : Zeitschrift der Deutschen Ophthalmologischen Gesellschaft
TITLE: [Fibrin glue for closing conjunctival wounds in ophthalmic surgery].
DOI: 10.1007/s00347-004-1015-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Tissue adhesives offer the attractive prospect of sutureless surgery and provide a mechanism for repairing potentially difficult surgical wounds. We examined the ability of fibrin glue--instead of sutures--to close conjunctival wounds at the end of different ophthalmic surgeries.
METHODS AND PATIENTS: Between 2002 and 2003 the fibrin glue Beriplast was used in our department to close the conjunctival wound in 100 eye muscle surgeries, 10 scleral buckling procedures in retinal detachment, and 20 pars plana vitrectomies.
RESULTS: No patient showed postoperative adverse or allergic reactions, bacterial infections, inflammation, or delayed healing. The healing process of the conjunctiva takes a similar time course as in suture closure, but without disturbing suture ends and knots. In children with extensive Tenon's fascia, adaptation of the conjunctiva is safer using sutures. The necessary time using fibrin glue is reduced to one-fourth of the usual 4-8 min necessary for suturing the conjunctiva. The costs for fibrin glue are the same as for Vicryl 9/0, i.e., approximately 18-20 Euros per patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin glue for closing conjunctival wounds results in good adaptation, is time saving, effective, and not more expensive than a suture with a high-end needle. Especially the thin atrophic conjunctiva in adults will tear using sutures in contrast to the very fast and effective adaptation with fibrin glue. Application of fibrin glue is limited in children with extensive Tenon's fascia: in these patients a suture is superior for good adaptation of the conjunctiva.

### PMID 15787172 (2004) — Klinika oczna
TITLE: [Culture of the corneal epithelium--comparison of the mitotic potential of limbal cells from living and cadaveric donors].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We analyse effectiveness of corneal limbal cells' culture prepared from heart-beating organ donors, that include living donors and from cadaver donors buttons following 3 days storage in 4 degrees C in Likorol.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: For experiment 12 adults (living and heart-beating organ donors) aged 28-63 (mean 46.3) and 12 corneal buttons of cadaver (aged 18-51, mean 34.1) were qualified. Tissue samples (1 mm2) were taken from superior corneal limbus. Sample from living donor obtained during routine operation was sent immediately to laboratory, as well as from heart-beating organ donor. The limbal biopsy of preserved cornea was taken after 3 days storage in 4 degrees C (Likorol). Samples were treated with trypsin/EDTA solution before culture. Collected cells in similar density in 1 ml of medium laid on dishes inserts, covered with fibrin (Tissucol) and cultured in presence of feeder layer of fibroblasts (L929 line). Epithelial cells were cultured for 14 days at 37 degrees C in humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere in supplemented 2:1 mixture of DMEM and Ham's F12. On the 14th day cells were collected. Number of cells per 1 ml of medium was counted by cytometer. Immunostaining for epithelium type (Keratin 3) was performed.
RESULTS: The number of cells obtained from cadaver donors reached 184.2+/-14.9% whereas from living donors revealed 1013.1+/-104.2%, increase in relation to number of delivered cells. We observed only 0.83+/-0.3 colonies per microscopic area in cultures from preserved tissue versus 6.67+/-0.6 colonies in cultures from living donor.
CONCLUSIONS: The preservation in 4 degrees C in Likorol significantly decreases proliferative potential of the corneal limbus.

### PMID 15757301 (2004) — Vestnik khirurgii imeni I. I. Grekova
TITLE: [Means of reducing blood loss and volume of the used transfused media in operative treatment of burn lesions of the liver].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An experience with surgical treatment of 77 patients with focal lesions of the liver is described. The patients were divided into two groups. In the main group (42 patients) the treatment-and-prophylactic method was used including acute isovolemic and hypervolemic hemodilution, preliminary preparation of autoblood, isolation and ligation of the vascular-secretory elements, the application for local hemostasis with Takhokomb of "Tissucol", gelatinous sponge with gentamycin. In the group of comparison the compression of the hepatoduodenal ligament, isolation of the vascular-secretory elements by digitoclasia method, suturing the liver stump with polysorb were used in resection of the liver. The strategy used in the main group allowed to reduce the volume of blood loss, to lessen the number of doses of the transfused donor blood, to diminish the number of postoperative complications by 30.5%. The used complex is effective, simple and is not expensive.

### PMID 17670190 (2004) — Interactive cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Pulmonary middle lobe fixation using TachoComb in patients undergoing right upper lobectomy with complete oblique fissure.
DOI: 10.1016/S1569-9293(03)00232-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Postoperative lobar torsion is a life-threatening complication of pulmonary resection. To prevent this complication, pulmonary lobe fixation has been proposed. We present here a new technique of middle lobe fixation after right upper lobectomy, using TachoComb, a collagen fleece coated with fibrin glue. This technique may facilitate tight fixation of the middle lobe to the lower lobe of the right lung in patients undergoing right upper lobectomy with complete oblique fissure.

### PMID 15497611 (2004) — Polimery w medycynie
TITLE: Use of mesh fibrous dressing covered with fibrin glue (TachoComb) in hemostasis after vascular anastomoses in the groin.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Controlled Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We present in this paper application of haemostatic device TachoComb onto bleeding after vascular anastomosis of dacron vascular prosthesis (branch of aortobifemoral or bypass aortofemoral) with common femoral artery in the groin. Hemorrhagic complications have influence onto clinical status of operated patients. Haemostatic TachoComb dressing was applied at 30 cases and results were compared to control group consist of 25 cases, in which gas compresses were applied. Mean loss blood in group I with the usage of TachoComb was statistical characteristic (p &lt; 0.003) smallest than in group II. Also mean time of hemostasis was shortest than in group II (p &lt; 0.01). We proved that use of TachoComb limits bleeding from suture line connecting artery with vascular prosthesis.

### PMID 15280748 (2004) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Comparison of poly-N-acetyl glucosamine with commercially available topical hemostats for achieving hemostasis in coagulopathic models of splenic hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000136747.35311.60 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The hemostatic quality of the poly-N-acetyl glucosamine (p-GlcNAc) patch was compared with a fibrin sealant, fibrin bandage, and cellulose patch.
METHODS: A 2 x 2-cm capsular strip to a depth of 3 mm of the swine spleen was used as a source of bleeding. Splenic lacerations were created in hemophilia B dogs and treated with p-GlcNAc and Surgicel. Wounds were created in rabbits and treated with p-GlcNAc at 37degreesC and after keeping body core temperature at 29degreesC.
RESULTS: Poly-N-acetyl glucosamine was able to achieve hemostasis with greater efficacy than either of the fibrin-based bandages. In the hemophilia B dog study, p-GlcNAc significantly outperformed Surgicel, with p-GlcNAc achieving hemostasis in 75% of the treated wounds compared with 17% for the cellulose patch. The hypothermia study demonstrated that p-GlcNAc is equally effective at 29degreesC and at 37degreesC.
CONCLUSION: Poly-N-acetyl glucosamine was effective at controlling bleeding in animals with experimentally induced or genetic coagulopathic disorders.

### PMID 15280747 (2004) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Application of the poly-N-acetyl glucosamine-derived rapid deployment hemostat trauma dressing in severe/lethal Swine hemorrhage trauma models.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ta.0000136746.97192.b2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The Rapid Deployment Hemostat (RDH) Bandage was developed for the rapid control of bleeding caused by trauma.
METHODS: An extremity wound involving skin, muscle, bone, and femoral arterial injury and a 1-cm vertical incision in the abdominal aorta in swine were studied to compare the RDH Bandage, a fibrin sealant dressing and gauze to restore hemostasis. The total blood loss was determined and the survival of animals was measured.
RESULTS: In the extremity injury model, the RDH Bandage reduced blood loss by 63% compared with the gauze control. In the aorta arterial incision model, the RDH Bandage required a significantly lower compression time to control bleeding compared with gauze and TachoComb. The RDH Bandage was able to stop bleeding from this injury in 100% of the tests.
CONCLUSION: The RDH Bandage was superior to a commercially available fibrin bandage in controlling hemorrhage, decreasing blood loss, and increasing survival.

### PMID 15541982 (2004) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: The effect of autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat) on morbidity after pulmonary lobectomy: a prospective randomised, blinded study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2004.08.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Postoperative air leakage is the most frequent complication after pulmonary surgery. The development of modern surgical techniques has been influenced strongly by the need to manage air leakage effectively during pulmonary resection. This study evaluated the effect of using an autologous fibrin sealant (Vivostat) during lobectomy on morbidity following surgery.
METHODS: This was a prospective, blinded, randomised clinical study. Patients undergoing lobectomy were enrolled into two groups (Vivostat or non-treatment control, 20 per group). Air leakage was measured over a 1-h period (using a mechanical suction pump) on the day of operation, and both air leakage and bleeding/exudation (drainage volume) were recorded every morning postoperatively until the chest tubes were removed. Personnel recording these parameters were blinded to the intervention received.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, mean bleeding/exudate volumes were significantly reduced in the Vivostat group (day 1,370 vs. 525 ml; total, 424 vs. 782 ml; both P&lt;0.001), and drains were inserted for a shorter time (medians, 1 vs. 2 days, P=0.07). Significantly fewer patients had air leakage at any time in the Vivostat group (40 vs. 80%, P=0.02), and air leakage volumes were significantly lower compared with the control group (median differences: day of surgery: 0.6l/min, P=0.01; total 0.8l/min, P=0.03). Postoperative hospitalisation time was shorter in the Vivostat group than in the control group but the difference was not significant (0.5 days, P=0.12).
CONCLUSIONS: Vivostat fibrin sealant significantly reduces post-surgical air leakage and drainage volumes following lobectomy in pulmonary surgery and is suitable for routine use in this procedure.

### PMID 14665952 (2004) — The Journal of urology
TITLE: Central renal stab wounds: treatment with augmented fibrin sealant in a porcine model.
DOI: 10.1097/01.ju.0000101000.08371.79 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We determined whether fibrin sealant augmented by an absorbable bolster could salvage kidneys with major, centrally located stab wounds.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A grade 4 renal injury was created in 16 commercial swine via a 1.5 cm sagittal, centrally located, through-and-through right renal laceration. Animals were randomized to 1 of 4 treatment arms, including control groups that received conventional renal capsule suture repair with an absorbable gelatin sponge bolster (3 in group 1) or a microfibrillar collagen sheet (3 in group 2) and experimental groups that received sutureless treatment entailing fibrin sealant instillation into the knife tract augmented by an external gelatin sponge (5 in group 3) or an external microfibrillar collagen sheet (5 in group 4). Arterial occlusion was not performed. Blood loss and time to hemostasis were recorded. Abdominal computerized tomography was performed at 1 week and necropsy was done at 6 weeks.
RESULTS: Renal reconstruction with fibrin sealant resulted in significantly lower blood loss (62 vs 155 ml, p &lt;0.05) and time to hemostasis (3.5 vs 6.5 minutes, p &lt;0.05) than in the conventional suture groups. There was no radiographic or gross evidence of significant postoperative bleeding, urinoma formation or abnormal tissue healing in the recovery period. Gelatin sponge and collagen sheet demonstrated similar hemostatic efficacy.
CONCLUSIONS: In this porcine renal trauma model fibrin sealant augmented by absorbable gelatin sponge or a microfibrillar collagen sheet effectively promoted hemostasis and renal salvage. Because of its safety, ease of use and efficiency, fibrin sealant appears to be an appropriate adjunct for managing challenging renal injuries.

### PMID 14733096 (2004) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [New surgical technique of pulmonary segmentectomy by ultrasonic scalpel and absorbable sealing materials].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We developed new surgical technique of pulmonary segmentectomy by ultrasonic scalpel to sever intersegmental pulmonary tissue and absorbable sealing materials to cover the cut surface of lung. This method is expected to preserve more anatomical lung volume than the segmentectomy with surgical stapler. Two cases of post surgical recurrent lung cancer, 3 cases of pulmonary metastasis and 4 cases of primary lung cancer were applied this technique to preserve function. Among 3 materials examined, best result was obtained with polyglycolic acid felt (PGAF:Neoveil). PGAF is a very soft and thin (0.15 mm depth) new absorbable material that is able to closely adhere to irregular sections of the lung with fibrin glue and effectively seals air leakage. Mean chest drainage period after surgery in 6 cases with PGAF was 3.3 days. Excellent lung expansion was obtained immediately after the surgery and PGAF was disappeared completely on chest CT within 1 year. Although the possible superiority of this method is suggested in the present study, further comparative study is necessary to clarify the advantage of this new technique.

### PMID 15622380 (2004) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Combined endovascular stent grafting and endoscopic injection of fibrin sealant for aortoenteric fistula complicating esophagectomy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2004.08.044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 67-year-old man with previous total gastrectomy and roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy had hematemesis 4 weeks after esophagectomy performed because of carcinoma of the esophagus. Investigation showed an aortojejunal fistula with a thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm. Endovascular stent grafting of the pseudoaneurysm, followed by endoscopic injection of fibrin sealant for the fistula, was performed, and the infection was controlled with broad-spectrum antibiotic agents together with drainage and daily irrigation of the pseudoaneurysm sac. The fistula subsequently healed. The patient remained well 14 months after the procedure; follow-up computed tomograms at 12 months did not show any pseudoaneurysm, and there was no evidence of reopening of the fistula.

### PMID 15160303 (2004) — Journal of infection and chemotherapy : official journal of the Japan Society of Chemotherapy
TITLE: Subcutaneous tissue release of amikacin from a fibrin glue/polyurethane graft.
DOI: 10.1007/s10156-004-0304-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We investigated whether fibrin glue (FG) might be useful as a carrier of amikacin (AMK) for prevention of local graft infection. After AMK (4.0 mg)-treated FG (AMK-FG) polyurethane grafts were implanted subcutaneously in the anterior abdominal region of Sprague-Dawley rats, AMK concentrations in tissues surrounding the implantation sites were compared over time with concentrations at the same sites in rats given an intravenous injection of AMK (4.0 mg). In the injection group, AMK concentrations in serum were detectable only for 4 h, whereas AMK released from AMK-FG grafts remained detectable over 24 h. Until 4 h after implantation, AMK concentrations in tissues near implantation sites were significantly higher in the AMK-FG graft group than in the injection group; peak local concentrations during that time were 210 times higher for the AMK-FG graft group than for the injection group. Areas under the tissue concentration-time curve (AUC) for AMK were 171 microg x h/g and 1.35 microg x h/g in the AMK-FG graft and injection groups, respectively. FG therefore was considered to control release of AMK and to maintain a high AMK concentration in tissues surrounding the implantation site. Thus, AMK-FG polyurethane graft delivery may be useful in preventing local infection by local delivery of AMK.

### PMID 15003102 (2003) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Spontaneous tracheal rupture associated with acquired tracheobronchomalacia.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report here a very rare case of pneumomediastinum due to spontaneous tracheal rupture with tracheobronchomalacia. The patient was a 74-year-old woman who had suffered nocturnal dyspnea due to productive cough for five days prior to admission and had been treated with corticosteroids for five years at another hospital after being diagnosed with bronchial asthma. Computed tomographic scanning of the chest demonstrated over 1 cm longitudinal small air collections behind the upper trachea. Crescent-type tracheobronchomalacia was diagnosed by emergency bronchoscopy. At the right side of the upper trachea, a 1-cm laceration was revealed. Fibrin glue (Bolheal, Kaketsuken, Kumamoto, Japan) was sprayed on the laceration through an instrument of our design for endoscopic gluing and she was intubated for three days. Furthermore, treatment including administration of antibiotics, an antitussive agent, and a mucolytic agent, in addition to pulmonary physical therapy involving pursed lip breathing exercises and smoking cessation improved her complaints one month after admission.

### PMID 15013277 (2003) — Thrombosis research
TITLE: A comparison of fibrin sealants in relation to their in vitro and in vivo properties.
DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2003.10.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Evaluation Study, Journal Article, Validation Study
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Fibrin sealants (FS) have been used for many years to facilitate hemostasis and to provide suture support and sealing/adhesion of tissues after surgery. While their composition is similar, different formulations, application devices, and varying concentrations of key components mean that the properties of clots formed by individual FS can be diverse.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed several studies, including animal models, to compare the properties of 12 different commercially available FS/application device combinations using partial liver and kidney resection models to assess hemostatic efficacy and a novel pig skin model to measure adhesive clot strength. The quality of mixing was determined using colored spray images.
RESULTS: Although the FS tested shared the principle of combining fibrinogen and thrombin, major differences were found between the individual preparations with regard to hemostatic efficacy. Two pre-requisites for successful early hemostasis were identified--adequate clottable protein content and the ability of the application device to effectively mix the fibrinogen and thrombin components of the FS. Factor XIII activity was a key determinant in prevention of re-bleeding and premature clot lysis. Furthermore, FS lacking measurable factor XIII activity formed the weakest, softest clots.
CONCLUSIONS: Clearly, all FS are not the same, and their different characteristics may potentially translate into different clinical outcomes. In our studies, while all FS tested performed well on individual parameters, Beriplast P (Aventis Behring) was the foremost FS in consistently providing early hemostasis, minimizing the risk of re-bleeding, and providing strong adhesive clots capable of resisting mechanical forces.

### PMID 14560228 (2003) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Prospective randomized multicenter trial of fibrin sealant versus thrombin-soaked gelatin sponge for suture- or needle-hole bleeding from polytetrafluoroethylene femoral artery grafts.
DOI: 10.1016/s0741-5214(03)00474-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the safety and efficacy of the fibrin sealant Beriplast P (FSBP; Aventis-Behring) for hemostasis in anastomosis of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) grafts to the femoral artery.
METHODS: In a single-blinded randomized prospective multicenter clinical trial, FSBP was compared with thrombin-soaked gelatin sponge (TSG) for efficacy in stopping bleeding from needle or suture holes in PTFE grafts after anastomosis to the femoral artery. Patients were randomized to FSBP application, which requires a 3-minute period of arterial clamping to enable the fibrin clot to adhere, or to TSG application, which requires pressure from gauze sponges, after completion of the femoral artery anastomosis. The primary end point was hemostasis, defined as absence of any detectable bleeding as judged by the operating surgeon, by 4 minutes after randomization. Secondary end points included actual time from randomization to hemostasis, time to beginning of wound closure, measured blood loss (weighed sponges), incidence of recurrent bleeding, stay in the intensive care unit, and hospital length of stay. Data were analyzed with the intention-to-treat method.
RESULTS: Two hundred thirty-five subjects were enrolled at 26 medical centers; 34 were subsequently excluded from the study. Of the 201 randomized subjects, 100 received FSBP and 99 received TSG. Hemostasis was achieved by 4 minutes in 64 subjects (63%) in the FSBP group and 40 subjects (40%) in the TSG group (P =.0018). In the FSBP group, compared with the TSG group, time to hemostasis was shorter (median, 4.0 minutes; 95% confidence interval [CI], 3.8-4.18 minutes vs median, 5.6 minutes, 95% CI, 4.5-7.0; P =.008), blood loss was less (mean, 4.0 +/- 29.7 g vs mean, 15.6 +/- 28.4 g; P &lt;.0001), and time to wound closure was shorter (median, 15 minutes; 95% CI, 10.47-18.67 minutes vs median, 22.8 minutes; 95% CI, 18.67-30.67; P =.005). There were no differences in recurrent bleeding or any other adverse events. There was no significant difference in ICU stay, but hospital length of stay was shorter in the FSBP group compared with the TSG group, and the difference approached significance (median, 6.5 days; 95% CI, 5.00-7.00 days vs median, 7.0 days; 95% CI,. 6.00-8.00 days; P =.0565).
CONCLUSION: FSBP is more effective than TSG for achieving hemostasis of needle or suture hole bleeding from PTFE femoral artery grafts.

### PMID 12929063 (2003) — Endoscopy
TITLE: Use of fibrin glue (beriplast) in the management of bleeding gastric varices.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2003-41517 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Gastric variceal bleeding is a serious complication of portal hypertension. The optimum endoscopic treatment of bleeding gastric varices is yet to be defined. We evaluated the use of Beriplast, which is a solution of fibrinogen and thrombin, in controlling gastric variceal bleeding.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifteen patients presenting with gastric variceal bleeding were entered into an open trial of endoscopic gastric intravariceal injection treatment with Beriplast (fibrin sealant) and followed for up to 1 month after endoscopic treatment.
RESULTS: There was failure to control bleeding in one patient. Four patients had rebleeding after the index bleed. All four were reinjected with Beriplast, and the bleeding was controlled in three. All patients were followed for 30 days, and the 30-day mortality following injection treatment was one. Fourteen patients were discharged from the hospital after the first episode of gastric variceal bleeding. None of the patients had injection-induced complications.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that Beriplast is a safe and simple endoscopic treatment option and is very effective in controlling gastric variceal bleeding.

### PMID 14714633 (2003) — The journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis and Dynamic Psychiatry
TITLE: The contributions of Kenneth Leslie Artiss, M.D.
DOI: 10.1521/jaap.31.4.663.23011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D019215">Biography, Historical Article, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Kenneth Leslie Artiss (1913-2001) was an Army psychiatrist who did significant investigative work in schizophrenia and milieu therapy and whose broad scholarship led to decisively important and enduring contributions to operational psychiatry. After retirement from military service, he developed a bold approach for teaching psychodynamic theory and its applications, and he led seminars for psychiatry residents and other physicians for over four decades. He was among the first to apply psychodynamic ideas to improve oncology practice. His death in 2001 motivated a group of his military students to memorialize his life and contributions and to demonstrate why they merit continuing consideration.

### PMID 14696522 (2003) — Polimery w medycynie
TITLE: Intraoperative hemostasis during kidney transplantation and the use collagen mesh dressing covered by fibrin glue (TachoComb).
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Controlled Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In this paper we present influence of use of haemostatic dressing TachoComb, onto bleeding from surface of transplanted kidney. Kidney transplantation (KTX) seems to be main method of treatment of terminal renal failure. Enlarging number of KTX results in growing frequency of intra and postoperative complications. Hemorrhagic complications can impact clinical status of recipient and graft function. Haemostatic dressing was applied at 29 cases. Control group in which only gas compresses were used consisted of 25 patients. It was proved, that use of dressing from collagen mesh covered by fibrin glue TachoComb, after kidney transplantation diminished parenchymal bleeding and time necessary to get complete hemostasis.

### PMID 12928602 (2003) — European surgical research. Europaische chirurgische Forschung. Recherches chirurgicales europeennes
TITLE: A comparison of the haemostatic effect of Vivostat patient-derived fibrin sealant with oxidised cellulose (Surgicel) in multiple surgical procedures.
DOI: 10.1159/000072229 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: AIM: To evaluate the haemostatic properties of Vivostat patient-derived fibrin sealant in a broad range of surgical procedures.
METHOD: In a prospective, randomised, multicentre, clinical study, typical surgical wounds of 69 patients (cardiothoracic, general, obstetric and gynaecologic, and vascular), requiring intervention to control bleeding, were treated with either Vivostat-derived sealant (n = 35) or Surgicel (n = 34) as required and the time taken to arrest bleeding was assessed.
RESULTS: Compared with Surgicel, the mean time to haemostasis of Vivostat-derived sealant was significantly shorter (1.6 vs. 3.3 min, p &lt; 0.0001) and more patients were successfully treated (i.e. no additional haemostatic measures required; 94 vs. 65%, p = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: Vivostat-derived sealant is a more reliable and rapidly effective surgical haemostat than Surgicel.

### PMID 12671377 (2003) — Annals of plastic surgery
TITLE: Hemostatic effect of Vivostat patient-derived fibrin sealant on split-thickness skin graft donor sites.
DOI: 10.1097/01.SAP.0000041484.22953.6D | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic agents are used frequently to control bleeding of skin graft donor sites. In this study, the hemostatic properties of Vivostat (Vivolution A/S, Birker&#xf8;d, Denmark) patient-derived fibrin sealant were compared with a control group of spray thrombin solution, which is considered an industry standard for topical hemostasis. Treatments were applied simultaneously to two randomly chosen halves of a single split-thickness single donor site in patients in five United States surgical centers. The time to achieve satisfactory hemostasis (&lt; or =10 min) was estimated on each half of the wound as the time at which active bleeding had stopped and the wound was suitable for application of a surgical dressing. The time to hemostasis of wounds treated with Vivostat (Vivolution A/S) patient-derived sealant was significantly shorter in comparison with wounds treated with thrombin solution (medians: Vivostat, 31 seconds; thrombin, 58 seconds; p=0.0012). No abnormalities in wound healing were reported for either treatment site 1 week after the operation. Vivostat (Vivolution A/S) sealant is a more rapidly effective topical hemostatic agent than thrombin on split-thickness skin graft donor sites.

### PMID 14618523 (2003) — European journal of pediatric surgery : official journal of Austrian Association of Pediatric Surgery ... [et al] = Zeitschrift fur Kinderchirurgie
TITLE: Successful management of severe chylothorax with argon plasma fulguration and fibrin glue in a premature infant.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2003-43574 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Post-traumatic neonatal chylothorax is a rare entity. Management includes medical and surgical treatment. We describe here a newborn who developed a severe chylothorax after repair of an oesophageal atresia. The chylothorax was treated successfully by a combination of argon beam coagulation of the mediastinum and fibrin glue application. However, the patient developed complete thrombosis of the left femoral vein with clot extension to the inferior vena cava which resolved after infusion of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA). The use of argon plasma coagulation and mediastinal fibrin glue application for treating postoperative chylothorax appears to be attractive and is easy to perform even in small premature infants and may replace a more extensive surgical procedure. However, the coagulation profile should be monitored and special care should be taken to prevent vascular thrombosis after surgery.

### PMID 14509504 (2003) — World journal of surgery
TITLE: Does fibrin glue reduce lymph leakage (pleural effusion) after extended esophagectomy? Prospective randomized clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s00268-003-6989-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue has been shown to be effective in improving postoperative chylothorax following various thoracic procedures and in reducing lymphorrhea after axillary dissection. It is unknown, however, whether fibrin glue is effective in reducing lymph leakage (pleural effusion) after esophagectomy. A series of 43 consecutive patients with thoracic esophageal cancer who underwent extended esophagectomy were prospectively randomized to two groups: group A (n = 21), in whom 3 ml of fibrin glue was applied to the dissected mediastinum; and group B (n = 22), in whom fibrin glue was not applied. The time of drain removal and the volume of the thoracic drainage were compared. All data were expressed as the mean +/- standard deviation. There were no significant differences in the clinicopathologic characteristics between the two groups. None of the patients developed chylothorax or died during their hospital stay. The daily volume from the thoracic drain (457 +/- 273 ml) was significantly (p &lt; 0.05) larger on postoperative day (POD) 1 in group A than in group B (298 +/- 158 ml) and tended to be larger (p &lt; 0.10) on PODs 4 and 6 in group A than in group B. The cumulative drainage volume was significantly (p &lt; 0.05) larger on PODs 4 to 6 and POD 9, and it tended to be larger (p &lt; 0.10) on PODs 1, 3, 7, 8, 10, and 11 in group A than in group B, suggesting that the cumulative drainage volume in group A was consistently larger than that in group B. The cumulative numbers of patients with a drain remaining in place were not significantly different for the two groups (p = 0.4683). Three patients in group A, however, had prolonged insertion (&gt; 20 days) of the chest tube. There were no significant differences in the incidence of postoperative chest-related complications. No patients in group A developed viral infectious disease during the long-term follow-up. Application of fibrin glue to the dissected mediastinum seems to induce postoperative lymph leakage and thus be responsible for prolonged chest tube insertion in some patients. Hence the use of fibrin glue cannot be recommended for reducing lymph leakage after esophagectomy.

### PMID 12027473 (2002) — European journal of vascular and endovascular surgery : the official journal of the European Society for Vascular Surgery
TITLE: Comparison of the topical haemostatic agents for the prevention of suture hole bleeding. An experimental study.
DOI: 10.1053/ejvs.2002.1619 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: using a rabbit vascular graft model we investigated the use of fibrin glue (FG), gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde (GRF), and collagen (C) as a means of reducing suture hole bleeding.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: twenty-eight rabbits were divided into four groups: fibrin glue, gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde, collagen and control. A 1 cm incision was made in the abdominal aortic wall of each animal. Incisions were covered with a polytetrafluoroethylene patch sutured with a 7-0 polypropylene. Fibrin Glue, GRF, and C were applied to cover suture holes in the groups 1, 2 and 3, respectively, but nothing in controls (group 4). The fibrin clot was allowed to achieve strength for 3 minutes before the clamps were reopened. After reopening the clamps, blood was collected from the surgical site using a syringe for a total of 2 min.
RESULTS: mean blood loss was significantly lower in the FG, GRF, and C compared with control group (p=0.0022, p=0.0022, and p=0.0017, respectively). The volume of blood lost and the time of haemostasis in the group 1 (FG) was less than those in groups 2 and 3 (GRF and C, respectively) (p=0.001). The haemostasis (defined 2 min later) was achieved only in group 1 (FG) (p=0.00067).
CONCLUSIONS: FG, GRF and C all reduce blood loss. Fibrin glue containing factor XIII was the most effective.

### PMID 12429174 (2002) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: The importance of factor XIII as a component of fibrin sealants.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2002.6495 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The need for factor XIII (FXIII) in fibrin sealant is subject to discussions. Some commercially available fibrin sealants (FS) contain high levels of FXIII (up to 70-80 U/mL) while others contain low levels or none. The objective of the present studies was to investigate the need for FXIII in FS.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Beriplast P, a commercial FS containing 40-80 U/mL FXIII, was compared with FS with different concentrations of FXIII or FXIII depleted FS. In Study 1, Beriplast P or FS with 4 U/mL FXIII was allowed to cross-link for 0.25, 1, and 2 min and the resulting fibrin gamma- and beta-chains as well as gamma-gamma-chain dimers were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and densitometry. In Study 2, a series of six FS was prepared from fibrinogen containing 0 (FS-FXIII), 17.5, 35, 70, 140, and 280 U/mL FXIII. The intrasealant strength was determined using a biomechanical test (twin-bottle test). In Study 3, 18 rabbits underwent bilateral partial kidney resection (acute model); right (n = 18) and left (n = 18) kidneys were treated with Beriplast P or FS with 4 U/mL FXIII (FS + 4U FXIII). In Study 4, rabbits were randomly assigned to receive FXIII depleted FS (FS-FXIII) (n = 15); FS + 3 U/mL FXIII (n = 10); FS + 10 U/mL FXIII (n = 10); or Beriplast P (n = 15), after partial rabbit kidney resection (chronic model). The primary endpoint for Studies 3 and 4 was hemostasis.
RESULTS: In Study 1, Beriplast P produced significantly more fibrin gamma-chain cross-linking in the observed period than FS with 4 U/mL FXIII. In Study 2, fibrin clot strength increased as a function of FXIII concentration with a maximum of 70 U/mL. In Study 3, significantly more animals achieved hemostasis in the Beriplast P treated group than in the FS + 4U FXIII group (P = 0.03 at 15 s; P &lt; 0.001 at 1 and 2 min). In Study 4, FS containing FXIII (all concentrations) achieved more efficient hemostasis and reduced the need for respray compared with FS-FXIII. Beriplast P was associated with a lower incidence of postoperative adhesions compared with the other treatment groups. At autopsy, the majority of clots formed from FXIII containing FS exhibited mild to moderate clot lysis, whereas the majority of clots in the FS-FXIII group showed severe lysis.
CONCLUSIONS: FXIII, when added to fibrinogen concentrate in FS, improved fibrin cross-linking and clot strength. FXIII containing FS achieved more effective hemostasis than FXIII depleted FS. FXIII is an essential component of commercial FS and should be present in FS at an optimal concentration of about 40-80 U/mL.

### PMID 12196788 (2002) — Gastrointestinal endoscopy
TITLE: An open pilot study of the effects of a human fibrin glue for endoscopic treatment of patients with acute bleeding from gastric varices.
DOI: 10.1016/s0016-5107(02)70054-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Optimal treatment for gastric variceal bleeding remains to be determined. The use of conventional sclerosing agents is associated with high rates of recurrent bleeding. Other agents, such as cyanoacrylate, have significant complication rates and can damage endoscopic equipment. The risk of prior-associated disease has caused concern regarding the use of bovine thrombin.
METHODS: Beriplast-P (human thrombin) forms a fibrin clot at the needle tip immediately upon injection through a double lumen needle. In 10 patients with gastric variceal bleeding, a median dose of 6 mL of Beriplast-P was injected into gastric varices.
OBSERVATIONS: Immediate hemostasis was achieved in 7 of 10 patients (70%) with a single injection. At a median follow-up of 8 months, there was no recorded episode of recurrent bleeding from gastric varices.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Beriplast-P is useful in the treatment of gastric variceal bleeding. Refinements in the design of the injection needle may improve the efficacy of this novel therapy.

### PMID 12142185 (2002) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Significant merits of a fibrin sealant in the presence of coagulopathy following paediatric cardiac surgery: randomised controlled trial.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(02)00271-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The efficacy of a fibrin sealant in paediatric cardiac surgery has been demonstrated. However, its effectiveness in the presence of significant untreated coagulopathy has not been addressed. This study was designed to investigate the role of the topical application of a fibrin sealant, Beriplast P (BP), in the presence of coagulopathy following paediatric cardiac surgery.
METHODS: After confirming the presence of significant post-bypass coagulopathy, patients undergoing repair of congenital heart defects using cardiopulmonary bypass were randomised to the use of BP (group BP) or no intervention (group C). BP was applied over suture lines and microvascular bleeding sites. Criteria for transfusion of blood and blood products were standardised for both groups. Outcome variables were: (1) post-operative bleeding; (2) transfusion of blood and blood products; (3) theatre time to achieve haemostasis; (4) ventilation time, intensive therapy unit (ITU) and hospital stay.
RESULTS: Fifty-two patients (n=26 in each group), aged 3 days to 17.4 years were recruited. There were no hospital deaths and no significant differences in demographic or intraoperative variables that might have affected the chosen endpoints. After protamine, all patients in both groups had significant coagulopathy (P&lt; or = 0.05 versus baseline). There were fewer patients receiving transfusions of fresh frozen plasma (FPP) in the intervention group, when compared to the control group (P&lt; or = 0.05). Patients receiving BP spent less time in theatre to achieve haemostasis (P&lt; or = 0.05), had a lesser amount of bleeding intraoperatively (P&lt; or = 0.01), at 4h (P&lt; or = 0.05) and at 24h (P&lt; or = 0.05), required a lower amount of transfusions of red cells (P&lt; or = 0.01), FPP (P&lt; or = 0.05) and platelets (P&lt; or = 0.05). There were no differences in ventilation time, length of stay in ITU or in hospital.
CONCLUSIONS: Even in the presence of significant coagulopathy, intraoperative use of fibrin sealant in paediatric cardiac surgery reduces the amount of bleeding and need for transfusions of blood and blood products. The theatre time necessary to achieve haemostasis is also significantly reduced. These findings have a potential to improve clinical outcomes and enhance cost benefits.

### PMID 11960146 (2002) — Neurology India
TITLE: Microneural anastomosis with fibrin glue: an experimental study.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: An experimental study was designed to compare the histological analysis of nerve anastomosis with 10-0 microsurgical sutures and fibrin adhesive. Wistar albino rats' sciatic nerves were transected and repaired either with fibrin adhesive-Beriplast P (M/s Centeon-Cadila Health Care) or with 10-0 monofilament microsutures. Histological assessment was performed at 10, 20, 30, 60 and 90 days after surgery. Functional recovery of the sciatic nerves started at two months and was near normal by three months. Separation of the stumps did not occur in any of the glued nerves. Histological evaluation showed no appreciable difference in the outcome of nerve regeneration after microsurgical repair using sutures or fibrin tissue adhesive. However, inflammation and granuloma formation were appreciated at the suture site, which presented a focal hindrance to myelin and axonal regeneration. Fibrin glueing is attractive for clinical purposes, since it is simpler and less time consuming than suturing.

### PMID 12233110 (2002) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Surgical repair of left ventricular free wall rupture using layered fibrin glue sheet and fibrin glue; report of a case].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 57-year-old man with acute myocardial infarction (#13:90%, #6-#8:75%) was admitted to our hospital after the administration of tissue plasminogen activator. Three hours' after emergent percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, he developed left ventricular free wall rupture in the left circumflex artery area. After bleeding was completely controlled by aortic cross clamping, a three-layered of fibrin glue sheet (TachoComb) with fibrin glue was extensively applied to the ruptured site including the infarcted area. He was discharged on the 25th postoperative day and underwent coronary artery bypass grafting to the left anterior descending artery three weeks later. This experience suggests that the layered TachoComb and fibrin glue are effective for left ventricular free wall rupture.

### PMID 12019396 (2002) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Subacute left ventricular rupture complicated by free wall rupture: repair with a TachoComb sheet and Tissucol glue.
DOI: 10.1067/mtc.2002.122359 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Letter, Comment
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 12368560 (2002) — Technology and health care : official journal of the European Society for Engineering and Medicine
TITLE: The Vivostat application system: a comparison with conventional fibrin sealant application systems.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The method of applying fibrin sealants may affect their physical properties and surgical performance. In this study, the characteristics of a novel fibrin-sealant application system (Vivostat were compared with conventional fibrin sealant spray systems. Delivery rates of Vivostat were highly reproducible in both high and low delivery modes (coefficient of variation [CV] &lt; 1.0%) Airflow rates of Vivostat were 578 ml/min (6.6% (6.5% were lower and less variable than conventional systems, which ranged from 5000 to 10000 ml/min depending on the pressure. Spray forces of Vivostat were consequently lower than other systems and the deposited fibrin films formed were of more consistent thickness. Unlike other systems, blockages with Vivostat were rare on intermittent use. The Vivostat system offers the surgeon a controlled, precise and efficient means of fibrin sealant application with potential performance advantages over conventional spray application systems.

### PMID 12074619 (2002) — Journal of hand surgery (Edinburgh, Scotland)
TITLE: The role of human-derived fibrin sealant in the reduction of postoperative flexor tendon adhesion formation in rabbits.
DOI: 10.1054/jhsb.2002.0752 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: This study assessed the role of a novel fibrin sealant (Vivostat in adhesion reduction after flexor tendon surgery. The deep flexor tendons of the 2nd and 4th digits of the left paw of 20 rabbits were exposed and a standard partial injury was performed on each. The rabbits were randomized to either immediate post-injury treatment with Vivostat or no treatment. In each case active movement of the 2nd digit was prevented while the 4th digit was allowed to move normally. The two groups were assessed at 14 days for adhesion formation with a tensiometer. The right paw acted as the unoperated control. Results showed that there was no significant difference in the force needed to remove the tendon from its sheath when comparing the two Vivostat((R))-treated groups to the unoperated controls. There was, however, a highly significant difference in this force between the non-Vivostat-treated groups and the unoperated controls. This suggests a beneficial effect of Vivostat in reducing post surgical tendon adhesion formation.

### PMID 12041975 (2002) — British journal of plastic surgery
TITLE: The co-application of sprayed cultured autologous keratinocytes and autologous fibrin sealant in a porcine wound model.
DOI: 10.1054/bjps.2002.3810 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: We have explored the potential for cultured autologous keratinocytes to form an epidermis when delivered as a spray intermixed with autologous fibrin sealant. Twelve full-thickness wounds in Large White pigs (six wounds in each of two pigs) were isolated from the surrounding skin by 4 cm diameter polytetrafluoroethylene chambers, and grafted with Integra artificial skin (Ethicon). Autologous fibrin sealant was produced 10 days later, using an automated processor unit (Vivostat System, ConvaTec, Bristol Myers Squibb), from 120 ml of autologous citrated blood taken 30 min before keratinocyte application. Nine wounds were sprayed, using a Vivostat System automated applicator unit, with a mixture of the sealant preparation and freshly trypsinised cultured autologous keratinocytes in growth medium, at a density of 1-3 x 10(5) cm(-2). Three control wounds were sprayed with the same mixture without cells. The sealant-cell mixture polymerised and adhered to the wound surface immediately. Histological analysis of biopsies taken following sealant-cell application showed that isolated spherical keratinocytes were distributed throughout the sealant at between 3.1 x 10(4) cm(-2) and 7.6 x 10(4) cm(-2). After 4 days discreet colonies of keratinocytes were observed on the wound bed. At 14 days a multi-layered undulating epidermis was formed, punctuated by sporadic epidermal cysts; the mean area of epithelium was 50.1% (s.d. = 19.7%, n = 9). There was no epithelium in the controls (s.d. = 0, n = 3). The difference was statistically significant (P=0.016). This study suggests that co-sprayed cultured keratinocytes and autologous fibrin sealant may be an effective means of delivering epithelial cells to assist wound healing.

### PMID 11962666 (2002) — Biomaterials
TITLE: Reproducibility of the mechanical properties of Vivostat system patient-derived fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/s0142-9612(01)00359-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Conventional "autologous" fibrin sealants, prepared from fibrinogen concentrates are inconsistent in their physical properties; this reflects the wide variation in the fibrinogen level of the single donor plasma from which they are made. In contrast, the Vivostat System produces a fibrin sealant of reproducible concentration and mechanical properties that are independent of the source plasma fibrinogen concentration. Fibrin solution concentrations prepared with the Vivostat System were 22.0 +/- 0.7 mg/ml (95% CI) with a coefficient of variation [CV] of 10.6% from samples of source plasma with a range of fibrinogen concentration between I and 6 mg/ml (mean 3.28 +/- 0.38 mg/ml (95% CI), 37% CV). Values of viscoelastic and tensile parameters after 11 min and 1 h, respectively, were: storage modulus (G') 891.5 +/- 72.9 Pa, 16.2% CV; loss modulus (G") 98.7 +/- 9.8 Pa, 23.2% CV; loss tangent (tan delta) 0.1093 +/- 0.0054, 9.8% CV; tensile strength 33.2 +/- 2.6kPa, 24.7% CV; extension at break 103 +/- 13%, 22.6% CV; Young's modulus 12.0 +/- 1.0 kPa, 16.6% CV. In the clinical setting this reproducibility provides the surgeon with a patient-derived fibrin sealant that can be expected to perform similarly from patient to patient.

### PMID 12127814 (2002) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Comparative study of the efficacy of the common topical hemostatic agents with fibrin sealant in a rabbit aortic anastomosis model.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2002.6426 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to compare the hemostatic efficacy of the common surgical hemostatic agents with fibrin sealant (FS) and to assess their functional strength to secure hemostasis in lieu of placing additional sutures.
METHODS: End-to-end anastomosis of transected abdominal aorta was performed in moderately anticoagulated rabbits using 4 or 6 interrupted sutures. The suture line was covered either with gauze alone ("untreated") or with gauze plus Gelfoam, Avitene, Surgicel, FloSeal, or FS, following which blood flow was restored. Blood loss was absorbed by gauze and measured. The surviving rabbits were recovered and the repaired vessel was examined histologically 4 weeks after operation. The investigators were blinded to the treatment groups. Aortic anastomoses using 8 or 12 sutures (untreated) were also performed.
RESULTS: Untreated 4-suture anastomosis of aorta resulted in a profuse hemorrhage with an average 108.0 +/- 19.2 (mean +/- SD) ml blood loss and 100% mortality (n = 4). FS application sealed the anastomoses, prevented blood loss (P &lt; 0.01 vs untreated) and exsanguination of the rabbits (n = 4). Other hemostatic agents reduced the bleeding to varying degrees compared to the untreated animals (Gelfoam 66.4 +/- 17.6, Avitene 80.6 +/- 34, Surgicel 66.7 +/- 16.7, FloSeal 44.2 +/- 8.5 ml blood loss, n = 4/group), but the changes were not statistically significant. One to three rabbits in each group survived the operation. Six-suture aortic anastomoses, untreated, resulted in 67.7 +/- 21.8 ml blood loss and 100% survival (n = 6). Application of FS produced immediate and sustained hemostasis in all the animals (P &lt; 0.01 vs untreated). Other hemostatic agents also reduced the bleeding (Gelfoam 42.5 +/- 10, Avitene 50.9 +/- 12.4, Surgicel 32.1 +/- 14, FloSeal 33.9 +/- 5.4 ml blood loss, n = 6/group), but the changes were not statistically significant. The 8- and 12-suture aorta repairs resulted in a moderate blood loss (43.9 +/- 19 and 21.3 +/- 14.9 ml, respectively), followed by a stable hemostasis that precluded the need to use any hemostatic agent. The aortic cross-clamping time of the 12-suture and time to hemostasis for both the 8- and the 12-suture techniques were significantly longer than those of the 4-suture plus FS application (P &lt; 0.01, P &lt; 0.01 and P &lt; 0.05, respectively).
CONCLUSION: In a moderate coagulopathy, FS was proven to be the most efficacious hemostatic agent, producing immediate and sustained hemostasis at the arterial anastomotic site. This high efficacy is in part attributed to the strong tissue adhesive property of this agent. FS application may potentially ease the anastomosis and shorten the duration of timely critical vascular procedures.

### PMID 12045638 (2002) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Comparative study of the hemostatic efficacy of a new human fibrin sealant: is an antifibrinolytic agent necessary?
DOI: 10.1097/00005373-200206000-00014 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Sustained hemostasis by fibrin sealant (FS) is critically important when it is used in trauma surgery. To purportedly delay fibrin degradation and prevent premature hemostatic failure, some FS products added an antifibrinolytic agent (e.g., bovine aprotinin). The purpose of this study was to compare the overall hemostatic efficacy of a new inhibitor-free FS obtained from the American Red Cross (ARC-FS) to a clinically available aprotinin-containing FS preparation (Tisseel). The need for addition of an antifibrinolytic agent was assessed under normal and high-fibrinolytic conditions.
METHODS: The abdominal aortas of anesthetized rabbits were transected and anastomosed, end-to end, using only four interrupted sutures. The suture line was covered with approximately 2 mL of either type of FS and blood flow was restored. Blood loss was absorbed by gauze and measured. All rabbits were recovered and underwent histologic examination 4 weeks after operation. The efficacy of FS was also tested under a high-fibrinolytic state by treating the rabbits with human recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (0.15 mg/kg, 3-hour infusion). The investigators were blinded to the treatment groups.
RESULTS: The majority (11 of 12) of deaths occurred because of bleeding at the suture line within 7 days of surgery. Sustained hemostasis by FS (&gt;1 week) was required for normal tissue healing and long-term survival of animals. Application of ARC-FS to the suture line produced immediate hemostasis in 43% of animals (three of seven), with mean blood loss of 4.8 +/- 1.8 mL, and 86% long-term survival. Tisseel application produced immediate hemostasis in 13% of animals (one of eight), with mean blood loss of 26.9 +/- 7.0 mL (p &lt; 0.05 vs. ARC-FS) and survival rate of 37% (three of eight). Under high-fibrinolytic conditions, ARC-FS produced immediate and complete hemostasis in seven of eight animals (88%), whereas the Tisseel demonstrated complete hemostasis in one of seven (p &lt; 0.01). The ARC-FS rabbits had a blood loss of 1.9 +/- 1.9 mL and survival rate of 75% (six of eight), whereas the Tisseel animals had a mean blood loss of 30 +/- 6.0 mL and survival rate of 43% (three of seven) (p &lt; 0.01). No detrimental effect on healing was noted with either product.
CONCLUSION: ARC-FS provides effective and secure hemostasis against high-pressure arterial bleeding under both normal and high-fibrinolytic conditions. Addition of an antifibrinolytic agent such as aprotinin is not required to sustain the hemostatic function of this fibrin sealant.

### PMID 12381219 (2002) — Drugs
TITLE: Pharmacological strategies to decrease transfusion requirements in patients undergoing surgery.
DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200262150-00003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Surgical procedures are inevitably associated with bleeding. The amount of blood loss may vary widely between different surgical procedures and depends on surgical as well as non-surgical factors. Whereas adequate surgical haemostasis may suffice in most patients, pro-haemostatic pharmacological agents may be of additional benefit in patients with (diffuse) surgical bleeding or in patients with a specific underlying haemostatic defect. In general, surgical haemostasis and pharmacological therapies can be complementary in controlling blood loss. The use of pharmacological therapies to reduce blood loss and blood transfusions in surgery has historically been restricted to a few drugs. Antifibrinolytic agents (aprotinin, tranexamic acid and aminocaproic acid) have the best evidence supporting their use, especially in cardiac surgery, liver transplantation and some orthopaedic surgical procedures. Meta-analyses of randomised, controlled trials in cardiac patients have suggested a slight benefit of aprotinin, compared with the other antifibrinolytics. Desmopressin is the treatment of choice in patients with mild haemophilia A and von Willebrand disease. It has also been shown to be effective in patients undergoing cardiac surgery who received aspirin up to the time of operation. However, overall evidence does not support a beneficial effect of desmopressin in patients without pre-existing coagulopathy undergoing elective surgical procedures. Topical agents, such as fibrin sealants have been successfully used in a variety of surgical procedures. However, only very few controlled clinical trials have been performed and scientific evidence supporting their use is still limited. Novel drugs, like recombinant factor VIIa (eptacog alfa), are currently under clinical investigation. Recombinant factor VIIa has been introduced for the treatment of haemophilia patients with inhibitors, either in surgical or non-surgical situations. Preliminary data indicate that it may also be effective in surgical patients without pre-existing coagulation abnormalities. More clinical trials are warranted before definitive conclusions can be drawn about the safety and the exact role of this new drug in surgical patients. Only adequately powered and properly designed randomised, clinical trials will allow us to define the most effective and the safest pharmacological therapies for reducing blood loss and transfusion requirements in surgical patients. Future trials should also consider cost-effectiveness because of considerable differences in the costs of the available pro-haemostatic pharmacological agents.

### PMID 11802136 (2002) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Technical details with the use of cryopreserved arterial allografts for aortic infection: influence on early and midterm mortality.
DOI: 10.1067/mva.2002.118818 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: In situ repair with cryopreserved vascular allografts improves the results in the surgical treatment of aortic infection. This study evaluated the technical pitfalls with the use of allografts that influence early and midterm mortality.
METHODS: Between 1990 and 1999, 49 patients, 21 (43%) with a mycotic aneurysm and 28 (57%) with a prosthetic graft infection of the thoracic and abdominal aorta including pelvic and groin vessels, underwent in situ repair with cryopreserved arterial allografts. Seventeen patients (35%) had aortobronchial, aortoesophageal, or aortoenteric fistulas.
RESULTS: Allograft-related technical problems occurred in eight patients (16%) in this series, and they included: intraoperative rupture caused by allograft friability; allograftenteric fistula from ligated allograft side branches rupturing 8, 18, and 48 months after implantation; anastomotic failure caused by inappropriate mechanical stress; anastomotic stricture after partial replacement of infected prosthetic grafts; allograft failure caused by inappropriate wound drainage; and recurrence of infection after inappropriate duration of antifungal treatment. Seven of the eight technical problems (87%) occurred in the first 10 patients (80%) in this series. There was one technical failure in the remaining 39 patients (2.6%; P =.0002) because of various technical adaptations, such as critical selection of allografts, use of allograft strips supporting large anastomoses, sealing with antibiotic-impregnated fibrin glue, and change in technique of allograft side-branch ligature. The 30-day mortality rate was 6% for the whole series; however, it was 2.6% for last 39 patients, with no recurrence of infection or allograft-related late death.
CONCLUSIONS: In situ repair with cryopreserved arterial allografts achieves excellent early and late results in the treatment of aortic infection. However, distinct allograft-related technical problems had to be overcome to improve the outcome of patients with major vascular infections.

### PMID 28561614 (2002) — Minimally invasive therapy &amp; allied technologies : MITAT : official journal of the Society for Minimally Invasive Therapy
TITLE: Early endoscopic management of anastomotic leakage of esophageal atresia.
DOI: 10.1080/13645706.2003.11873733 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anastomotic leaks (AL) of esophageal atresia (EA) close spontaneously with tube drainage and nutritional support, but this conservative management carries some risk factors. The present study describes an alternative endoscopic approach in evaluation and management. The endoscopic procedure, including esophagoscopy, catheterization of leakage point, and application of fibrin glue (FG) has been evaluated. It was applied seven times to four patients. The diagnostic criteria, the technique and the results are discussed. It has been determined that early endoscopic demonstration of AL in EA and application of FG prevent the possible complications of the conservative management, such as mediastinitis and lung collapse with pneumothorax due to ineffective chest drain, and side effects of parenteral nutrition and antibiotics. If a quickly solidified FG in a proper amount &#xab;0,5 ml) is used in an early phase with a correct positioning of the AL by radiological or endoscopic examination, a satisfactory result can be obtained.

### PMID 11295761 (2001) — Lasers in surgery and medicine
TITLE: One hundred consecutive treatments with holmium: YAG laser for pulmonary bullae: especially in conjunction with gelatin-resorcinol formaldehyde-glutaraldehyde glue adhesion.
DOI: 10.1002/lsm.1047 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: We have widely used a Ho:YAG laser to treat bullae thoracoscopically.
STUDY DESIGN/MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bullae with broad necks were treated with a Ho:YAG laser thoracoscopically. Because one patient relapsed after application of fibrin glue in the early period, a DEXON (polyglycolic acid) mesh patch soaked in fibrin glue was used through a 2-cm opening in the subsequent cases. Lastly, gelatin-resorcinol formaldehyde-glutaraldehyde (GRFG) glue was applied through a 5-mm opening instead of a DEXON mesh after coagulation.
RESULTS: In the 38 patients patched with DEXON mesh soaked in fibrin glue and 56 patched with GRFG glue after coagulation, none relapsed.
CONCLUSION: Combined uses of fibrin glue plus DEXON mesh or GRFG glue were effective when bullae were treated with the Ho:YAG laser. However, the wound was smaller and more cosmetic in the GRFG glue group than in the DEXON mesh plus fibrin glue group.

### PMID 11673138 (2001) — The heart surgery forum
TITLE: Evaluation of a novel synthetic sealant for inhibition of cardiac adhesions and clinical experience in cardiac surgery procedures.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Pericardial adhesions subject patients requiring reoperation to potential injuries to the heart, great vessels, and cardiac grafts during the re-sternotomy. These adhesions can severely complicate re-operations by making re-entry hazardous, impeding orientation and visibility, increasing the amount of blood loss, and prolonging the operation time. The efficacy of an in situ-forming polyethylene glycol (PEG) material, CoSeal surgical sealant (CoSeal), for inhibiting cardiac adhesions in an animal model is reported. It is currently estimated that 10-20% of patients undergoing aortic valve replacement and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) will require a second operation later in their lives. Successful clinical experience using CoSeal for sealing suture lines of the aorta and CABGs with the data reported here suggest that CoSeal may have multiple applications in cardiac surgery.
METHODS: In rabbits, a sternotomy and pericardiotomy were performed to expose the heart and the epicardium of the left ventricular surface. The epicardium was abraded for five minutes with dry gauze and cotton to develop punctate bleeding. In treated animals, CoSeal(R) or Tissucol(R) was applied directly to the abraded bleeding epicardium while retracting the pericardium. The pericardium was released, and the material over-sprayed to the cut edges of the pericardium. No material was applied in control animals.
RESULTS: At necropsy, CoSeal(R) was found to significantly reduce the formation of adhesions, the tenacity of the adhesions, and the percent of the abraded site with adhesions as compared to surgical control and Tissucol. Tissucol showed no significant difference from the surgical control in any adhesion parameter. CoSeal treated hearts showed re-establishment of the mesothelial layer and tissue morphology similar to a normal un-operated heart. During the clinical cardiac procedures, CoSeal was easily mixed and applied to the suture lines of the aorta and coronary artery grafts. No bleeding was found at the suture lines.
CONCLUSIONS: In the rabbit cardiac adhesion model, CoSeal significantly reduced the formation of adhesions as compared to surgical control and Tissucol, and demonstrated good biocompatibility. In CoSeal treated patients undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass or vessel repair, sealing was achieved comparable to previous cases using Tissucol fibrin sealant. CoSeal effectively sealed the suture lines of the aorta and coronary artery bypass grafts.

### PMID 11805403 (2001) — European surgical research. Europaische chirurgische Forschung. Recherches chirurgicales europeennes
TITLE: Physical characteristics of Vivostat patient-derived sealant. Implications for clinical use.
DOI: 10.1159/000049737 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study compared the physical characteristics of Vivostat patient-derived sealant with two conventional fibrin sealants, Tissucol and Beriplast. Vivostat sealant exhibited greater elasticity without compromising tensile strength. Vivostat sealant polymerised at low temperatures (4 and 25 degrees C) or at high temperature (70 degrees C) exhibited similar viscoelastic properties as when polymerised at normal physiological temperature (37 degrees C). Vivostat fibrin I solution can be stored at room temperature for up to 8 h without affecting the mechanical properties of the derived sealant. These physical characteristics of Vivostat patient-derived sealant suggest that it may have suitable stability and performance characteristics for use in a wide range of surgical procedures.

### PMID 11775579 (2001) — Obesity surgery
TITLE: Endoscopic fibrin sealing of high-output non-healing gastrocutaneous fistulas after vertical gastroplasty in morbidly obese patients.
DOI: 10.1381/09608920160558759 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin glue was used in a various fields of surgery during the last 15 years, but its use has not been reported in bariatric surgery yet.
METHODS: In 2 out of 215 morbidly obese patients who underwent vertical banded gastroplasty, a non-healing gastrocutaneus fistula (GCF) developed. In both patients sepsis occurred, caused by a leak of the posterior gastric wall, which was managed by means of an unsuccessful reoperation. After that, sepsis recurred, and a non-healing GCF developed. These GCF were managed endoscopically by the use of a fibrin sealant (Beriplast P 2 ml set, Behring) as a tissue adhesive.
RESULTS: One injection was needed for the first case and six for the second in achieving full healing of the fistulas. No evidence of fistula was observed at gastroscopy 3 and 24 months after the end of therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Endoscopic use of human fibrin sealant is simple, safe, effective and in some cases life-saving. This is a therapeutic option in high output GCF in morbidly obese patients.

### PMID 11706539 (2001) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Effect of fibrin on osseointegration of bioactive glass-ceramic materials--experimental study].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE OF THE STUDY: The aim of the experimental study is to find out how fibrin influences the speed of osteiontegration of bioactive glass-ceramic materials BAS-O, BAS-HA, BAS-R (LASAK Prague, Czech Republic) and how it influences the response of live tissue at the implant-bone interface in the interval of 1-8 weeks.
MATERIAL: Dense materials BAS-0 (glass-ceramics), BAS-HA (hydroxyapatite) and BAS-R (beta tricalcium phosphate) in the form of 0.6-1 mm granules were implanted in artificially created defects in tibia of an experimental animal with the addition of 0.1 ml of fibrin adhesive system Beriplast. Control implantation was performed with the addition of physiological solution. Materials BAS-HA and BAS-R were implanted in the same way in the ratio of 7:3, 8:2 and 9:1. Duration of exposure was 1-8 weeks. Radiographs of samples were taken by Mammograph and decalcified sections were coloured by toluidine blue and examined at 60 times and 120 times magnification.
RESULTS: Surgical wounds were healed per primam. Radiographs of materials with the fibrin system showed clearly after one week defects and implants, after the third week part of the materials penetrated above the bone surface, after the fourth week there were evident signs of bone tissue formation between particles of BAS-HA, BAS-R and their mixtures. The most marked bone formation took place in the seventh and eighth weeks. With the use of glass-ceramics without fibrin the particles were after three weeks less clear, after the fourth week BAS-HA and BAS-R penetrated above the surface. A significant bone formation was obvious after the sixth and seventh weeks. There were no signs of resorption or fibrous encapsulating. Microscopic examination proved enveloping of particles of BAS-0 by fibrous tissue which was evident partially also after the eight week. With the use of fibrin the situation was analogical. In BAS-HA and BAS-R the finding in the first week was similar. With fibrin, there was after the third week a mature lamellar bone in the vicinity of granules and the fibrous interlayer disappeared. Neither positive nor negative impact of fibrin on the process of healing was found. With the application of BAS-R and fibrin system the bone tissue was after the third week more significant and trabeculae more bulky. The final result after eight weeks was the same: Ingrowth of the mixtures of the given materials proceeded in the same way.
DISCUSSION: The applied glass-ceramic materials are used in the clinical practice. The speed of osteointegration depends on the quality of the bone bed, and on the tolerance of these materials by live tissue. Osteintegration can be accelerated by the use of growth factors or stem cells cultivated in the tissue culture. Fibrin which creates a network along which osteoblasts can migrate should have a similar quality. It seems that of decisive importance is the thickness of the fibrin layer around the implants. If this layer is thick glass-ceramics is enveloped more probably to fibrous tissue. In a thin layer the process is accelerated within the first three weeks. After a longer exposure the differences are not evident. Samples of BAS-HA and BAS-R, both applied separately and in a mixture, showed a marked bioactivity in the experiment. During eight weeks no signs were found of resorption which is typical of tricalcium phosphate in a longer time interval.
CONCLUSION: In the experiment on an animal the fibrin adhesive system accelerated osteointegration of bioactive materials BAS-HA, BAS-R and their mixtures until the third week after the implantation. Small differences with the use of fibrin were adjusted within six weeks. Materials BAS-HA, BAS-R and their mixtures were completely osteointegrated. Glass-ceramics BAS-0 was partially enveloped by fibrous tissue, even with the use of fibrin adhesive system. During eight weeks no resorption of materials was found. The process of ingrowth can be seen on radiographs. X-ray picture of bone formation in BAS-HA, BAS-R correlates with the histological finding. The fibrin adhesive system facilitates manipulation with fine granules.

### PMID 11518470 (2001) — Breast cancer research and treatment
TITLE: Sealing of postoperative axillary leakage after axillary lymphadenectomy using a fibrin glue coated collagen patch: a prospective randomised study.
DOI: 10.1023/a:1010671209279 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Seroma formation after axillary lymphadenectomy in women with breast cancer remains a problem despite many efforts to reduce surgery-related morbidity. In a prospective, randomised, open, parallel-group, controlled clinical trial we evaluated the effect of a fibrin-glue coated collagen patch (TachoComb H, Nycomed Pharma AS, Denmark) on volume and duration of postoperative axillary drainage, duration of hospital stay, and procedural safety. Sixty patients were included in the study. Patients did not differ with respect to general characteristics, such as age, body mass index, treatment modality, and tumor stage distribution. In 29 patients, a fibrin-glue coated collagen patch was applied from the apex axillae to the thoracic longus nerve and half a patch was applied to the lateral border of the axillary nerve-vessel bundle. Thirty-one patients were randomised to standard closure of the axillary lymphadenectomy area. The mean duration of axillary drainage was 3.8 +/- 1.9 days in the fibrin-glue treatment group and 3.9 +/- 1.8 days in the control group (p = NS). The mean total drainage volume was 338.5 +/- 251.8 ml in the fibrin-glue treatment group and 370.8 +/- 314.6 ml in the standard closure group (p = NS). The mean length of post-operative hospital stay was 9.1 +/- 2.7 days in the fibrin-glue treatment group and 9.3 +/- 3.6 days in the standard closure group (p = NS). Seven patients (25%) and eight patients (25%) were diagnosed with local inflammation in the fibrin-glue treatment group and the standard closure group, respectively (p = NS). Seroma formation after drain removal was found in 11 patients (39%) in the fibrin-glue treatment group and in 13 patients (42%) in the standard closure group (p = NS). In summary, we observed no statistically significant differences with respect to axillary drainage time, drainage volume, length of hospital stay, local inflammation, and seroma formation after drainage removal.

### PMID 11261754 (2001) — Infection
TITLE: Collagen patches impregnated with antimicrobial agents have high local antimicrobial efficacy and achieve effective tissue gluing.
DOI: 10.1007/s15010-001-0073-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Local antimicrobial systems have gained importance, as illustrated by current research on drug delivery systems (DDS). We aimed to develop materials that combine hemostatic and antimicrobial efficacy as well as adhesiveness for use in surgical tissue management.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Materials were evaluated by in vitro studies employing microbiological and technological methods.
RESULTS: Antimicrobial impregnation of a collagen fleece, which is a pre-coated fibrinogen-based adhesive and therefore ready-to-use (TachoComb), is significantly more efficient--both in terms of the antimicrobial efficacy (p &lt; 0.001) as well as the adhesive strength (p = 0.03) -than coating an antibiotic-containing collagen fleece "on-site" with fibrin glue.
CONCLUSION: Due to ease of practical handling and favorable pharmacoeconomics, this DDS is recommended for both open and minimally invasive surgery.

### PMID 11516209 (2001) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Development of an animal model for assessment of the hemostatic efficacy of fibrin sealant in vascular surgery.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2001.6226 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Sustained hemostatic function of fibrin sealant (FS) is crucial when it is used in cardiovascular surgery. The purpose of this study was to develop a model that can determine the long-term hemostatic efficacy of tissue sealants in a vascular surgery.
METHODS: To determine the ability of the model to detect differences in FS performance, various concentrations of FS were prepared and tested. Tensile strength of FS clots was determined in vitro using a tensiometer. Laparotomy was performed on 49 anesthetized rabbits, and a segment of the aorta was occluded, transected, and then sutured in an end-to-end fashion with four or eight interrupted 9-O sutures. The four-suture repair was covered with FS or placebo, and blood flow restored. Spilled blood was absorbed with gauze and weighed to estimate blood loss. Four weeks after surgery the animals were euthanized and the vessels recovered for histology.
RESULTS: Average tensile strength of FS clots at 120, 90, and 60 mg/ml topical fibrinogen complex (TFC) concentration was 0.42 +/- 0.07 N, with no significant difference among them. The lowest TFC concentration, 30 mg/ml, produced weaker clots than either 120 or 90 mg/ml (P &lt; 0.05). All rabbits with four-suture anastomoses that were treated with placebo bled to death after the vessel was unclamped (n = 6). Treatment of suture line with standard FS concentration (120 mg/ml TFC, n = 8) sealed the anastomosis and prevented blood loss. Hemostasis was sustained for 4 weeks, allowing vascular healing. All rabbits with the eight-suture anastomosis survived the operation but lost 42 +/- 9.2 ml blood (n = 5). Hemostatic efficacy of FS was unchanged when TFC was diluted to 90 mg/ml (n = 6) but further dilution to 60 mg/ml with water (n = 8) produced significantly less effective clots, with an average blood loss of 5.5 +/- 7.6 ml (P &lt; 0.05) and two fatal clot failures postoperatively. When FS was diluted to 60 mg/ml TFC with a buffer, it maintained its hemostatic strength (n = 6). Further TFC dilution to 30 mg/ml led to consistent bleeding with an average blood loss of 35.3 +/- 10.3 ml (P &lt; 0.001, n = 6).
CONCLUSIONS: The four-suture anastomosis of rabbit aorta offers a consistent and reliable method for evaluating the short- and long-term hemostatic efficacy of FS products. This model is not only able to determine the functional differences in various concentrations of FS, but it is also sensitive to detect the subtle changes in FS preparation (e.g., medium composition) that is not detected by in vitro testing.

### PMID 14728016 (2001) — American journal of cardiovascular drugs : drugs, devices, and other interventions
TITLE: Transfusion medicine : support of patients undergoing cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.2165/00129784-200101050-00004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: There is still no alternative that is as effective or as well tolerated as blood; nevertheless, the search for ways to conserve, and even eliminate blood transfusion, continues. Based on hemoglobin levels, practice guidelines for the use of perioperative transfusion of red blood cells in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting have been formulated by the National Institutes of Health and the American Society of Anesthesiologists. However, it has been argued that more physiologic indicators of adequacy of oxygen delivery should be used to assess the need for blood transfusion. Methods used for conserving blood during surgery include autologous blood donation, acute normovolemic hemodilution and intra- and postoperative blood recovery and reinfusion. The guidelines for the use of autologous blood transfusion are controversial and it does not appear to be cost effective compared with allogeneic blood transfusion in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Similarly, the cost effectiveness of intra- and postoperative blood recovery and reinfusion need further evaluation. Treatment with recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO) remains unapproved in the US for patients undergoing cardiac or vascular surgery, but it is a valuable adjunct in Jehovah's Witness patients, for whom blood is unacceptable. The characterization of darbepoetin alfa, a novel erythropoiesis stimulating protein with a 3-fold greater plasma elimination half-life compared with rhEPO, is an important advance in this field. Darbepoetin alfa appears to be effective in treating the anemia in patients with renal failure or cancer and trials in patients with surgical anemia are planned. Desmopressin has been used to effectively reduce intraoperative blood loss. Topical agents to prevent blood loss, such as fibrin glue and fibrin gel, and agents that alter platelet function, such as aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) or dipyridamole, need further evaluation in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Aprotinin has been shown to preserve hemostasis and reduce allogeneic blood exposure to a greater extent than the antifibrinolytic agents tranexamic acid and aminocaproic acid. Controlled clinical trials comparing the costs of these agents with clinical outcomes, along with tolerability profiles in patients at risk for substantial perioperative bleeding are needed.

### PMID 11552427 (2001) — Laryngo- rhino- otologie
TITLE: [Comparison of 2 endoscopic surgery techniques for reliable therapy of Zenker diverticulum].
DOI: 10.1055/s-2001-16432 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A mediastinitis or intraoperative bleeding are the most feared complications of the transoral laser assisted diverticulotomy of Zenker's diverticulum. To reduce these complications we developed a new endoscopic surgical technique and compared the results of this new method with the results of patients who we treated earlier.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: At the department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of Luebeck 68 patients suffering from a hypopharyngeal diverticulum have been treated since 1987. In 64 patients we performed an endoscopic diverticulotomy using a CO2-Laser and the Weerda distending diverticuloscope. Four of the Zenker's diverticulua had to be removed by an external approach. From 1987 to 1994 a five millimeter bar between pouch and hypopharynx after diverticulotomy was left and sealed with fibrin glue in the first 38 patients. From 1995 to 1999 the spur of the hypopharyngeal pouch of the other 26 patients was completely separated. Afterwards we sutured the mucosa between the pouch and the hypopharynx to close the opened mediastinal space and sealed the former spur with fibrin glue.
RESULTS: Comparing both endoscopic methods we had to observe concerning our first method one mediastinitis, a rise of body temperature in 29 patients (76%) and we had to perform a revision diverticulotomy in three patients (8%). Our modified technique didn't cause any mediastinitis, a rise of body temperature did only occur in five patients (18%) and no patient had to undergo revision surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: The transoral complete separation of the spur of the hypopharyngeal pouch with suturing the mucosa of the pouch and the hypopharynx causes good functional results and means a further reduction of complications and a further improvement of the endoscopic diverticulotomy. Our new instruments (Fa. K. Storz, Tuttlingen) will be demonstrated.

### PMID 11193531 (2000) — No shinkei geka. Neurological surgery
TITLE: [Production and clinical application of fibrin sealant with high concentrated fibrin (fibrin patch)].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECT: The sealing properties of fibrin sealant with high concentrated fibrin (fibrin patch) were examined.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A commercial fibrin sealant (Bolheal) produced from pooled human plasma was utilized for this study. The fibrin sealant made of fibrinogen and thrombin solutions mixed in a volume ratio 5:1 was applied as the fibrin sealant with high concentrated fibrin (fibrin patch). The burst pressure of the fibrin clots of either 1:1 or 5:1 mixing ratio, which sealed the small holes, was measured by a water-leak preventing model. The tensile strength of the fibrin patch was measured by the breaking pressure of the fibrin clot. The burst pressure of the fibrin patch, which sealed the dural defect with a diameter of 15 mm, was compared with that of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE).
RESULTS: The burst pressure was elevated from 287 +/- 23.1 to 445 +/- 30.5 mmHg by changing the mixing ratio from 1:1 to 5:1. The breaking pressure of the fibrin patch showed 131 +/- 25.4 mmHg and that of the patch mixed at the ratio of 1:1 showed 46.6 +/- 9.9 mmHg. The result of dural repair with the fibrin patch revealed higher sealing effectiveness than that of ePTFE. The burst pressure averaged 70.5 +/- 21.4 mmHg in the fibrin patch samples and 51.4 +/- 13 mmHg in the ePTFE samples.
CONCLUSION: The fibrin patch revealed higher performance as a sealant and has the potential to be a candidate for acceptance as the new dural repair material.

### PMID 10744283 (2000) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Comparison of poly-N-acetyl glucosamine (P-GlcNAc) with absorbable collagen (Actifoam), and fibrin sealant (Bolheal) for achieving hemostasis in a swine model of splenic hemorrhage.
DOI: 10.1097/00005373-200003000-00013 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To compare the hemostatic capabilities of poly-Nacetylglucosamine (p-GlcNAc) with three currently available products: Actifoam, Surgicel, and Bolheal fibrin glue. This study was conducted in a controlled animal model, with monitoring of hematologic parameters over the course of the study. Two series were conducted, one in unheparinized animals comparing Bolheal fibrin sealant, Actifoam (absorbable collagen, AC), and Surgicel (ORC) with p-GlcNAc, and the second in systemically heparinized animals comparing p-GlcNAc with AC.
METHODS: This study was performed in immature female Yorkshire White swine. Splenic lacerations controlled for length and depth of wound were used as sources of bleeding, with one material used per wound to assess hemostatic effectiveness. A total of 97 wounds in 12 animals were created for the study, 74 wounds in unheparinized animals, and 23 wounds in the heparinized animals. In the heparinized animals, hemostatic efficacy was judged by number of applications needed to achieve complete hemostasis. In the unheparinized animals, hemostatic efficacy was judged by length of time required to achieve complete hemostasis (p-GlcNAc vs. fibrin sealant) or the number of applications needed to achieve complete hemostasis (p-GlcNAc vs. AC or ORC).
RESULTS: In systemically heparinized animals, p-GlcNAc demonstrated greater hemostatic efficacy (72.7 %) in one application than did the control material (0%), p &lt; 0.01. In the unheparinized animals, p-GlcNAc took less time to achieve hemostasis (mean, 22.9 seconds) than fibrin sealant (mean, 172.9 seconds), p &lt; 0.01. p-GlcNAc achieved hemostasis with a greater efficacy (79.2%) in one application than did the AC or ORC (16.7%), p &lt; 0.01, whereas there was no difference in the efficacy of the control materials.
CONCLUSION: The results of the previous series in unheparinized animals demonstrated that p-GlcNAc in the form of a membrane is a more effective topical hemostatic agent than Bolheal fibrin glue, AC or ORC. The results in the anticoagulated animals similarly demonstrate that p-GlcNAc is a more effective topical hemostatic agent than the control material AC. These data indicate that p-GlcNAc is a promising hemostatic agent as evaluated in this model.

### PMID 11398589 (2000) — Przeglad lekarski
TITLE: [Post-traumatic bacterial meningitis].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: 10 patients with posttraumatic bacterial meningitis were treated in the Department of Infectious Diseases of the Jagielloniam University--Collegium Medicum during the period of 63 months. Traffic accidents were responsible for 80% of all cases of trauma. The most common place of injury was the base of anterior cranial fossa. Infecting agent was established in 8 cases. Gram-positive aerobic cocci (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Enterococcus faecalis, and Enterococcus spp.) were found in 4 patients, Gram-negative aerobic cocci (Neisseria meningitidis) in 2 patients, and Gram-negative aerobic rods (Acinetobacter baumanii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp, Escherichia coli) in 3 patients. Streptococcus pneumoniae was still highly sensitive to penicillin, ampicillin and cefotaxime. Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus spp. were sensitive to vancomycin and teicoplanin. Neisseria meningitidis was sensitive to penicillin, cefotaxime, amoxicillin/clavulonate. Gram negative aerobic rods were sensitive to third-generation cephalosporins, carbapenems and aminoglycosides. Among 10 patients treated for posttraumatic bacterial meningitis 1 patient died and in 1 preserved vegetative state was diagnosed. In 4 patients severe or moderate disabilities developed, however 4 recovered completely. 6 patients after regression of the CNS infection were qualified to neurosurgical intervention. In 3 patients reconstructive operation of the basis of anterior cranial fossa with tissue glue Beriplast P. was done, the recovery was complete. 3 patients didn't agree to surgical operation, and we don't know what has happened with them. They have not come to the control visit.

### PMID 11156133 (2000) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Fate of fibrin sealant in pericardial space.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(00)02126-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Although fibrin sealant (Beriplast, Aventis Behring, Marburg, Germany) has been widely used as a supplementary measure for hemostasis during cardiac surgery in Europe and is becoming popular in the United States, the pharmocokinetics of fibrin sealant applied in pericardial space has not been elucidated.
METHODS: A small incision was made on the epicardial surface of the left ventricle of a rat, and the incision was sutured. Total 0.2 ml of fibrin sealant containing iodine 125 (125I)-labeled fibrinogen, aprotinin, blood coagulation factor XIII and thrombin was applied to the area around the suture line.
RESULTS: Distributions of 125I-labeled fibrinogen in the heart on postoperative days 1, 3, 7, and 14 were 48.2% +/- 1.8%, 20.7% +/- 2.2%, 0.15% +/- 0.02%, and 0.01% +/- 0.02%, respectively. The radioactivity was negligible in the blood, liver, spleen, and kidney except for the thyroid in which the radioactivity increased to 7.9% +/- 0.7% and 4.3% +/- 0.4%, respectively, on postoperative days 7 and 14. Iodine 125-labeled fibrinogen concentrations of the heart and other organs showed a similar change in the time course of distribution. Dense and thick fibrin network, observed on postoperative day 1, had dissipated and was thinner with collagen formation by postoperative day 7.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant applied to the pericardial cavity regresses rapidly and plays an important role in wound healing.

### PMID 11127565 (2000) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [A case of primary lung cancer complicated with post-operative intractable pulmonary fistula].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The case was a 76-year-old male. After thoracoscopic left upper lobectomy against primary lung cancer with poor risks such as complication of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and pulmonary emphysema, oral steroid treatment, heavy smoker, decreased renal function, the patient was complicated with intractable pulmonary fistula and MRSA pyothorax. Intracavitary administration of albumin preparation and fibrin glue (Beriplast P) was effective against pulmonary fistula though it was not helpful in the pleurodesis which was conducted 7 times. Teicoplanin (Targosid) was effective against MRSA pyothorax and maintained the renal function.

### PMID 11027461 (2000) — The Journal of surgical research
TITLE: Prevention of suture hole bleeding using fibrin sealant: benefits of factor XIII.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2000.5985 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Suture hole bleeding is a frequent complication in vascular surgery. The use of fibrin sealants (FSs) during surgery is reported to reduce blood loss by enhancing hemostasis.
OBJECTIVES: Using a pig vascular graft model we investigated: (1) the use of FSs in vascular surgery and measured blood loss with and without the use of FSs; (2) the effect of factor XIII in FSs on hemostasis and blood loss; and (3) the effect of increasing FS incubation time on hemostasis and blood loss.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: During surgery, a 3-cm incision was made in the carotid artery wall. Incisions were covered with a Gore-Tex (PTFE) patch sutured with Ethicon monofil 5/0 or 3/0. The resulting suture holes were treated according to study protocol. Study 1: Nine pigs received either FS treatment (n = 5) or no treatment (n = 4). Study 2: Twenty pigs underwent bilateral surgery; right (n = 20) and left (n = 20) patches received either FS with factor XIII (FS + FXIII) or FS depleted of factor XIII (FS - FXIII). Study 3: Bilateral surgery was carried out on 24 pigs; PFTE patches secured with Ethicon 3/0 were treated with FS and allowed to polymerize for 120 s (n = 12), 180 s (n = 12), or 240 s (n = 12) or with solid support/thrombin (n = 12).
RESULTS: Study 1: Mean blood loss was significantly lower in the FS-treated group compared with untreated controls (9.2 +/- 10.6 mL vs 178.8 +/- 125.5 mL, mean +/- SD, P = 0.016). Study 2: Significantly less blood was lost in the FS + FXIII group than in the FS - FXIII group (Delta = 9.6 mL, P = 0. 02). Study 3: Blood loss was significantly higher from patches treated with solid support/thrombin compared with those treated with FS (P &lt; 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: FSs containing factor XIII, such as Beriplast P, are effective in reducing suture hole bleeding and improving hemostasis during vascular graft procedures. The presence of factor XIII contributes to the efficacy of FSs and reduces the time to hemostasis. During vascular surgery, blood loss can be reduced significantly by the use of fibrin sealant compared with absorbable gelatin sponges coated with thrombin.

### PMID 10890078 (2000) — Vestnik khirurgii imeni I. I. Grekova
TITLE: [The initial trial of the clinical use of FK-1 glue in surgical interventions].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The article presents results of a comparative clinical trial of the preparation "fibrinous glue" (FK-1) and "Beriplast" in operations on the lungs for hermetization of the wound and the lung as well as in reconstructive plastic gynecological operations. Intraoperative hermetization in operations on the lungs was obtained in 67% of the cases when using "FK-1" and in 64% with "Beriplast". In all the cases the lung was spread during 12 hours after operation. The visual intraoperative assessment of using "FK-1" and control laparoscopy on the 4th-5th days after operation showed its good effect in gynecological procedures. Clinical trials of the new domestic fibrinous glue "FK-1" in surgical and gynecological clinics confirmed its high medical effectiveness.

### PMID 10821905 (2000) — Cardiovascular and interventional radiology
TITLE: Endoluminal embolization of bilateral atherosclerotic common iliac aneurysms with fibrin tissue glue (Beriplast).
DOI: 10.1007/s002700010054 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The standard surgical approach to nonleaking iliac aneurysms found at repair of a leaking abdominal aortic aneurysm is to minimize the operative risk by repairing the abdominal aorta only. This means that the bypassed iliac aneurysms may have to be repaired later. As this population of patients are usually elderly with coexisting medical problems, interventional radiology is being used to embolize these aneurysms, thus avoiding the morbidity and mortality associated with further general anesthesia and surgery. Various materials and stents have been reported to be effective in the treatment of iliac aneurysms. We report the successful use of endoluminal fibrin tissue glue (Beriplast) to treat two large iliac aneurysms in a patient who had had a previous abdominal aortic aneurysm repair. We discuss the technique involved and the reasons why we used tissue glue in this patient.

### PMID 10740652 (2000) — Cancer biotherapy &amp; radiopharmaceuticals
TITLE: Effect of hemostatics used during operations for digestive organ on cancer cells present in the peritoneal cavity.
DOI: 10.1089/cbr.2000.15.47 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We investigated effects of hemostatics used during operations for digestive organ on cancer cells present in the peritoneal cavity using BALB/c mice inoculated with Meth A tumor cells (fibrosarcoma) intraperitoneally (i.p.) and C3H/He mice inoculated with MH134 tumor cell (hepatic cell carcinoma) i.p. Microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene) or fibrinogen preparation (Beriplast P) did not affect survivals of those tumor-bearing mice. Gelatin sponge (Spongel)prolonged survivals of MH134 tumor-bearing mice. Liquid form gelatin used instead of Spongel displayed in vitro antitumor effect on MH134 tumor cells at the concentration of 15 mg/ml. Radioactive sodium chromate-labeled MH134 and Meth A tumor cells were not lysed when they were incubated with 15 mg/ml of liquid form gelatin for 24 hours. On the other hand, the tritium thymidine (3H-TdR) uptake by MH134 or RL male 1 tumor cells was suppressed when they were incubated with 15 mg/ml of liquid form gelatin for 24 hours. Proliferation of Meth A tumor cells were not affected by the treatment. Effect of liquid form gelatin on phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-stimulated spleen cells as a benign counter-part of RL male 1 tumor cells (T cell lymphoma) was examined. Liquid form gelatin (15 mg/ml) did not suppress 3H-TdR uptake by PHA-stimulated spleen cells.

### PMID 10713324 (2000) — Thrombosis research
TITLE: Comparative kinetics of polymerisation of three fibrin sealants and influence on timing of tissue adhesion.
DOI: 10.1016/s0049-3848(99)00234-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The clinical performance of fibrin sealants may be influenced by physical properties such as elasticity, tensile strength, and ability to adhere to human tissue. These properties are related to the internal structure of the fibrin sealant that builds as it polymerises. Analysis of the minimum polymerisation time to achieve a functional fibrin clot is clinically important. Instant tissue-fibrin sealant adhesion is desirable to ensure that the fibrin sealant functions on contact and remains at the site of application without being washed away by blood or displaced by movement of the target tissue (e.g., the heart or lungs). The physical characteristics of fibrin sealants are related to the extent of fibrin cross-linking. Determination of the polymerisation rate allows calculation of the minimum time required to produce a functional clot. The adhesion characteristics to vital human tissue and kinetics of polymerisation between 20 and 300 seconds postapplication of Vivostat system patient-derived sealant have been analysed and compared to those obtained for two conventional fibrin sealants, Tissucol and Beriplast. Mathematical analysis of the experimental data revealed that polymerisation of Vivostat sealant followed first-order kinetics, whereas that of Beriplast and Tissucol followed second-order kinetics. This study demonstrates that Vivostat sealant polymerises faster than these other conventional fibrin sealants.

### PMID 11052282 (2000) — The Journal of cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Collagen patch coated with fibrin glue components. Treatment of suture hole bleedings in vascular reconstruction.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Bleeding from suture holes during vascular reconstruction, particularly when polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) prostheses are used, is still a problem which can lead to intraoperative delay and increased blood loss. The aim of this prospective, randomised, open, controlled multicentre study was to evaluate whether the use of a new local haemostyptic would reduce intraoperative blood loss and the time to haemostasis.
METHODS: Thirty patients received a new haemostyptic (TachoComb H, Nycomed Pharma AG), whereas another 30 patients were treated with compresses. The vascular reconstructions were either anastomoses or patch angioplasties and were performed using PTFE vascular prostheses.
RESULTS: The mean time to haemostasis of suture hole bleeding in the haemostyptic group (326.0 sec) was significantly shorter compared to the control group (514.3 sec) (p=0.006). The median intraoperative blood loss was 24.5 g in the treatment group and 57.3 g in the control group (p=0.045).
CONCLUSIONS: It was shown that collagen patches coated with components of fibrin glue significantly reduce the time to haemostasis as well as blood loss at the operation site in patients undergoing vascular reconstruction with PTFE grafts.

### PMID 10953494 (2000) — Ceska gynekologie
TITLE: Hemostasis using tissue glue in laparoscopy: discussion and review.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To discuss the usefulness of tissue glue and TachoComb (TC), a new hemostyptic agent which combines the advantages of two reliable hemostyptic products-collagen fleece and fibrin glue in local hemostasis during laparoscopy.
SETTING: Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Endoscopic Training Centre, Hospital Kladno.
DESIGN: Review.
METHODS: Analysis of literary and clinical data.
RESULTS: In recent years, collagen fibers, gelatin sponges, oxidized cellulose and fibrin glue has been developed, which are now widely used in postoperative hemostasis in laparoscopy. An efficient use of these preparations shortens the duration of intervention procedures and reduces patient strain.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical studies demonstrate that hemorrhage from damage tissue important pelvic structures can be successfully arrested and controlled using the laparoscope to apply tissue glue. At Czech study, sixteen patients have been effective treated with collagen-fibrin agent during laparoscopic operations. The elimination of hemorrhages after primary laparoscopic electrosurgery and the effectiveness of this drug have been successfully tested.

### PMID 10848861 (2000) — The British journal of surgery
TITLE: Experimental study of a novel fibrin sealant for achieving haemostasis following partial hepatectomy.
DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2168.2000.01427.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Ensuring adequate haemostasis is a major difficulty in the field of liver surgery. This study aimed to evaluate a novel fibrin sealant (Vivostat), designed for autologous preparation, in a porcine model of partial hepatectomy.
METHODS: Thirty-six Large White Landrace pigs underwent partial left hepatectomy by finger fracture under portal vascular inflow occlusion. Animals were randomized to treatment of the resected surface with either fibrin sealant (Vivostat, n = 12) or regenerated oxidized cellulose gauze (Surgicel, n = 12), or were left untreated (controls, n = 12). Blood loss from the resection margin was measured at 2-min intervals for 10 min, and the time to haemostasis was recorded. Following complete haemostasis the animals recovered for 7 days.
RESULTS: Median (range) blood loss in the control group was 94.3 (17.3-467.0) g, and was significantly reduced with Vivostat (13.8 (5.5-150.9) g) and Surgicel (22.8 (5.8-67.3) g). Median (range) time to haemostasis in controls (31 (12-52) min) was also significantly reduced by Vivostat (8 (0-32) min) and Surgicel (10 (0-19) min) (both P &lt; 0.001 versus controls, Kruskal-Wallis test).
CONCLUSION: The novel fibrin sealant, Vivostat, is as effective as Surgicel cellulose gauze in achieving haemostasis after porcine partial hepatic lobectomy.

### PMID 10800814 (2000) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Bleeding from the sternal marrow can be stopped using vivostat patient-derived fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(99)01560-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Median sternotomy is the most important method of access to the heart. Bleeding from the sternal marrow may become significant, especially in elderly patients. Vivostat (ConvaTec, a Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Skillman, NJ) patient-derived fibrin sealant is biocompatible and easily applied to the sternal marrow using the Vivostat Spraypen applicator.
METHODS: Thirty patients undergoing elective cardiac operation were randomized to receive Vivostat fibrin sealant applied to either the right or left side of the sternum immediately after median sternotomy, with the untreated side serving as control.
RESULTS: The average time to hemostasis was 43 seconds after treatment with Vivostat and 180 seconds on the control sides (p&lt;0.001). At the end of the operation, complete hemostasis was observed on 24 of 30 sides treated with Vivostat compared with on 4 of 30 of the control sides (p&lt;0.001). The average volume of sealant used to cover one side of the sternum was 0.9 mL.
CONCLUSIONS: Vivostat patient-derived fibrin sealant is a biocompatible alternative to bone wax, with the results of this study showing that it provides effective control of bleeding after median sternotomy.

### PMID 10767251 (2000) — Chest
TITLE: Prevention of air leakage by spraying vivostat fibrin sealant after lung resection in pigs.
DOI: 10.1378/chest.117.4.1124 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: STUDY OBJECTIVES: To evaluate Vivostat fibrin sealant in the prevention of air leakage after experimental lung resection in pigs.
DESIGN: Randomized study.
SETTING: University laboratory.
METHODS: Six Landrace pigs were operated on in both lungs through a median sternotomy. Five different resection sites were created in each lung.
INTERVENTION: Randomization was performed to either application of Vivostat fibrin sealant (ConvaTec; Skillman NJ) or human albumin 20% (control) at the resection sites. The lung parenchyma was occluded with a soft clamp for either 1, 2, 5, or 10 min in the treatment group and 10 min in the control group. After removal of the clamp, the lung was ventilated with an increasing intrabronchial pressure of 20, 30, and 45 cm H(2)O for 2 min at each step.
RESULTS: At inspiratory pressures of 20 and 30 cm H(2)O air leaks were found in the control group but not in the Vivostat group (p &lt; 0.001). At an inspiratory pressure of 45 cm H(2)O, there were two small air leaks in the Vivostat group at each clamping time (four at 5 min), compared with five small and seven large leaks in the control group. Analysis of the data after 10 min of clamping showed that the Vivostat group was superior to the human albumin group (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: This randomized study shows that Vivostat fibrin sealant is effective in preventing air leakage after small lung resections in pigs, even at high inspiratory pressures.

### PMID 11126918 (2000) — Neurosurgery
TITLE: Transdural cauda equina incarceration after microsurgical lumbar discectomy: case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE AND IMPORTANCE: Complications usually occur when they are least expected. We present an unusual case of nerve entrapment after microsurgical discectomy.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A patient undergoing uneventful first lumbar microsurgical discectomy developed severe back and leg pain and a progressive neurological deficit during the first postoperative night. Herniation of cauda equina nerve roots had occurred through an unnoticed minimal defect in the dura, which had not caused cerebrospinal fluid leakage. The roots were incarcerated and swollen, and they filled the space of the resected nucleus pulposus. It was presumed that elevation of intra-abdominal pressure and consequent increased intraspinal pressure during extubation led to the herniation of arachnoid and cauda equina roots. The nerve roots were then trapped and incarcerated in the manner of bowel loops in an abdominal wall hernia.
INTERVENTION: During reoperation, the nerve roots were repositioned into the dural sac. The patient recovered without further complications and without long-term sequelae.
CONCLUSION: All dural tears that occur during intraspinal surgery, even if they are small and the arachnoid is intact, should be closed with stitches or at a minimum with a patch of muscle or gelatin sponge with fibrin glue. Care should be taken to avoid increased intra-abdominal pressure during extubation. Excessive pain and progressive neurological dysfunction occurring shortly after microsurgical lumbar discectomy or any intraspinal procedure is indicative of possible hemorrhage with subsequent compression of nerve roots. The case reported here provides anecdotal evidence that this situation can also be caused by a herniation of cauda equina nerve roots through a small dural defect that was not evident during the initial operation.

### PMID 11059655 (2000) — Journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Sellar reconstruction with resorbable vicryl patches, gelatin foam, and fibrin glue in transsphenoidal surgery: a 10-year experience with 376 patients.
DOI: 10.3171/jns.2000.93.5.0762 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECT: Closure of the sella turcica after transsphenoidal surgery is mainly accomplished with autologous muscle fascia and fat or muscle; this requires a second surgical incision. The authors review the results of using resorbable vicryl patches, gelatin foam, and fibrin glue for sellar reconstruction.
METHODS: A review was conducted of 376 consecutive patients who underwent surgery for pituitary adenomas, cysts, or subdiaphragmatic craniopharyngiomas in the sella turcica that the senior author (R.W.S.) had performed or directly supervised over the last 10 years. The sellar reconstruction was performed with a commercially available, synthetic absorbable patch composed of polyglactin 910/poly-p-dioxanone, gelatin foam, and fibrin glue. The patch is essentially resorbed in 2 to 3 months and replaced by fibrous collagen tissue. There were 117 small, 112 medium-sized, and 147 large lesions. The overall nonendocrine postoperative morbidity rate was 2.8%, and included visual deterioration, meningitis, secondary epistaxis, nasal septum complication, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. Two patients with macroadenomas needed reoperation for persistent CSF leakage, which comprised 0.5% of the whole series or 0.8% of the 259 patients with medium-sized or large lesions. There was no mortality and no morbidity related to the implanted material, and in particular no delayed empty sella syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: Closure of the sella turcica with a synthetic absorbable vicryl patch, gelatin foam, and fibrin glue after transsphenoidal surgery is safe and very effective in preventing postoperative CSF fistulas. The use of this technique obviates the need for a second surgical incision and shortens the operating time. Because of the progressive resorption of the substitute material, the interpretation of postoperative magnetic resonance studies was not significantly hindered.

### PMID 10906674 (2000) — Journal of biomedical materials research
TITLE: Distribution and serum concentration of sisomicin released from fibrin glue-sealed dacron graft in the rat and human.
DOI: 10.1002/1097-4636(200010)52:1&lt;53::aid-jbm7&gt;3.0.co;2-i | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We investigated whether or not fibrin glue (FG) used as a sealant in vascular prostheses to prevent leakage might be useful as a carrier of antibiotics for the prevention of local graft infection. Sisomicin (SISO) was incorporated into fibrin glue (SISO-FG) and evaluated as to its safety and pharmacokinetics. SISO (1.75 mg) -FG Dacron grafts were implanted subcutaneously in the anterior abdominal region of Sprague-Dawley rats, and then the changes in SISO concentrations in the serum and in the tissue around the implantation sites were compared with those same sites in rats that had had intravenous injection of SISO (1.75 mg). The serum SISO concentrations were significantly lower in the SISO-FG Dacron graft group than they were in the intravenous injection group. However, until 4 h after implantation the SISO concentrations in the tissues around the implantation sites were significantly higher in the SISO-FG Dacron group than they were in the iv injection group, and the peak concentrations during that time were 5.8 times higher for the SISO-FG Dacron group than they were for the intravenous injection group. The ratio of the area under the tissue concentration time curve of SISO (AUC tissue) after implantation of the SISO-FG Dacron graft to that after intravenous injection of SISO was 13.08. Therefore, FG was considered to control the release of SISO into the serum and to maintain a high SISO concentration in the tissue around the implantation site. Clinically, SISO (45 mg) -FG was applied directly to the Dacron grafts implanted in 10 patients who underwent prosthetic vascular reconstruction. No graft infection was observed in any of the patients who received SISO-FG Dacron grafts. The mean serum concentration of SISO was 0.65+/-0.17 microg/mL after 1 h and 0.33+/- 0.21 microg/mL after 3 h. The results of these clinical applications are in close correlation with those of the animal experiment and suggest that FG is useful as a carrier of SISO, allowing its controlled release for the prevention of local infection.

### PMID 10589345 (1999) — Cardiology clinics
TITLE: The use of biological glue in aortic surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/s0733-8651(05)70114-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: The biologic sealants presently available on the market that are used in cardiovascular surgery and particularly during surgery of the aorta are described in this article. Two of these biological sealants, the gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde (GRF) glue and two-component fibrin sealant have been in use for two decades. Their respective properties are described beneficial in modifying the natural history of the disease. Certain pharmacological agents that result in improved aortic function have been identified.

### PMID 10478554 (1999) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [An effective case of a new biological adhesive agent, gelatin-resorcinol formaldehyde-glutaralhyde glue (GRFG-glue) in treating refractory pulmonary fistula following lobectomy for pulmonary aspergilloma].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We report a successful case of thoracoscopic therapy using a new biological adhesive agent, Gelatin-Resorcinol Formaldehyde glue (GRFG glue) for refractory pulmonary fistula. A 69-year-old male underwent right upper lobectomy for lung aspergilloma. Air leakage began 11 days after lobectomy. Closing alveolar fistula was performed 28 days after first operation. Relapsing air leakage began 2 days after second operation. The insertion of fibrin glue through thoracoscope at two times was not effective for refractory pulmonary fistula. But the insertion of GRFG glue was effective to close the fistula completely.

### PMID 10213857 (1999) — European surgical research. Europaische chirurgische Forschung. Recherches chirurgicales europeennes
TITLE: Improved techniques of applying fibrin glue in lung surgery.
DOI: 10.1159/000008637 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To enhance the adhesive property of fibrin glue, two techniques were developed. The first is an improvement of the conventional layer method, and the second is a further improvement of the first technique. Their adhesive properties were tested in canine lungs in two phases. In phase 1 of the experiment, two new techniques were compared with the conventional methods in the retrieved lung. In phase 2 of the experiment, the second technique examined how its adhesive properties changed after treatment comparing them with gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde-glutaraldehyde (GRFG) glue. In phase 1, the first technique showed a 3-fold enhancement of the adhesive properties as compared with the conventional methods, and with the second technique the adhesive properties were further improved by more than 2-fold in the retrieved canine lung. In phase 2, it was revealed that the bursting pressure of both the second new technique and GRFG glue was eventually equal, and enough to close the cut surface of the lung. In the clinical setting, two techniques showed a safe and satisfactory performance in closing the cut surface of the lung. Due to the low toxicity of fibrin glue and absorbable material, these two techniques, especially the second technique, provide better circumstances for the healing of lung injury.

### PMID 10086552 (1999) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde-glutaraldehyde glue for sealing pulmonary air leaks during thoracoscopic operation.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(98)01184-9 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intraoperative pulmonary air leakage is one of the most troublesome complications in video-assisted thoracoscopic surgical procedures. We developed a sealing procedure using gelatin-resorcinol-formaldehyde-glutaraldehyde (GRFG) glue for pulmonary air leaks during such operations.
METHODS: Formaldehyde-glutaraldehyde (FG) jelly is prepared by mixing FG fluid with 2.5% sodium carboxymethyl cellulose to make the FG fluid viscous. We performed an adhesion-strength test to determine the optimum ratio of gelatin-resorcinol mixture to FG jelly and then conducted an air leakage test on swine lung to compare the sealing effect between fibrin and GRFG glues. To study the histotoxicity of the GRFG glue, the sealant was applied to injured rabbit lung, and the rabbits were followed for 1 day to 188 days. For clinical studies, we developed an endosyringe to apply the GRFG glue on the target site during video-assisted thoracoscopic surgical procedures and used this technique in 21 patients with intraoperative air leaks. In addition, the side effects of GRFG glue application were studied in 52 patients in whom glue was used in several ways during lung operations.
RESULTS: The results of the adhesion-strength test favored a 2:1 gelatin-resorcinol to FG ratio. The mean pressure required to produce air leakage was significantly higher with GRFG glue than with fibrin glue (p&lt;0.001). No critical histologic damage was seen in the rabbit lung, and the glue persisted on the lung surface for 188 days after sealing. Clinical application of the glue in 21 patients resulted in complete stoppage of air leakage during operation and long afterward, except in 1 patient with a late-onset lung fistula. The FG jelly helped prevent glue spillage at the target site, regardless of angle. A transient rise in temperature up to 38.60C was observed as a side effect 7 days after operation in 5 (9.6%) of the 52 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: A GRFG glue using FG jelly seals pulmonary air leaks effectively, simply, and safely during video-assisted thoracoscopic surgical procedures.

### PMID 10595866 (1999) — Drugs
TITLE: Fibrin sealant: a review of its use in surgery and endoscopy.
DOI: 10.2165/00003495-199958050-00010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: Fibrin sealant (fibrin adhesive; fibrin glue; Beriplast P1) is a haemostatic and wound support product consisting of the blood coagulation factors fibrinogen, factor XIII and thrombin, the antifibrinolytic agent aprotinin and calcium chloride. Fibrin sealant has been used to good effect in a wide variety of surgical and endoscopic procedures. Suture support was provided in series of patients with oesophageal, gastric, colonic or rectal anastomoses, and fibrin sealant was as effective in haemostasis as microcrystalline collagen powder in hepatic surgery. It did not reduce postoperative peritoneal drainage after elective cholecystectomy, however. A 41% reduction (p&lt;0.02) in incidence of air leakage was achieved when fibrin sealant was added to sutures in patients undergoing pulmonary resection in a randomised single-blind study. A high rate of complete remission of malignant pleural effusion has been reported after intrapleural instillation of fibrin sealant, and successful sealing of CSF leaks after trauma or surgery has also been achieved. Attenuation of prolonged or excessive haemorrhage after dental extraction has been achieved in patients on anticoagulant therapy or with haemorrhagic disorders who received fibrin sealant with packing and suturing. Repeated endoscopic injection of fibrin sealant was superior to single injection sclerotherapy with polidocanol 1% in a randomised study in 805 patients with bleeding peptic ulcers. Other data suggest that endoscopic injection of fibrin sealant is associated with lower recurrence of bleeding and need for emergency surgery than thrombin with adrenaline (epinephrine) or hypertonic saline with adrenaline. Similar haemostatic efficacy to laser photocoagulation or sclerotherapy was reported in a retrospective comparison. A statistically significant reduction relative to suturing in the incidence of wound dehiscence was reported after the use of fibrin sealant in cataract surgery, and benefit of the sealant has also been noted in patients receiving skin grafts and in those undergoing transurethral resection of the prostate gland.
CONCLUSIONS: Although comparative studies would assist in the clarification of the place of the product discussed with respect to other haemostatic or wound support techniques and to other fibrin sealants, the formulation reviewed here has been shown overall to be effective and well tolerated in a variety of haemostatic and wound healing support roles in numerous types of surgery. Fibrin sealant has also been shown to be useful when administered endoscopically, with superiority over sclerotherapy being shown after repeated application in patients with peptic ulceration. Fibrin sealant can therefore be considered useful in a number of surgical and endoscopic settings.

### PMID 10412165 (1999) — Nihon yakurigaku zasshi. Folia pharmacologica Japonica
TITLE: [Adhesive and sealing effects of TO-193 on tissues and organs in various experimental models].
DOI: 10.1254/fpj.113.269 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We studied the adhesive and sealing effects of sheet style fibrin adhesive, TO-193 (TachoComb), on some tissues and organs, comparing them with those of sheet style collagen agent, collagen sponge, Novacol, and Avitene and liquid fibrin adhesive agent, Beriplast P. TO-193 showed more a potent adhesive effect on liver than the sheet style collagen agents and was more potent on bone and skin than the liquid fibrin adhesive agent. Furthermore, TO-193 had a potent sealing effect at the site of incomplete suture immediately after application on a motile organ such as lung and stomach. These effects may be partly attributable to rapid expression of the effect due to the presence of a high concentration of fibrinogen on coverage. Enhancement of fibrin penetrability to the tissues by compression and inhibition of cleavage of coverage by the collagen sponge also may be participating in the effects of TO-193. These results suggest that TO-193 will be a valuable adhesive and sealing agent.

### PMID 10410155 (1999) — Gan to kagaku ryoho. Cancer &amp; chemotherapy
TITLE: [A case of gastric carcinoma treated effectively with 5'-DFUR].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 79-year-old male was admitted to our hospital for further examination on gastric carcinoma (1' type) in the cardia. The histology of biopsied tissue was moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (tub2). The patient refused a gastrectomy and received three cycles of local injection therapy with OK-432 + Beriplast into the tumor. However, the tumor showed no decrease in size. Considering the quality of life, the patient was given out patient treatment with 5'-DFUR (Furtulon, 800 mg/day). Three months later, the patient showed a partial response (PR) on the basis of gastric X-ray and endoscopic findings. No adverse reactions to the drug were seen. The patient has been receiving the same drug since then, and has continued to show PR for 15 months. Biopsied tissues were checked immunohistochemically for expression of thymidine phosphorylase (TdRPase), and changes in tissue TdRPase level were examined by ELISA. The TdRPase level decreased with shrinking of the tumor. These results suggest that the shrinking of tumor following 5'-DFUR therapy is closely related to TdRPase.

### PMID 10347842 (1999) — Nihon yakurigaku zasshi. Folia pharmacologica Japonica
TITLE: [Hemostatic effect of a novel sheeted fibrin adhesive agent, TO-193, on experimental incision models].
DOI: 10.1254/fpj.113.177 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: TO-193 (TachoComb) is a new fibrin adhesive agent that consists of a collagen sheet coated with fibrin glue. We compared the hemostatic effect of TO-193 in several experimental models with Beriplast P as a fibrin adhesive agent, Avitene and Novacol as a microfibrillar collagen hemostat, and a sponge-like collagen sheet as the constitutional parts of TO-193. In the in vitro bleeding model in which blood leaks out through cotton cloth, the pressure of TO-193 when blood leakage was observed was higher than those of Beriplast P, Avitene, Novacol and the collagen sheet, indicating that TO-193 possessed a strong adhesive effect on the bleeding surface. On the kidney resection surface, TO-193 showed a more potent adhesive effect than those of Beriplast P and the collagen sheet, suggesting that TO-193 has a potent hemostatic effect. In the liver resection, TO-193 significantly reduced the bleeding volume compared with that of Novacol in normal rats. Furthermore, the bleeding volume of TO-193 was about half that of Beriplast P and equivalent to that of Novacol even in anticoagulant-treated rats. From these data, it is expected that TO-193 would be a valuable hemostatic agent for clinical use since TO-193 possesses a potent adhesive ability on the bleeding resection surface and would certainly stop bleeding in both patients with normal coagulation and those with a low blood coagulation condition.

### PMID 10689630 (1999) — The Journal of international medical research
TITLE: Use of fibrin adhesive to reduce post-surgical adhesion reformation in rabbits.
DOI: 10.1177/030006059902700504 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Following surgery on fallopian tubes, the development of adhesions is a natural consequence of wound healing and may result in infertility. Using a rabbit model, we evaluated the anti-adhesive properties of a sponge-like equine collagen sheet (TachoComb), which is coated on one side with human fibrinogen and bovine thrombin. TachoComb is applied by affixing the sheet over the area of perforation or bleeding and acts as a haemostatic agent, capable of sealing perforations to prevent leakage. In our rabbit model, adhesions were induced by mechanical and chemical irritants during laparotomy. After a 1-month recovery period, adhesions were lysed using microsurgical techniques and TachoComb, or physiological saline applied. Evaluation of adhesion reformation was determined after a minimum of 10 days. TachoComb significantly reduced the area of adhesion reformation compared with rabbits treated using physiological saline only. Our study demonstrated that TachoComb is effective not only as a haemostatic agent, but is also capable of reducing adhesion reformation.

### PMID 10197706 (1999) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Ablation of persistent air leaks after thoracic procedures with fibrin sealant.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(98)01292-2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Prolonged air leak after thoracic procedures was successfully treated in 11 of 12 patients under local anesthesia using video thoracoscopic instillation of fibrin sealant over the site of the leak. No related complications occurred. This method should be considered an effective option for the treatment of persistent pulmonary air leaks.

### PMID 20492800 (1998) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Dynamika uvolnov&#xe1;n&#xed; neomycinu a linkomycinu in vitro ze sklokeramick&#xfd;ch materi&#xe1;l&#x16f;].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The dynamics of release of neomycin and lincomycin from glass-ceramic materials BAS-0, BAS-HA and BAS-R in the form of cullet was monitored in vitro. After the saturation by individual antibiotics the glass-ceramic samples were overlaid with fibrin glue and after it became solid they were covered with buffered physiological solution. In the samples taken at planned intervals in the course of 2 months eluted ATB quantity was determined by agar well method. Release of ATB from glass-ceramics proceeded in two phases, elution slowed down in most cases after 6 hours. With the use of composites there occurred another slowing down of the speed of elution after another 48 hours. Of the total eluted quantity of ATB 50 % was released in neomycine in 2-4 hours, in lincomycin in 6 hours. After 48 hours only small quantities of ATB were eluted, however, they were still detected at the end of the monitored period. The total released quantity of ATB was influenced by the type of the material used, or to a lesser extent, also by size of its particules and in case of composites by the proportion of their components. Key words: bioactive, porous glass-ceramics, separation of antibiotics from the carrier, Beriplast fibrin glue.

### PMID 20492799 (1998) — Acta chirurgiae orthopaedicae et traumatologiae Cechoslovaca
TITLE: [Bioactive Glass-ceramic ATB Carrier Treatment of Chronic Osteomyelitis.].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Since 1993 the authors have applied in the surgical treatment of chronic osteomyelitis bioactive glass-ceramic material BAS-0 and BAS-HA for filling the osteomyelitic cavity in 20 patients. Prior to the operation the glass-ceramic material was saturated with ATB solution (Bycomycin, Lycomycin). At the same time ATB were administered also in general. The most suitable for the given purpose is the porous form of the mentioned materials. Due to the lack of porous glass-ceramics, dense material was used with 15 % apparent porosity in 11 patients and a combination of fine cullet of BAS-0 and BAS-HA and Beriplast fibrin glue in 4 patients. 19 patients were followed up, the best result was achieved in the application of porous material when all 4 patients healed. The period of follow up in these patients is 4 years and 7 months. After the application of dense material more than 50 % of patients healed. A worse result was recorded in the application of the combination of BAS-0 and BAS-HA with Beriplast. Three reoperations were performed. The authors discuss the pros and cons of the application of the mentioned materials in the treatment of osteomyelitic cavities and their prospect for the future. Key words: chronic osteomyelitis, bioactive glass-ceramics, ATB carrier.

### PMID 12721959 (1998) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: The Clinical Significance of TachoComb, a Fibrin Adhesive in Sheet Form.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Recent improvements in surgical techniques and procedures have been accompanied by attempts to develop adhesives to seal wounds. In the 1940s, Young et al., in animal studies, attempted to connect nervous tissue with a fibrin adhesive, however, as separation and purification of blood constituents were still in a primitive state, their efforts did not progress to clinical usage.

### PMID 9728792 (1998) — The European journal of surgery = Acta chirurgica
TITLE: Massive liver haemorrhage and rupture caused by HELLP-syndrome treated by collagen fleeces coated with fibrin glue.
DOI: 10.1080/110241598750005615 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 9725389 (1998) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Vivostat system autologous fibrin sealant: preliminary study in elective coronary bypass grafting.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(98)00470-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The Vivostat System is a medical device for the preparation of an autologous fibrin sealant from 120 mL of the patient's blood in the operating room. The system is fully automated and microprocessor controlled and is made up of three components: an automated processor unit, an automated applicator unit, and a disposable, single-patient-use unit, which includes a preparation set and a Spraypen applicator. The biochemical process is initiated by batroxobin, which acts upon the fibrinogen in the patient's plasma. The completion of the process depends entirely on endogenous thrombin in producing the sealant.
METHODS: Twenty-four volunteer patients undergoing elective primary coronary artery bypass grafting were randomized to either conventional hemostasis (control group) or the use of Vivostat fibrin sealant as an adjunct to conventional hemostasis. The patients were followed up at 1 month and 1 year.
RESULTS: The preparation process was completed in 30 minutes. No safety issues associated with the use of the sealant were identified. From 120 mL of the patient's blood the yield of fibrin sealant was 4.5 mL (range, 3.9 to 4.8 mL). There was a favorable trend toward lower amounts of chest tube drainage in the Vivostat group. In the Vivostat group, 1 of 11 patients (9%) required a perioperative transfusion and in the control group 3 of 12 patients (25%) required a perioperative transfusion.
CONCLUSIONS: It is possible to prepare autologous fibrin sealant with the Vivostat system in 30 minutes. No exogenous thrombin is required. The sealant has no known adverse effects and may prove to be a useful adjunct to hemostasis in cardiothoracic surgery.

### PMID 9757646 (1998) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Postoperative chylothorax treated with fibrin glue and absorbent mesh: a case report].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 66-year-old man was treated by graft replacement for a thoracic aortic aneurysm. Chylothorax occurred on postoperative day 2. In spite of cessation of oral intake and IVH management, chest tube drainage did not decrease, the patient became malnourished. A chest X-ray and CT scan revealed the massive pleural effusion. Reoperation assisted with a thoracoscopy was carried out for chylothorax on postoperative day 27. Because we were unable to find the thoracic duct and the leakage point, the fibrin glue and absorbent mesh was applied to parietal and mediastinal pleura. Four days after reoperation, the chest tube was removed. This method is useful for this type of a chylothorax and lymphorrhea.

### PMID 9706509 (1998) — International surgery
TITLE: Unusual and infrequent indications for thoracoscopy.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: A number of unusual or uncommon thoracoscopic indications have developed over the years. Pleural tuberculosis and blastomycosis, HIV infections, histoplasmosis, presenting as a nodular process have been diagnosed and treated. Fistulae or tube tract endoscopy may delineate whether a patient has persistence or recurrent carcinoma or tuberculosis through biopsy and culture techniques especially in the post pneumonectomy patient with an air leak. Thoracic diseases, including carcinoma, and mediastinal adenopathy and undiagnosed masses, are amenable to biopsy and possible resection. Foreign bodies may be removed with this technique. The utilization of thoracoscopy for diagnosis and treatment of pericardial processes has been utilized as well for placement of pacemakers. More recently, internal mammary artery to coronary artery bypass grafting has been performed by a few same surgeons with the endoscopic or VATS technique. Neurogenic indications include resection of the posterior sympathetic ganglia and vagectomy. Chylothorax therapy utilizing fibrin glue and liver and kidney biopsy may be performed.

### PMID 9080164 (1997) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Pneumostatic effect of gelatin-resorcinol formaldehyde-glutaraldehyde glue on thermal injury of the lung: an experimental study on rats.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(96)01006-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Recently, the use of gelatin-resorcinol formaldehyde-glutaraldehyde (GRFG) glue has been reported in vascular surgery, especially in surgery for acute aortic dissection. However, reports concerning its use in lung surgery are quite rare. Although the strong adhesion and tensile strength of GRFG glue to fresh incisional wounds of the lung has been demonstrated experimentally, the effectiveness of this adhesive on thermal injury with severe tissue degeneration has not yet been reported.
METHODS: We experimentally evaluated the ability of GRFG glue to seal air leaks through severely degenerated tissues after thermal injury on rat lung, and compared its performance with two reference adhesives: fibrin glue and EDH-adhesive.
RESULTS: The GRFG glue provided complete pneumostasis immediately after the sealing in the presence of positive pressure ventilation, unlike the other two reference adhesives. The fate and biocompatibility of the three glues were examined histologically at 1 h and 3, 8, and 20 days after treatment. The GRFG glue tightly adhered to the degenerated tissue surface and was gradually fragmented and absorbed. The healing process was favorable, indicating good biocompatibility. Local tissue irritability was negligible.
CONCLUSIONS: Even in the presence of tissue degeneration and positive pressure ventilation, the GRFG glue has proved efficacious as a surgical adhesive in lung surgery because of its ability to bind tissue rapidly and tightly.

### PMID 9467366 (1997) — Oral diseases
TITLE: Hemostatic treatment after tooth extraction in a patient with factor V deficiency.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-0825.1997.tb00036.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Factor V deficiency is a very rare hereditary coagulation disorder and tooth extraction in the patient with factor V deficiency has not been reported except in one case.
PATIENTS AND TREATMENT: A 38-year-old woman with factor V deficiency was referred for extraction of the impacted lower third molar. After intravenous administration of frozen fresh plasma (FFP) and recognition of an increase of factor V level from 1-31%, upper and lower third molars were extracted. Eighteen and 48 h after the extraction, factor V was intermittently supplemented by injection of 4 and 2 units of FFP, respectively, and factor V was maintained above 12%. To form fast coagula and to protect the wound, the lower extraction socket was filled with a fibrin glue composed of factor XIII and fibrinogen (Beriplast P) and a plastic splint was applied. The wound was healed and epithelized within 2 weeks after the extraction without any bleeding or infectious consequences.
CONCLUSION: Extraction in the patient with factor V hereditary deficiency is safely performed by both supplementation of factor V and application of local hemostasis.

### PMID 9137433 (1997) — Anticancer research
TITLE: A newly established mouse model of peritoneal dissemination in human pancreatic cancer.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Tissue from a Suit-2 cell line derived from human pancreatic cancer was transplanted into the normal pancreas of Balb/c nu/nu mice using a physiological fibrin adhesive kit (Beriplast P). A minced tissue specimen (2-5 x 10(2) mg) was transplanted into normal pancreas in each nude mouse, and immediately thereafter 10 microliters of type A solution and 10 microliters of type Bsolution of Beriplast P were administered simultaneously at the transplanted area. The tumor tissue promptly adhered to the normal pancreas. Ten days after the implantation of cancer tissue, neovascularization had also already formed around the cancer tissue. The transplantation ratio of cancer tissue in normal pancreas was 100% (20/20). The capsule around the cancer tissue had not clearly formed. Twenty-one days after transplantation, the cancer cells were observed to be disseminated and closely fixed to the mesentery. The dissemination ratio of this cell line in the mouse mesentery was 85% (17/20) at 21 days after transplantation. This nude mouse model might thus be useful for investigating the development of human pancreatic cancer.

### PMID 9084887 (1997) — Biological &amp; pharmaceutical bulletin
TITLE: Microdialysis assessment of fibrin glue containing sodium alginate for local delivery of doxorubicin in tumor-bearing rats.
DOI: 10.1248/bpb.20.278 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study was designed to assess a local drug delivery system of an anticancer agent, doxorubicin (DOX), using fibrin glue (Beriplast P) as a drug carrier. In vitro release of DOX from the fibrin glue was examined by a dialysis method in the presence and absence of sodium alginate. The in vitro mean dissolution times of DOX with solution, fibrin glue, and fibrin glue containing sodium alginate were 3.7 h, 8.7 h, and 81 h, respectively, indicating a sustained release of DOX from fibrin glue, especially in the presence of sodium alginate. Fibrin glue containing 6 mg of DOX and 2.5 mg of sodium alginate was applied on the surface of an AH60C tumor at the back of rats. DOX concentrations in the tumor extracellular fluid were monitored by a microdialysis method. Local application of DOX using fibrin glue containing sodium alginate to the tumor resulted in extremely higher concentrations in the tumor extracellular fluid than those in plasma (AUC ratio &gt; 800), indicating an advantage of the site-specific delivery of DOX using fibrin glue with sodium alginate. The tumor volumes were inversely correlated with tumor extracellular fluid-to-plasma AUC ratios (r = 0.882), suggesting the relevance of tumor size in the drug efflux from tumor to blood. In conclusion, the site-specific delivery of DOX using fibrin glue with sodium alginate to the tumor was demonstrated to be advantageous with regard to the extent and duration of drug concentrations in the tumor extracellular fluid, as assessed by a microdialysis technique.

### PMID 9424908 (1997) — Wiadomosci lekarskie (Warsaw, Poland : 1960)
TITLE: [Evaluation of using fibrin tissue adhesive (Beriplast) and preparations of thrombin and adrenalin in injection hemostasis methods for gastric and duodenal ulcer hemorrhage. Randomized, prospective clinical trial].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: A prospective randomized trial involving 30 patients was performed to assess whether second-look endoscopy could improve the efficacy of injection therapy for bleeding peptic ulcers. The inclusion criteria were the presence of active arterial bleeding or a non-bleeding visible vessel at emergency endoscopy. All the patients received emergency injection of thrombin with adrenaline solution and were subsequently randomized (15 patients in each group). All the patients receive a second elective endoscopy within the first 24 hours with repeated injection of thrombin-adrenaline solution (Group I) or fibrin sealant-Beriplast-(Group II). A tendency towards better results was noted in the Group II. Recurrent bleeding was observed in 6.6% versus 26.6% patients in Group I. The need for emergency surgery occurred in (6.6% in Group I versus 0 in Group II) and length of hospital stay was (13.2 in Group I versus 7.4 in Group II [p &lt; 0.05]). No mortality was observed in both of the groups. In conclusion, our data suggest the possibility of a small benefit with second-look endoscopy with repeated injection of fibrin sealant.

### PMID 9018001 (1997) — Surgery today
TITLE: Closure of a gastric tube-tracheal fistula by transposition of a pedicled sternocleidomastoid muscle flap.
DOI: 10.1007/BF02385913 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We treated a 65-year-old man presenting with a gastric tube-tracheal fistula, who had undergone subtotal esophagectomy. The radiological and endoscopical findings demonstrated a 4-mm gastric tube-tracheal fistula located just above the sternum. Conservative treatment using a flexible fiberscope and/or gastrofiberscope, including factor XIII with fibrinogen (Beriplast P, Tisseel, and Borheal), alpha-cyanoacrylate (Aron-alpha-A), n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (histoacryl), and human antihemolytic factor XIII (Fibrogammin P) in addition to total parenteral nutrition with no oral intake did not result in closure of the fistula. The fistula was therefore transected and closed through an upper median sternotomy and right partial intercostal incision followed by transposition of the sternocleidomastoid muscle flap between the gastric tube and trachea. The postoperative course was uneventful.

### PMID 17171003 (1997) — Skull base surgery
TITLE: The fixed combination of collagen with components of fibrin adhesive-a new hemostypic agent in skull base procedures.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2008-1058620 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: CSF leak still is one of the major sources of morbidity after extensive skull base procedures. Of the various standard closure techniques of traumatic or iatrogenic dural defects, none provides a really waterlight, persistent closure. Even the supplementary use of fluid fibrin glue did not substantially improve the rate of postoperative CSF leaks. The application of a collagen sheet covered with a fixed layer of solid components of a fibrin tissue glue (TachoComb(R)) overcomes the major drawbacks of dural sealing in skull base surgery. The dural defects of 58 patients undergoing extensive skull base procedures were sealed with this new hemostyptic agent. The series includes 44 patients undergoing primary surgery, 6 patients with traumatic or iatrogenic tears of venous sinuses, and 8 patients with postoperative leaks after previous skull base procedures in which other sealing methods were previously used. In the group of primary surgery, none of the patients had postoperative CSF leakage or venous rebleeding. One patient developed a delayed pneumatocephalus. All cases of patent CSF fistulas were resolved without any adjuvant therapy. Preliminary experience shows that the good sealing and hemostyptic performance of this new agent will considerably reduce the risk of postoperative CSF leak and infection after skull base procedures.

### PMID 9408353 (1997) — Acta chirurgica Hungarica
TITLE: Results with collagen fleece coated with fibrin glue (TachoComb). A macroscopical and histological experimental study.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Diffuse bleeding from parenchymatous organs at conventional surgery is eliminated with the usual methods coagulation tamponade or styches. We performed experimental series at 9 dogs. After resection of spleen, liver, pancreas and kidney, the bleeding surface was covered by collagen fleece coated with fibrin glue (TachoComb). Postoperatively 7 days, 10 days, 14 days and 28 days we made a relaparotomy. Then the results were analyzed macroscopically and microscopically. In the abdominal cavity neither significant quantity of blood nor greater adhesions were detected. At all cases the fibrin glue was found on place were it was put before. Histologically a perfect wound healing experienced. The fibrin glue (TachoComb) using at diffuse parenchymatous organs' bleeding give a very good results when the wound area is at least 1 cm beyond the immediate wound margin and the fibrin glue is applied onto the wound and pressed on it for 4-5 minutes.

### PMID 9268200 (1997) — Thrombosis and haemostasis
TITLE: Application of thrombin based fibrin glue and non-thrombin based batroxobin glue on intact human blood vessels: evidence for transmural thrombin activity.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S.
ABSTRACT: An alternative method of uniting small diameter vessels to obtain tissue union while limiting the thrombogenic effect of suture placement at a vessel anastomosis involves the use of a thrombin based fibrin glue as a surgical sealant. This investigation addresses whether the in vitro application of a thrombin based glue (TG), or batroxobin glue (BG), a non-thrombin based glue made with the snake venom enzyme batroxobin, alters intravascular platelet deposition (PD) or cleaves blood fibrinogen, as measured by fibrinopeptide A (FPA) production, when the respective glue is applied to the external surface of an intact human placental artery or an artery with an anastomosis. When TG was applied to the adventitial surface of an intact vessel or an anastomosis (n = 7) of control and experimental vessels, there was a significant increase in intraluminal platelet deposition, an effect not realized with BG (n = 12, intact vessel TG p = 0.01, BG p = 0.66, anastomosis TG p &lt;0.01, BG p &lt;0.01). Both TG and BG significantly increased FPA levels when human whole blood was perfused through both intact vessels or vessels containing an anastomosis when compared to control vessels (intact vessel TG and BG p &lt;0.01, anastomosis TG and BG p &lt;0.01). Labelled thrombin studies document the rapid passage of thrombin through an intact vessel wall or vessels with an anastomosis when TG was applied to the adventitial surface of the vessel. The data suggest that TG and BG are drug delivery systems for their respective enzymes that either pass through or transfer a message across not only a surgically created anastomosis, but also an intact vessel wall.

### PMID 9206634 (1997) — Der Chirurg; Zeitschrift fur alle Gebiete der operativen Medizen
TITLE: [Surgical therapy of esophageal perforation. A determination of current status based on 4 personal cases and the literature].
DOI: 10.1007/s001040050203 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: We present four cases of esophageal rupture (three iatrogenic, one Boerhaave syndrome) to demonstrate the difficulty in diagnosis and therapy. The current literature is discussed and conclusions are drawn as regards the modus operandi. All our patients were operated on. The site of esophageal rupture was always closed with a primary suture and substantial irrigation and drainage were performed. In two cases the suture line was in addition covered with fibrin glue or by an omentum flap, respectively. All patients survived and recovered was unremarkable. Our own results and a subsequent analysis of literature allow the following conclusions. At an early stage of esophageal rupture surgical intervention is indicated. The method of choice is primary closure of the rupture site by suture, possibly combined with a muscle or omentum flap. In cases of delayed diagnosis with advanced mediastinitis, suture of the rupture site should also be striven for. Additional coverage is advisable in these cases. Resection procedures with or without reconstruction should be done only in exceptional cases before of the high surgical risk.

### PMID 8731204 (1996) — Journal of biomedical materials research
TITLE: A new biological glue from gelatin and poly (L-glutamic acid).
DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4636(199606)31:2&lt;157::aid-jbm2&gt;3.0.co;2-m | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study describes the potentiality of hydrogels composed of gelatin and poly(L-glutamic acid) (PLGA) as a biological glue for soft tissues and compares its effectiveness with that of a conventional fibrin glue. Water-soluble carbodiimides (WSC) were used to crosslink the aqueous mixture of gelatin and PLGA. The mixed aqueous solution of gelatin and PLGA set to a hydrogel by use of WSC as rapidly as BOLHEAL fibrin glue. An addition of PLGA to gelatin aqueous solution reduced not only its gelation time but also the WSC concentration necessary for hydrogel formation. The cured hydrogel exhibited firm adhesion to the mouse skin and other soft tissues with a higher bonding strength than BOLHEAL fibrin glue. Cohesive failure in the hydrogel was observed when the gel-tissue bond was broken, in contrast to BOLHEAL fibrin glue. The bonding strength of the gelatin-PLGA hydrogel became higher with the increasing PLGA concentration. The inflammatory reaction around the gelatin-PLGA hydrogel subcutaneously implanted in mice was mild, and the hydrogel was gradually absorbed with time in vivo. A toxicity test demonstrated that the concentration of WSC necessary as a biological glue was low enough not to induce its toxicity.

### PMID 8619391 (1996) — Hinyokika kiyo. Acta urologica Japonica
TITLE: [Treatment of scrotal hydrocele using fibrin adhesive].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: For the purpose of adhesion of the tunica vaginalis in scrotal hydrocele, we used fibrin adhesive, Bolheal. Between September 1993 and December 1994, 13 patients with scrotal hydrocele received occlusion therapies using Bolhead. The therapy was effective in 1 of the 6 patients (17%) administered 2.4 mg of fibrinogen and 750 units of thrombin into the vaginal cavity after aspiration of fluids, and in 5 of the 7 patients (71%) administered 240 mg of fibrinogen and 7.5 units of thrombin. Therefore, fibrin adhesive may be useful in the treatment of scrotal hydrocele.

### PMID 9237133 (1996) — International ophthalmology
TITLE: The utilization of a biological adhesive for wound treatment: comparison of suture, self-sealing sutureless and cyanoacrylate closure in the tensile strength test.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00176885 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: We produced a measurement apparatus for testing the tensile strength of wounds during cataract surgery, and tested the tensile strength of treated wounds including wounds sutured with various methods, non-sutured and wounds treated with various bio-tissue adhesives.
METHODS: In cataract surgery on white rabbits eyes, a corneoscleral incision 5 mm in length was made 2.5 mm from the limbus corneae, and entry into the anterior chamber was obtained 0.5 mm to the clear cornea. After treatment for closure, the corneoscleral piece was subjected to the tensile strength test.
RESULTS: The tensile strengths just after surgery were (1) 0 gf/mm2 after self-sealing sutureless closure; (2) 114 gf/mm2 after vertical suture closure (one stitch with 10-0 nylon); (3) 125 gf/mm2 after horizontal suture closure (one stitch with 10-0 nylon); (4) 143 gf/mm2 after infinity suture closure (with 10-0 nylon); (5) 112 gf/mm2 after fibrin glue (Beriplast P) application (instilled on the surface of scleral incision); (6) 121 gf/mm2 after fibrin glue application (glued on corneoscleral wound); (7) 131 gf/mm2 after cyanoacrylate closure (instilled on the surface of scleral incision); (8) 139 gf/mm2 after cyanoacrylate closure (glued on corneoscleral wound). The respective strengths at four days after surgery were: (1) 86; (2) 131; (3) 137; (4) 175; (5) 109; (6) 43; (7) 138; and (8) 108 gf/mm2. At 28 days after surgery, the respective strengths were (1) 164; (2) 167; (3) 184; (4) 209; (5) 322; (6) 195; (7) 251; and (8) 175 gf/mm2.
CONCLUSION: The use of fibrin glue in treatment of a wound in cataract surgery is beneficial in assisting this treatment.

### PMID 8823491 (1996) — Cancer chemotherapy and pharmacology
TITLE: Advantages and safety of local treatment with MMC/Beriplast P for cancer tumors.
DOI: 10.1007/s002800050519 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To target the treatment of small points of cancer, Beriplast P, already used clinically as a physiological tissue adherent drug carrier, was mixed with the anticancer drug, mitomycin C (MMC). In this in vitro study, MMC did not release quickly from the clot of MMC/Beriplast P. The antitumor effect of this mixture was examined for its effect on cancer growth. In one series of experiments, tumor tissues were inoculated with MMC/100 microliters Beriplast P and in another series, MMC/100 microliters Beriplast P was injected into tumors at a weight of 300 mg. In the first series of experiments, tumor tissue treated with 0.3 mg MMC/100 microliters Beriplast P was replaced with plasma cells and lymphocytes, and no viable cancer cells could be found. In the second series, MMC/100 microliters Beriplast P delayed tumor growth, and the survival of Balb/c mice injected with 0.08 mg MMC/100 microliters Beriplast P was significantly longer than that of mice injected with 0.08 mg MMC/100 microliters saline solution (P = 0.026). In addition, the abdominal aorta, vena cava, and intestine around the area of treatment with 1.6 mg MMC/100 microliters Beriplast P were not damaged. These results indicate that the mixture of Beriplast P and MMC is more effective than MMC solution alone in the local treatment of residual cancer.

### PMID 9123925 (1996) — Vox sanguinis
TITLE: A randomised trial of fibrin sealant in peripheral vascular surgery.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1423-0410.1996.tb01328.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: In a prospective randomised trial 39 patients undergoing either arterial bypass surgery with a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) bypass graft (n = 18) or aortic aneurysm repair with a woven Dacron graft (n = 21) were randomised either to receive fibrin sealant as a topical haemostatic agent at the arterial anastomosis or to act as control. The main outcome measure was the time taken to achieve haemostasis at the suture line. The median time to achieve haemostasis was 0.5 min (range 0-11 min) in the treatment group and 4 min (range 0-21 min) in the control group. This difference was statistically significant p &lt; 0.014 by the Mann-Whitney test. Immediate haemostasis on release of the clamps was achieved in 13/21 patients in the treatment group and in 4/18 patients in the control group (p = 0.023 by Fisher's exact test). There was no difference in total operative time or operative blood loss. No patients in the treatment group suffered any perioperative thromboembolic event and 1 patient in the control group suffered an early graft occlusion. There was no evidence of transmission of hepatitis B or C, or parvovirus B19. In conclusion, fibrin sealant is an effective topical haemostatic agent for arterial suture lines involving PTFE or woven Dacron.

### PMID 8911335 (1996) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Postoperative chylothorax.
DOI: 10.1016/S0022-5223(96)70152-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Between July 1987 and May 1995, 11,315 patients underwent general thoracic surgical procedures at our institution. In 47 of these patients (0.42%), postoperative chylothorax developed. There were 32 men and 15 women with a median age of 65 years (range 21 to 88 years). Initial operation was for esophageal disease in 27 patients, pulmonary disease in 13, mediastinal mass in six, and thoracic aortic aneurysm in one. All patients were initially treated with hyperalimentation, cessation of oral intake, medium chain triglyceride diet, or a combination. Nonoperative therapy was successful in 13 cases (27.7%), and oral intake was resumed a median of 7 days later (range 2 to 15 days). Reoperation was required in the remaining 34 cases. The reoperation rate varied according to the type of initial operation. Twenty-four of the 27 patients (88.9%) who had undergone an esophageal operation required reoperation, versus only five of 13 patients (38.5%) who had undergone pulmonary resection (p &lt; 0.001). Lymphangiography was performed in 16 patients and identified the site of the leak in 13. The thoracic duct was ligated in 32 of the 34 patients who required reoperation (94%). The remaining two patients were treated with mechanical pleurodesis and fibrin glue. Reoperation was successful in 31 of the 34 patients (91.2%). The single death among the 47 patients (2.1%) occurred in the reoperated group. Complications occurred in 18 patients (38.3%). Factors that predicted the need for reoperation were initial esophageal operation and average daily postoperative drainage greater than 1000 ml/day for 7 days. We conclude that postoperative chylothorax is an infrequent complication. Some cases can be managed without operation; however, we recommend early reoperation when drainage is greater than 1000 ml/day or if the chylous fistula occurs after an esophageal operation. The fistula can usually be controlled by ligation of the thoracic duct.

### PMID 8905274 (1996) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Controlled clinical studies of fibrin sealant in cardiothoracic surgery--a review.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(96)80332-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: More than 2300 clinical papers have been published on the surgical applications of fibrin sealant (FS), with the largest number in the speciality of cardiothoracic surgery. The purpose of this review of the literature was to find and evaluate controlled studies published in the field of cardiothoracic surgery, to clarify the indications and emphasize the benefits of FS available to the practising surgeon.
METHODS: A database of the surgical publications of FS was created. Up to the end of 1995, at least 24 controlled clinical studies had been published; these may be divided into 20 studies with a positive outcome and 4 studies where the results were not different from the controls. In none of the studies was the clinical result worse after the use of FS.
RESULTS: In most of the cardiac studies, FS was successfully used at bleeding sites in reoperations and in congenital heart surgery. Postoperative bleeding may also be reduced by the anterior mediastinal spray application of FS or by preparing woven Dacron prostheses with the sealant. In addition, Fs has been found to improve results after type A aortic disections and, by adding an antibiotic to the sealant, the postoperative infection rate for active endocarditis of the aortic root can be reduced. In pulmonary surgery FS can be used to reduce pulmonary air leakage, however the results of some studies diverge due to different clinical test conditions and the inclusion of only a small number of patients in the "negative" studies. In none of the controlled studies of esophageal surgery could FS prevent leakage from esophageal anastomoses.
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrin sealant is safe when it is applied properly, but there is a learning curve for surgeons who start using it. An autologous sealant or a sealant containing human instead of bovine thrombin is preferred, since repeated use of bovine thrombin may induce coagulopthies. The number of controlled clinical studies of FS is currently increasing, with the majority of the papers revealing a beneficial effect of FS when it is used as a hemostatic or sealing agent in cardiothoracic surgery.

### PMID 7574778 (1995) — Gan to kagaku ryoho. Cancer &amp; chemotherapy
TITLE: [Antitumor effect of MMC mixed in Beriplast P].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We attempted to mix an anticancer drug. MMC, with a fibrinogen preparation, Beriplast P (B. P.). First, we examined how MMC was gradually released from its mixture. As the result, its release depended on the MMC concentration in B. P., and the release rate of 1.0 mg MMC from 100 microliters B. P. was 1.6 mg/30 min. Second, we examined the safety of the conjugated drug for normal tissue, because MMC is one of anticancer drugs causing serious damage to normal tissue. When the conjugation of 100 microliters B. P. and below 1.6 mg MMC was coated within one square centimeter, the drug was safe for the endothelium of artery and vein, and the intestinal wall. Third, we attempted an experiment on both the antitumor effect and the role of survival prolongation of the conjugated drug in a mouse carrying a malignant tumor. MMC conjugated with Beriplast P had a highly antitumor effect, which caused necrosis in the cancer cells in unstable conditions. Also, its conjugation drug could inhibit the growth of cancer cells in stable conditions, and prolonged the survival period. From these results, the mixture of MMC and B. P. was found to possess an MMC releasing effect, was safe for normal tissues, and showed high antitumor effect with prolongation of the survival period.

### PMID 8541171 (1995) — British heart journal
TITLE: Pseudoaneurysm following aortic homograft: clinical implications?
DOI: 10.1136/hrt.74.6.645 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of pseudoaneurysm formation after aortic (left ventricular outflow tract) homograft implantation and to evaluate predisposing factors.
METHODS: Echocardiographic data were analysed in 30 patients for evidence of pseudoaneurysm formation after homograft implantation. Pseudoaneurysm was characterised as a perfused echo-free space between the homograft and the native aortic wall communicating with the left ventricular outflow tract. Clinical data were analysed for potential predisposing factors for pseudoaneurysm formation.
RESULTS: Pseudoaneurysms were found in 22 of 30 patients. Mean age, length of follow up after surgery, aortic systolic pressure gradient (15 (SD 12) v 10 (4) mm Hg), aortic root diameter, and size of the homografts were comparable in patients with and without pseudoaneurysm. preoperative infection, operating techniques, and whether first or reoperation did not affect pseudoaneurysm formation. However, pseudoaneurysms were often localised at the site of an abscess or a paravalvular leak after eradicated prosthetic valve endocarditis.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) Doppler echocardiography demonstrates that pseudoaneurysm formation is common after aortic homograft implantation. (2) A prospective study is needed to clarify the prognostic importance of pseudoaneurysms. (3) The high incidence of pseudoaneurysm formation may lead to an improvement of surgical technique (application of fibrin glue).

### PMID 8657017 (1995) — Microbiology and immunology
TITLE: Prevention of vascular graft infection by sisomicin incorporated into fibrin glue.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.1995.tb03287.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To examine the efficacy of sisomicin (SISO) incorporated into fibrin glue (FG) for the prevention of graft infection in animal models, the susceptibility to infection of Dacron grafts (control) and SISO-FG Dacron grafts following the inoculation of Staphylococcus aureus or S. epidermidis was compared. The results showed that SISO-FG Dacron grafts displayed resistance to graft infection.

### PMID 7571895 (1995) — Zentralblatt fur Chirurgie
TITLE: [Prevention and therapy of prosthesis infections in the thoracic area].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Infections of vascular prostheses following replacement of the thoracic aorta remain a rare complication, fortunately. The incidence of prosthetic infection amounts to approximately 1.6%, however, there is only limited information from single center studies, and linearized actuarial data for more exact estimations are not available. Experience with prophylaxis and treatment of bacterial endocarditis as well as data available from peripheral vascular reconstruction nevertheless allow the development of treatment strategies concerning this complication. Experimentally, there is clear evidence that pretreatment of Dacron-grafts using the fibrin sealant-antibiotic compound results in a significant protection from infection, created by artificial contamination with staphylococcus aureus. This concept could clearly be confirmed in clinical series involving treatment of prosthetic valve endocarditis. Currently, the concept of implantation of cryopreserved human vascular allografts is studied clinically. Its efficiency in infected areas and following prosthetic replacement of the thoracic aorta has not been proven. Some preliminary results as well as studies on treatment for bacterial endocarditis would suggest a clear advantage of this strategy, however statistically significant improvements have not been published. Currently available data, however, appear to be sufficient to advocate potentially successful techniques as a prophylaxis in routine thoracic aortic replacement as well as for treatment in case of a vascular prosthetic infection following such procedures.

### PMID 7951406 (1994) — International journal of fertility and menopausal studies
TITLE: Reproductive function after reconstructive surgery on rat uterine horns.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To assess the effectiveness of tuboplasty procedures employing fibrin glue.
METHODS: Experimental tuboplasty operations were performed on 63 rats using biological glues (fibrin glue--"Beriplast" Behring; "FK-1", Russia) and microsuture materials. Uterine horn patency, adhesion formation, and other changes at the site of anastomosis, as well as pregnancy rate and embryonal characteristics, were assessed.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed the effectiveness of fibrin glue application in reconstructive surgery on uterine horns, and documented no significant differences between microsuture and sutureless anastomoses with regard to pregnancy rates (80 and 83.3%, respectively).

### PMID 7824456 (1994) — Presse medicale (Paris, France : 1983)
TITLE: [Post-infarction rupture of the heart into the pericardium. Surgical treatment combining synthetic patch and biological fibrin glue].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 66-year old man was hospitalized with chest pain and acute ischaemia of the lower limbs highly suggestive of dissection of the aorta. Computed tomography and aortography however showed pericardic effusion and thrombosis situated in the iliac bifurcation of the aorta. During the emergency operation, acute tamponade required sub-xyphoid drainage. The haemodynamic situation was reestablished and the operation continued but within minutes a cataclysmal haemorrhage occurred through the drainage tube due to ischaemic rupture of the lateral wall of the heart into the pericardium. Extra-corporal circulation was installed immediately and a large polytetrafluoroethylene patch was sutured to the epicardium, distally from the necrosed area, in healthy tissue. A biological fibrin glue was injected under the patch. The operation was terminated with an axillo-bifemoral bypass. The postoperative period was satisfactory and the patient was discharged. At the six months examination, the patient was in NYHA class II and the echography showed moderate left ventricular dysfunction with grade II mitral regurgitation and a false aneurysm facing the area of necrosis. This technique allowed us to patch the rupture without excessive tension on the sutures in the fragile tissue which would have increased the risk of secondary rupture. In addition, the large patch avoided excessive reduction in volume of the left ventricular cavity and saved the mitral chordae which would have been destroyed by direct suture. This method can be an effective salvage technique for heart rupture during the acute phase of myocardial infarction and offers the possibility of a second look in case of a secondary false aneurysm.

### PMID 7836832 (1994) — [Zasshi] [Journal]. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai
TITLE: [Two cases of esophageal fistula, in which a fibrin glue preparation was effective].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Two successful cases of endoscopic therapy for esophageal fistula are reported herein. The first case was a 61-year-old man who underwent irradiation, chemotherapy and endoscopic laser beam therapy for esophageal cancer (Im T4N0M0 Stage III). Gastrografin -esophagogram revealed a fistula between esophagus and mediastinum after these therapy. Closure of the fistula was attainable using fibrin glue with a double-channel-fiber scope. The second case was a 43-year-old man who underwent chemotherapy and irradiation for lung cancer (S1,S2 T4N2M0 Stage IIIB) which invaded to mediastinum, trachea and esophagus. Bronchogram revealed a esophago-tracheal fistula one month later. We performed the same procedure as the first case, and confirmed reduction of the fistulous size. The endoscopic fibrin glue injection is an easy, safe and effective technique for the fistula even caused by malignancies, and contributes to the quality of life of these patients.

### PMID 8469534 (1993) — Oral surgery, oral medicine, and oral pathology
TITLE: Dental extractions in patients with bleeding disorders. The use of fibrin glue.
DOI: 10.1016/0030-4220(93)90135-q | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Eighty patients with various bleeding disorders underwent 135 extractions without preventive replacement hematologic therapy. The local hemostatic control involved the use of fibrin glue Beriplast. Secondary bleeding occurred in 9 of 12 patients with severe hemophilia when the concentration of the aprotinin in the fibrin glue was 1,000 KIU/ml. When it was increased to 10,000 KIU/ml and swish and swallow rinses of tranexamic acid before and after the dental extractions were added, only 3 of 25 hemophilia patients suffered from secondary bleeding. Local use of fibrin glue is a safe and cost-effective tool to treat patients with severe bleeding disorders. None of the 43 patients with coagulopathies other than severe hemophilia suffered bleeding after extractions.

### PMID 8295648 (1993) — Neuro-Chirurgie
TITLE: [Teflon wrapping in cerebral aneurysm surgery. A technical note].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Wrapping is a well-known alternative technique when clipping the aneurysm is by no means possible or when it seems necessary to complete an imperfect clip. In 22 operated cases of intracranial aneurysm, we recently experienced pledgets of Teflon arranged and then fixed by drops of fibrin sealant. We used this technique in the following operative circumstances: to reinforce the ectatic base of the clipped aneurysm (11 cases); to wrap a pre-aneurysmal ectasia distant from the ruptured aneurysm (5 cases); to minimize the compression due to the clip to an adjacent cranial nerve or artery (6 cases). So far no complication was noted in relation to this technique. We then propose this technique of wrapping or interposing Teflon as an alternative to the other well-known techniques using autogenous tissue, gelatin sponge, cotton or other synthetic coatings or glue. Up to now, no known material received a worldwide approval for its complete innocuity and/or efficiency. Nowadays, in neurosurgical microvascular decompression and in cardiovascular surgery Teflon is widely and satisfactorily used. Its biologic tolerance is known to be good. This may apply in this new indication, and we would like recommend its practical use. However, for reliability and safety, there is an obvious need for a long-term clinical follow-up and an experimental controlled study as well.

### PMID 8258925 (1993) — Kyobu geka. The Japanese journal of thoracic surgery
TITLE: [Cerebrospinal fluid fistula following an operation of mediastinal schwannoma: a case report].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 33-year-old man was operated for the mediastinal schwannoma. During the operation, the 9 th intercostal nerve was avulsed and revealed liquorrhea. Lyodura and fibrin glue was applied for sealing the site of dural defect. But post-operative course was not successful. So, we used the external cerebrospinal fluid drainage system. After this procedure, thoracic fluid from the chest tube was reduced and we could remove the chest tube in the 20th post operative day. This case indicates that in case of thoracotomy, it is difficult to expect easy closure of cerebrospinal fluid fistula under conservative therapy. Therefore it was considered that specific repair during the operation and spinal drainage in the post-operative early phase should be performed.

### PMID 8367876 (1993) — The Thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon
TITLE: Closure of acute bronchial stump insufficiency with a musculus latissimus dorsi flap.
DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-1013854 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe a successful closure of an acute bronchial stump insufficiency after pneumonectomy by intrathoracic transposition of the pedunculated latissimus dorsi muscle: A 56-year-old patient with a necrotizing bronchial carcinoma developed a stump insufficiency after right pneumonectomy. Repeated resection and renewed closure of the completely dehiscent stump was not possible, as the stem bronchus had been separated close to the tracheal bifurcation in the preceding operation. Therefore we transposed the pedunculated musculus latissimus dorsi into the thoracic cavity. The closure of the bronchial stump insufficiency was achieved by fixation of the muscle on to the open stump and surrounding tissue of the mediastinal pleura with fibrin glue. The postoperative course was without complications, no further insufficiency or empyema developed.

### PMID 1435688 (1992) — Nihon Geka Gakkai zasshi
TITLE: [Innovative elastomeric bio-adhesive (pup-201) synthesized by urethane-prepolymer].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Properties of PUP-201 for the application to vital organs were estimated. Basic properties of PUP-201 were compared with two kinds of commercial fibrin and synthetic adhesives. Its initial and wet adhesive strength was 40 and 150 times stronger than those of fibrin adhesives respectively. Its curing time was 50 seconds, and elongating rate was 150% nearly as same as that of the intestine. This adhesive had not antimicrobial activities. The strength of adhesive bonded pig skin in shear by tension loading by way of JIS K6850 recorded 2.0-2.7kg/cm2 five minutes after, and 2.0-2.8kg/cm2 after 24 hours. The results of the same test in small intestine defined 0.4-1.0kg/cm2 in sero-sero attachment. There was no toxicity on the pig skin. Practical examinations for application to hemostasis on the section of dog liver and sealing of the lung section were performed successfully. PUP-201 was demonstrated excellently useful material for the adhesive, hemostasis and sealant of vital tissue.

### PMID 1739179 (1992) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Comparative efficacy of topical hemostatic agents in a rat kidney model.
DOI: 10.1016/0002-9610(92)90108-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The efficacies of four topical hemostatic agents were compared in a rat model employing a standardized renal injury. The materials used to effect hemostasis were oxidized cellulose, microfibrillar collagen powder, positively charged modified collagen, and single donor heterologous fibrin glue. Animals that were treated only with surgical gauze served as controls. Hemostasis was achieved by application of one of the topical hemostatic agents plus moderate digital pressure. The time necessary to achieve complete hemostasis was recorded for each animal. Control animals bled profusely and suffered an increased postoperative mortality rate compared with the experimental animals. Microscopic studies demonstrated progressive healing of the injuries with varying degrees of inflammation and scar formation. Fibrin glue was by far the most effective agent in controlling hemostasis. The collagen materials, though effective, required a longer time to control bleeding and did not differ statistically in their activity from one another.

### PMID 1532072 (1992) — Presse medicale (Paris, France : 1983)
TITLE: [Contribution of fibrin glue to the reinforcement of esophageal anastomoses].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, English Abstract, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: A prospective randomized study was conducted on 100 patients operated upon for oesophageal diseases to evaluate the usefulness of fibrin glue in reinforcing oesophageal anastomoses. The anastomoses were located in the neck, the chest or the lower mediastinum. The operative mortality rate, the number and severity of fistulae and the incidence of anastomotic stenosis were studied. This series was insufficient to demonstrate that fibrin glue was effective in this type of surgery.

### PMID 1574944 (1992) — Zentralblatt fur Chirurgie
TITLE: [Pathophysiology, incidence and therapy of malignant pleural effusion].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Malignant pleural effusions are a common and significant problem in patients with advanced malignancies. Effective control of recurrent malignant effusion can greatly improve the quality of life. On the basis of comparison involving, efficacy, toxicity, and costs we recommend intrapleurally tetracycline with chest tube drainage as the technique of choice inducing a response rate of 70%. Instillation of fibrin glue into the thoracic cavity through a tube is also a safe and effective technique and should be employed when tetracycline fails. Mediastinal radiation constitutes the best local therapy secondary to lymphoma. Pleurectomy would be appropriate in a very small subset of patients whose performance status is exceptionally good and whose malignancy ist otherwise under good control.

### PMID 1530824 (1992) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Prevention of graft infection by bonding of gentamycin to Dacron prostheses.
DOI: 10.1067/mva.1992.30301 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To increase the efficacy of perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis in vascular surgery an experimental study including topical application of the gentamicin derivative EMD 46/217 and fibrin sealant as antibiotic carrier to Dacron prostheses was initiated. In vitro treatment of Dacron with gentamicin and fibrin was followed by constant antibiotic release for 3 weeks. In a subsequent animal study Dacron grafts were implanted in the aorta of 10 pigs after direct contamination with Staphylococcus aureus solution. One graft was pretreated with the antibiotic/fibrin compound, a second with the antibiotic alone. Grafts 3 (no pretreatment) and 4 (fibrin alone) served as controls. After 1 week the grafts and their corresponding implantation sites were excised for measurement of antibiotic content and for culture. The antibiotic content of grafts with the antibiotic/fibrin compound was 25.0 +/- 7.2 micrograms/gm wet weight, whereas Dacron pretreated with the antibiotic alone contained no measurable drug amounts except for one specimen (0.5 microgram/gm) (antibiotic/fibrin vs antibiotic, p less than .0005). The corresponding implantation sites to antibiotic/fibrin grafts contained 1.07 +/- 0.54 microgram/gm antibiotic, whereas in only 2/10 implantation sites of antibiotic grafts low antibiotic levels were found (0.05 and 0.2 microgram/gm) (antibiotic/fibrin vs antibiotic, p less than 0.005). All control grafts and 9/10 antibiotic grafts were infected. By contrast, only five were contaminated, and 5 of 10 remained sterile after culture (antibiotic/fibrin vs antibiotic, p less than 0.05). This finding correlates with the antibiotic content in the Dacron. It is concluded that pretreatment of prosthetic Dacron grafts with the antibiotic/fibrin compound results in binding of sufficient amounts of antibiotic for at least 1 week.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

### PMID 1789351 (1991) — Akusherstvo i ginekologiia
TITLE: [Reproductive function after surgery of the horn of uterus in rats].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A model of tuboplasty with the use of biologic glues (FK) and microsuturing material was created in experiments with 63 rats. Clinically commercial fibrin glue Beriplast FK manufactured by Bering (Germany) and FK-1 (USSR) were used in 15 patients during various gynecologic operations. The patency of uterine horn anastomoses, the formation of adhesions and other changes at the site of anastomosis were assessed, as was the incidence of the resultant pregnancy. Clinically early control laparoscopy was carried out on days 4-5 after surgery. The results evidence the efficacy of FK in reconstructive surgery on the uterine tubes. Preliminary analysis of the clinical data has confirmed the experimental data.

### PMID 1908661 (1991) — Gan to kagaku ryoho. Cancer &amp; chemotherapy
TITLE: [Experimental study on local attachment of Beriplast P membrane including MMC].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We studied the effect of Beriplast P membrane including MMC (2 mg/ml) on human gastric carcinoma implanted in nude mouse (OSS) as a example of a shallow but broad lesion as with an early-stage local recurrence of rectal cancer and superficial gastric cancer. As a result, the resected tumor contact Beriplast P membrane including MMC after 3 days showed continuous necrotic lesions, from 1 to 2 mm in depth. No side effect was observed in nude mice. These results indicated that Beriplast P membrane including MMC is a useful chemotherapy against local cancerous lesion.

### PMID 2068963 (1991) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Fibrin tissue adhesive sealant for the prevention of CSF leakage following transsphenoidal microsurgery.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01405692 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue (Beriplast, Behring or Tissucol, Immuno) was used for 126 sublabial transseptal transsphenoidal operations in 119 patients from April 1981 to March 1987 in a variety of sellar pathologies together with septal bone and spongycel to seal the sellar floor and the anterior wall of the sphenoid sinus. The incidence of postoperative rhinorrhea was 1.6%. A review of the literature revealed an incidence of 1.5%-9.6% with the use of autologous tissue for sellar packing such as fat or muscle; fibrin glue combined with autologous grafts led to postoperative rhinorrhea in 1%-4.4%. The present results support the view that sellar and sphenoidal sealing with fibrin glue instead of muscle or fat tissue does not raise the incidence of postoperative rhinorrhea.

### PMID 2054487 (1991) — Biulleten' eksperimental'noi biologii i meditsiny
TITLE: [Functional evaluation of the effectiveness of experimental reconstructive and plastic operations on the uterine horns].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In the given experimental model, tubo-plastic surgery was done with the use of locally produced fibrin glue (Fk-1), and commercial product "Beriplast" (FRG). In the control group microsurgical technique was adopted in the uterine horn of rats. It was proved that Fibrin glue reduces the frequency of post operative adhesion formation in the area of anastomosis and the chance of pregnancy is increased in comparison to microsurgical techniques.

### PMID 1960439 (1991) — [Zasshi] [Journal]. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai
TITLE: [Coronary artery bypass grafting using right gastro-epiploic artery and cholecystectomy].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 59-year-old male with ischemic heart disease and cholecystolithiasis underwent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) using the right gastro-epiploic artery (GEA) and cholecystectomy simultaneously CABG was performed under standard extracorporeal circulation followed by cholecystectomy at the same incision. The opening in the dome of the diaphragm where the pedicle of GEA was brought up was closed with fibrin glue. Then, sternum was closed and cholecystectomy was performed with no elongation of the incision. The postoperative course was uneventful without mediastinitis or other infectious events. The postoperative angiography showed good patency of the GEA graft. Combined CABG using GEA and cholecystectomy is beneficial for the selected patients.

### PMID 2048851 (1991) — The American surgeon
TITLE: Spraying of aerosolized fibrin glue in the treatment of nonsuturable hemorrhage.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In the present report, the authors describe the use of aerosolized fibrin glue (FG) to achieve hemostasis in patients with nonsuturable hemorrhage. The multicomponent FG was sprayed on bleeding tissues with a dual chamber spray head that allowed simultaneous application and mixing of fibrinogen and thrombin on the tissue surface. Sterile propellant gas was passed through tubing to the spray head and independently controlled, allowing for drying of the tissue surface immediately before FG application. This technique was found to be effective in achieving hemostasis of parenchymal organs, retroperitoneal surfaces, and skin graft donor sites. Additional potential applications of this technique include the control of hemorrhage from mediastinal and pleural surfaces.

### PMID 2077915 (1990) — Akusherstvo i ginekologiia
TITLE: [Use of fibrin glue in gynecologic operations].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anastomosing of the uterine horns in 98 experimental rats has employed a fibrin glue FK-1 (USSR) and Beriplast (FRG) or microsurgical techniques in a control group. Intactness and sealing of the anastomoses and the incidence of pelvic adhesions were assessed at 5 minutes, 1 hour and 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 days following the operation. The fibrin glue Beriplast was used clinically in 6 patients during reconstructive-plastic operations. The results with seamless anastomosing of uterine horns in rats using the fibrin glue and preliminary clinical evidence suggests a high effectiveness of the glue in gynecologic reconstructive plastic surgery.

### PMID 2145537 (1990) — Oral surgery, oral medicine, and oral pathology
TITLE: Dental extraction for patients on oral anticoagulant therapy.
DOI: 10.1016/0030-4220(90)90139-j | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Dental extraction in patients receiving long-term oral anticoagulant therapy is a controversial issue. Continuation of anticoagulation exposes the patient to serious hemorrhage, whereas cessation of therapy increases the risk of thromboembolism. Forty patients treated by coumarin underwent 63 tooth extractions, without a change in the therapeutic protocol of anticoagulation. The biologic adhesive Beriplast was used successfully to achieve local hemostasis at the site of the surgical wound. Apart from one patient who had mild oozing, there were no incidences of postsurgical hemorrhage.

### PMID 2245063 (1990) — Grudnaia i serdechno-sosudistaia khirurgiia
TITLE: [Use of fibrin glue in pulmonary surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The article deals with the experimental data on the use of the "Beriplast" (GFR) and phi K-1 (USSR) fibrin glue (FG) for providing hemostasis and hermetization of the resected surface of the lung. The results were evaluated during the operation by the method of pneumopressure and by means of morphological studies. The "Beriplast" FG was applied in the clinic for aerostasis in incomplete +hermetization of the sutured pulmonary wound in 11 patients. Complete +hermetization was produced in all cases. Complications linked with the use of FG were not encountered.

### PMID 2290063 (1990) — [Zasshi] [Journal]. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai
TITLE: [A case of postoperative chylothorax successfully treated by thoracoscopic fibrin gluing].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chylothorax was complicated on the 10th postoperative day in a 66-year-old male who underwent left pneumonectomy with mediastinal lymph node dissection for squamous cell carcinoma of the lung. After the leakage point was determined by lymphangiogram and CT, fibrin gluing was performed via flexible fiberoptic thoracoscope. By this procedure the chylous fistulas were completely controlled. Application of fibrin glue through thoracoscope appeared very useful for the treatment of postoperative chylothorax.

### PMID 2201786 (1990) — The Journal of trauma
TITLE: Fibrin glue-antibiotic suspension in the prevention of prosthetic graft infection.
DOI: 10.1097/00005373-199008000-00009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: The following study was done to assess whether fibrin glue-antibiotic suspension (FGAS) can prevent infection of a PTFE vascular graft in a contaminated wound.
METHODS: FGAS was made by combining cryoprecipitate with a mixture of bovine thrombin, aminocaproic acid, and tobramycin (5 mg/cc thrombus). Antibiotic activity was documented by in vitro kinetics which revealed initial elutions to be greater than 8,000 mu gm/cc and elutions at 4 days to be greater than 2 mcg/cc. Twelve dogs had a 1-cm section of infrarenal aorta replaced with a PTFE graft that had been bathed in a 2-cc solution of E. coli 3 x 10(8) CFU/ml and S. aureus 3 x 10(8) CFU/ml. Both organisms were sensitive to tobramycin and cefonicid. Dogs were divided into three groups of four. Group I had a contaminated PTFE graft placed and no further therapy. Group II had a contaminated PTFE graft placed and sealed with fibrin glue. Group III had a contaminated PTFE graft placed and sealed with FGAS. All three groups received daily IV cefonicid.
RESULTS: Group I: Four of four dogs were reoperated on the fourth day for suspected sepsis and all four had pseudoaneurysms (one ruptured). Three of four were culture positive for S. aureus and two of four positive for E. coli. Group II: Four of four died of anastomotic disruption by the third day. Four of four were culture positive for S. aureus and E. coli. Group III: All four dogs survived and were sacrificed on Day 17: all anastomoses were normal. Animal survival was significantly associated with the treatment given (p = 0.0025). Three of four tissue cultures of the grafts were weakly positive for S. aureus and one of four for E. coli and Pseudomonas. Serum tobramycin levels were negligible at 12, 24, 72, and 96 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: The data show that FGAS was associated with a reduction in vascular graft infection and pseudoaneurysm formation after exposure to a standardized bacterial inoculum. Whether complete eradication of all organisms can be achieved with higher doses of tobramycin is as yet undetermined.

### PMID 2802921 (1989) — Nihon geka hokan. Archiv fur japanische Chirurgie
TITLE: [Use of fibrin glue (Beriplast P) in neurosurgical practice].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: 1. Beriplast P was used in 48 places, at 36 neurosurgical operations in 34 patients for various purposes. 2. No complications were encountered. Its use proved useful for sealing an inadvertently entered paranasal sinuses and as an auxiliary measure of controlling venous bleeding from dural sinuses or dural venous lakes difficult to control by usual means. 3. As to its use for sealing the site of dural closure to prevent the leakage and accumulation of the cerebrospinal fluid, it proved useful in the selected patients, but it should be emphasized that the meticulous closure with surgical sutures is of utmost importance and that the availability of fibrin glue does never replace the skillful operative techniques. 4. A case where Beriplast P applied over the dural surface caused obstruction of an epidural drain and resultant epidural hematoma was presented.

### PMID 2472722 (1989) — Acta chirurgica Scandinavica
TITLE: Randomized trial of fibrin adhesive for reduction of drained secretion after elective cholecystectomy.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: Eighty patients scheduled for elective cholecystectomy were randomly allocated to application of fibrin adhesive (Beriplast) to the gallbladder bed or to a control group. No significant difference was found between the two groups in regard to amount of postoperatively drained secretion or in drainage time. Fibrin adhesive thus had no effect on secretion of peritoneal fluid after simple cholecystectomy.

### PMID 2618326 (1989) — Acta chirurgica Iugoslavica
TITLE: [Second-look operations in malignancies of the breast].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Second look operation in surgical oncology practice has been performed because of three reasons: 1. revision of operative wound due to hematoma and dehiscence of wound, 2. doubt on local recidive and 3. because of doubt on spreading process on second breast. During the period from 1977 to 1986 at surgical oncology we had revision due to hematoma and dehiscence-27, local recidives-147, metastasis in lymphoglads axilla neck, parasternal and subclavicular-38. Metastasis in second breast were 11. Up to local recidive and expansion on a second breast we have got a period of relatively good health. At reoperation because of dehiscence and hematoma interval between two operation is very short so we have got present not only hypovolemia but also summation effect of used anesthetic and plasma expander. In our material, except anesthesia a great influence on blood hemism has got irradiation and cytostatic therapy so out of 147 women patients-45 have been previously radiated, 4 under cytostatic therapy, while combined therapy had 31 patients. And that was the reason why we had to examine the influence of anesthesia polyhemio and irradiation therapy on a change in hepatogramms, blood picture and coagulation. Found deviation are statistically significant in proportion, so we emphasize it a fact, that at revision we can't find very often the source of bleeding, connected with disorders of coagulation which we have found in our examination. Because of that, without regard on a spreading hematoma, we suggest parallel hemism, and before closing the wound local use of Beriplast or Surgicel.

### PMID 2604614 (1989) — Auris, nasus, larynx
TITLE: Scanning electron microscopic study of the middle ear mucosa after transtympanic infusion of fluids with different osmotic pressure.
DOI: 10.1016/s0385-8146(89)80027-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This study focused on the morphological alteration of the mucous membrane of the middle ear after transtympanic infusion of fluids with different osmotic pressure. Our results suggested that fluids with high osmotic pressure will seriously damage the mucous membrane of the middle ear regardless of whether or not the fluids have ototoxicity. On the other hand, fluids with low osmotic pressure were found to demonstrate minor changes on the mucous membrane. The authors have confirmed through this study that Beriplast-P A (894 mOsm) and B (228 mOsm), fibrinogen-based tissue sealants, may be safely used in the middle ear with minimum injury to the mucous membrane.

### PMID 2711039 (1989) — Research in experimental medicine. Zeitschrift fur die gesamte experimentelle Medizin einschliesslich experimenteller Chirurgie
TITLE: The chick chorioallantoic membrane as test system for biocompatible materials.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01856032 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Biologic and non-biologic materials clinically used as hemostyptica, as vascular prostheses, or as temporary skin substitutes were implanted to the chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) during days 9-14 of incubation. The histological study revealed an intact CAM after application of cellulose gauze (Tabotamp). The fibrin tissue adhesive (Tissucol), the collagen sponge (Tachotop), or the gelatin sponge (Gelfoam) induced different amounts of connective tissue. Some fibroblasts were about to grow into the fibrin adhesive. Fibroblasts and capillaries filled the interstices of the collagen sponge poorly, and in the case of the gelatin sponge markedly. Neutrophils and giant cells of the foreign body type occurred more often in the gelatin sponge than in the collagen sponge. With regard to the non-biologic materials, expanded polytetrafluorethylene induced squamous metaplasia of the chorionic epithelium. Dacron caused ulceration with the onset of connective tissue ingrowth, based on a reaction of giant cells of the foreign body type. Polyurethane foam (SYSpur-derm) showed bleeding into the implant due to spikes of the material. Eosinophilic granulocytes were absent in all materials studied. The results are related to different clinical findings. The correlation allows consideration of the CAM as an in vivo model in screening materials for their biocompatibility and their connective tissue reaction.

### PMID 2464722 (1989) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Randomized clinical trial of fibrin sealant in patients undergoing resternotomy or reoperation after cardiac operations. A multicenter study.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: A multicenter study was conducted to test the efficacy and safety of fibrin sealant as a topical hemostatic agent in patients undergoing either reoperative cardiac surgery (redo) or emergency resternotomy. A total of 333 patients from 11 centers in the United States were included in the study. Patients were randomly assigned to initially receive the fibrin sealant or a conventional topical hemostatic agent when such was required during an operation. The end point used to evaluate the agent's efficacy was local hemostasis, the number of bleeding episodes controlled within 5 minutes. The fibrin sealant group from the prospective study was compared with historical matched control subjects for postoperative blood loss, need for resternotomy, blood products received, and hospital stay. It was also compared with historical nonmatched control subjects for the incidence of resternotomy and mortality. The results showed a 92.6% success rate for fibrin sealant in controlling bleeding within 5 minutes of application, compared with only a 12.4% success rate with conventional topical agents (p less than 0.001). Fibrin sealant also rapidly controlled 82.0% of those bleeding episodes not initially controlled by conventional agents. High-volume postoperative blood loss was significantly less (p less than 0.05) in the fibrin sealant group than in the matched controls. Additionally, resternotomy rates after redo operations were significantly lower in the fibrin sealant group (5.6%) than in the nonmatched historical control group (10%) (p less than 0.0089). There were no significant differences in hospital stay or blood products received between the fibrin sealant group and matched historical controls and no difference in mortality between the fibrin sealant group and nonmatched historical controls. There were no documented instances of adverse reactions, transmission of viral infection (hepatitis B, non-A/non-B hepatitis), or human immunodeficiency virus seroconversion. This study shows that fibrin sealant is safe and highly effective in controlling localized bleeding in cardiac operations. Fibrin sealant reduces postoperative blood loss and decreases the incidence of emergency resternotomy. These findings make fibrin sealant a valuable hemostatic agent in cardiac surgery.

### PMID 2467632 (1989) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Mediastinal fibrin glue: hemostatic effect and tissue response in calves.
DOI: 10.1016/0003-4975(89)90392-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: There is continued controversy regarding the effectiveness and potential adverse effects of fibrin glue. Thus, we chose to evaluate it in a model of experimental calf aortic valve replacement that has been previously well established. Concentrated fibrinogen and topical thrombin were sprayed to form a thin layer of fibrin glue over the mediastinal tissues of 20 consecutive calves undergoing aortic valve replacement. Chest tube outputs of these animals were compared with those of the preceding 20 consecutive calves undergoing aortic valve replacement without fibrin glue. All procedures were performed by the same surgeon, and no other technical changes were made between the two series. Total postoperative chest tube output (mean +/- standard error) was 553 +/- 50 mL for the calves treated with fibrin glue and 1,155 +/- 103 mL for the control calves (p less than 0.001). On histological examination of mediastinal tissues from 5 treated calves killed 6 weeks after operation, there was no evidence of inflammation, fibrosis, or residual fibrin. To our knowledge, this is the first controlled laboratory study to show that fibrin glue spray is an effective hemostatic agent and that it produces no long-term tissue reaction.

### PMID 2465714 (1989) — The American surgeon
TITLE: Successful use of fibrin glue during 2 years of surgery at a university medical center.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A method for producing concentrated fibrinogen, an essential component of fibrin glue, from individually stored, single-donor units of human plasma is reported. The plasma is screened for hepatitis B antigen and HIV-1 virus to reduce the risk of transmission of hepatitis and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). This material is routinely stocked in some operating rooms. It is thus readily available when requested by a surgeon for use in combination with topical bovine thrombin to produce fibrin glue. From April 1985 to March 1987 this material was used by surgeons from eight different surgical specialties on 413 patients with a 91 per cent success rate (376/413). Uses have included sealing vascular suture lines, reinforcing pulmonary and esophageal staple lines, closing dural cerebrospinal fluid leaks, fixing split-thickness skin grafts, reducing lymphatic leakage, and controlling bone bleeding. Additional uses include closure of bronchopleural fistulas by means of the flexible bronchoscope, reduction of perioperative hemorrhage by spraying fibrin glue on the anterior mediastinum during cardiac surgery, and reduction of bleeding during debridement of burn eschars. Careful monitoring and patient follow-up detected no cases of transmission of blood-borne diseases. Only one complication, a local wound infection, has been documented. This material has been an important adjunct for the surgical services and may be safely used at hospitals with local blood bank facilities.

### PMID 3280083 (1988) — British journal of urology
TITLE: re Reduction of post-operative bleeding after transurethral resection of the prostate by local instillation of fibrin adhesive (Beriplast).
DOI: 10.1111/j.1464-410x.1988.tb05077.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 2456934 (1988) — European surgical research. Europaische chirurgische Forschung. Recherches chirurgicales europeennes
TITLE: Bacterial lysis of fibrin seal in vitro.
DOI: 10.1159/000128744 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We performed an in vitro study to determine whether certain bacteria may lyse a commercially available fibrin seal (Beriplast, Behringwerke, Marburg, FRG). Fibrinogen solution was mixed with actively growing bacterial cultures, and thrombin was added. During 20 days of incubation at 37 degrees C complete lysis was observed with a number of different bacteria, however, at different rates. Complete lysis within 1-5 days was observed for the following species (number of strains in parentheses): Streptococcus faecalis (3), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (2), Serratia marcescens (2), and Serratia liquefaciens (1). Lysis was observed after 6-10 days for Enterobacter cloacae (2), Morganella morganii (2), Escherichia coli (2), S. marcescens (1), and Klebsiella pneumoniae (2). Lysis after 11-16 days was observed for Streptococcus pyogenes (2), S. faecalis (2), and Staphylococcus aureus (2). Rapid lysis was associated with the ability of the strain to liquefy gelatin, i.e. the production of a protease.

### PMID 2451367 (1988) — Acta chirurgica Scandinavica
TITLE: Fibrin glue protection of primary anastomosis in the obstructed left colon. An experimental study on the rat.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A left-sided colon obstruction was produced with a polypropylene sling in 65 rats. Colon resection and primary anastomosis were performed three days later. The animals were then randomly allocated to the FG (fibrin glue) group receiving sealing of the anastomosis with 0.4 ml of fibrin glue (Beriplast R), or to the NG (non-glue) group. The anastomoses were assessed 30 min, two days and four days later. Adhesion formation was similar in both groups. The number of macroscopic or radiological leakages did not differ either. At 30 min the mean bursting pressure was 74.6 +/- 8.6 (SD) mmHg in the FG group and 58.3 +/- 21.6 mmHg in NG (non-glue) group (p less than 0.05, Mann-Whitney test). Later on the strength of the anastomoses was equal in both groups. We conclude that the initial sealing of weak points in the anastomoses was beneficial but the inherent strength per se could not be enhanced.

### PMID 3286706 (1988) — The Journal of dermatologic surgery and oncology
TITLE: Topical hemostatic agents for dermatologic surgery.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1524-4725.1988.tb03390.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic agents are very helpful in attaining capillary and small vessel hemostasis in dermatologic surgery. The commonly used topical hemostatic agents, including oxidized cellulose, absorbable gelatin, and thrombin are reviewed, along with newer agents such as microfibrillar collagen, fibrin sealants, and acrylates. Agents best suited for certain situations are recommended.

### PMID 2468466 (1988) — Drug intelligence &amp; clinical pharmacy
TITLE: Fibrin glue: a review of its preparation, efficacy, and adverse effects as a topical hemostat.
DOI: 10.1177/106002808802201203 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue is composed of two separate solutions of fibrinogen and thrombin. When mixed together, these agents mimic the last stages of the clotting cascade to form a fibrin clot. Fibrin glue is available in Europe but is not commercially available in the U.S.; therefore, investigators have extemporaneously compounded their own fibrin glue. Fibrinogen can be obtained from pooled, single-donor, and autologous blood donors and is usually isolated by the process of cryoprecipitation. The thrombin component is generally derived from commercial bovine sources. Some investigators have added calcium chloride and/or antifibrinolytics (i.e., aminocaproic acid, aprotinin) to their preparations. Fibrin glue can be applied using a double-barrel syringe or by spray application. Although fibrin glue has been used in a variety of surgical procedures, it has been especially useful in heparinized patients undergoing cardiovascular procedures requiring extracorporeal circulation, as it does not require an intact hemostatic system to be effective. Fibrin glue also has been evaluated in presealing woven or knitted Dacron vascular grafts. The major drawback to its use is the risk of transmitted serological disease from pooled and single-donor blood donors. The safest preparations use the patient's own blood to prepare fibrin glue. Overall, fibrin glue is a useful adjunct to other methods to control bleeding in selected surgical patients.

### PMID 2470842 (1988) — [Zasshi] [Journal]. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai
TITLE: [Use of fibrin glue at the anterior mediastinum to reduce postoperative drainage in cardiac surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 2441791 (1987) — British journal of urology
TITLE: Treatment of urethrocutaneous fistulae with a two-component fibrin adhesive (Beriplast).
DOI: 10.1111/j.1464-410x.1987.tb09148.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 2440164 (1987) — Ugeskrift for laeger
TITLE: [Fibrin occlusion (Beriplast) of the prostatic cavity after transurethral resection of the prostate. A study of the method].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 2445314 (1987) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Reduction of perioperative hemorrhage by anterior mediastinal spray application of fibrin glue during cardiac operations.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(10)62115-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A variety of published techniques for the production of concentrated fibrinogen from units of screened single-donor human plasma have led to increasing clinical use of fibrin glue in the United States. We have adapted a method of applying this material with a disposable plastic sprayer. In 20 consecutively treated patients, fibrin glue was sprayed on the anterior mediastinum before closure of the median sternotomy incision. A control group of 20 patients undergoing the identical cardiac operations (13 coronary artery bypass grafting procedures [CABG], 4 valve replacements [including 1 reoperative procedure], and 3 combined valve replacements and CABG) by the same surgeon within a one-year period was chosen for comparison of chest tube outputs. Specifically, chest tube outputs were as follows for treated and untreated patients, respectively: at 12 hours, 461 +/- 40 ml (mean +/- 1 standard error of the mean versus 731 +/- 80 ml; at 24 hours, 714 +/- 73 ml versus 1,016 +/- 109 ml; and at 48 hours, 863 +/- 93 ml versus 1,187 +/- 137 ml. The differences between control and spray chest tube output are statistically significant by unpaired t test (p less than 0.05) at both 12 and 24 hours. Thus, this method can reduce perioperative hemorrhage from the anterior mediastinum after cardiac operations.

### PMID 3801827 (1986) — British journal of urology
TITLE: Reduction of post-operative bleeding after transurethral resection of the prostate by local instillation of fibrin adhesive (Beriplast).
DOI: 10.1111/j.1464-410x.1986.tb05910.x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016430">Clinical Trial, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: A method for instilling a two-component fibrin adhesive into the prostatic cavity after transurethral resection of the prostate is described. In a prospective, controlled study, 30 consecutive patients undergoing transurethral prostatectomy (TURP) were randomised either to receive treatment with the local instillation of fibrin adhesive into the prostatic cavity or to a control group that received no special treatment post-operatively. There were no complications either during application of the fibrin adhesive or in the follow-up period. Post-operative blood loss was significantly reduced in the fibrin group (P less than 0.01).

### PMID 3487885 (1986) — Wiener klinische Wochenschrift
TITLE: [Fibrin gluing in ophthalmic surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A new fibrin adhesive "Beriplast" of the Behringwerke AG Marburg was implemented for conjunctival glueing in 42 patients after intracapsular cataract extraction. The tissue adhesive was also examined in palpebral tumour surgery as to its compatibility and usefulness. Good functional and cosmetic results were obtained with regard to the conjunctiva and the eyelids, respectively. No cases of incompatibility were registered.

### PMID 3486797 (1986) — Geburtshilfe und Frauenheilkunde
TITLE: [Sterilization reversal with additional use of fibrin glue (Beriplast). Preliminary report].
DOI: 10.1055/s-2008-1035905 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This is a report on the first use of a fibrin adhesive in microsurgical refertilisation. During the period between 4.4. 1984 and 11.11. 1985 a total number of 17 women were operated on with the additional use of this fibrin adhesive. In the first group, operated on between 4.4. 1984 and 14.11. 1984, three pregnancies have occurred so far. On 6.4. 1985 the first patient of this group gave birth to a boy weighing 3050 gr. To our knowledge this is the first delivery world-wide that was effected with the additional use of fibrin adhesive. Laparoscopy of tube function of a further patient in this group who had not become pregnant after 12 months revealed normal anatomical conditions in the region of the refertilised tube as well as perfect patency. Two cases of intrauterine pregnancy are known in another group of 6 women operated on between 13.2. 1985 and 15.5. 1985. In five patients the follow-up period is less than 4 months, and hence these have been excluded from evaluation. No ectopic pregnancies are known so far. We believe we can sum up as follows in respect of preliminary results: Additional use of fibrin adhesive in the refertilisation of fallopian tubes will not result in enhanced risk of renewed closure. It will be possible to develop suture-free techniques of anastomosis after appropriate development. Operation times get shorter by using fibrin adhesive and the stress exercised on the patient by anaesthesia is reduced. There does not seem to be any enhanced risk of ectopic pregnancy.

### PMID 4072235 (1985) — Wiener medizinische Wochenschrift (1946)
TITLE: [Initial clinical experiences with the fibrin adhesive Beriplast in heart surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue Beriplast was used during cardiovascular surgery in 97 patients. The fibrin seal was used for hemostasis on anastomoses, patches and suture lines. Moreover, the glue was applied for epicardial fixation of aorto-coronary vein grafts to prevent postoperative graft kinking. Following extrapleural ligation of patent duct in premature infants, the parietal pleura was fastened to the thoracic wall to prevent extrapleural pneumothorax or hemorrhage. After accidental dissection of the thoracic duct in infants, leakage of chyle could be sealed successfully in 6 cases. Hemorrhage from the sealed surfaces of suture lines was not observed. Viral hepatitis occurred postoperatively in 2 patients (3% of the operations for acquired heart disease), both of whom had also received clotting factor concentrate and blood transfusion because of postoperative hemorrhage not related to fibrin sealed surfaces. A causal relation between the hepatitis and application of the pasteurized fibrin glue seems very unlikely. Although fibrin glue certainly cannot replace the surgical suture, it appears to be a valuable aid under special conditions.

### PMID 3878636 (1985) — Zeitschrift fur experimentelle Chirurgie, Transplantation, und kunstliche Organe : Organ der Sektion Experimentelle Chirurgie der Gesellschaft fur Chirurgie der DDR
TITLE: [Adhesive strength studies of biologic tissue adhesives].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Different tissue adhesives including an own fibrin adhesive on the base of the human plasma fraction Cohn I were investigated in relation to their adhesive strength tension. These investigations were carried out on lyophilised skin grafts in vitro. The adhesive strengths were equal in case of the Cohn I adhesive, the Tissucol-Kit and also with Beriplast. These investigations will contribute to optimize an adhesive system.

### PMID 3004516 (1985) — Arzneimittel-Forschung
TITLE: Fibrin glue safety: inactivation of potential viral contaminants by pasteurization of the human plasma components.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue has become an indispensable tool in salvaging operations of the parenchymatous organs of the abdomen, in vascular and ophthalmic plastic surgery as well as neurosurgery. Currently available glues contain clotting factors from human plasma and thus carry the potential risk of transmitting viral infections like hepatitis or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Combined efforts in selection of plasma donations as well as pasteurization of the human plasma products allow the manufacturing of a product (Beriplast) with virtually no risk of transmission of viral infections as demonstrated by in vivo and in vitro experiments with a variety of human pathogenic viruses. No changes in activity or antigenicity of the clotting factors by the pasteurization procedure have been encountered.

### PMID 3930885 (1985) — The Journal of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: Cryoprecipitate-topical thrombin glue. Initial experience in patients undergoing cardiac operations.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The use of fibrin glues as topical hemostatic agents is reported in the European literature. We have composed an analogous compound in our operating rooms using cryoprecipitate and topical thrombin (1000 units/ml) in equal volumes applied directly to the bleeding site. We have used cryoprecipitate-topical thrombin glue in 26 patients undergoing cardiac operations. Severe bleeding not responding to usual methods of control was encountered during or after coronary artery bypass (n = 17), valve replacement (n = 3), bypass plus valve replacement (n = 5), or repair of postinfarction ventricular septal defect (n = 1). Five patients were operated on emergently and four were undergoing their second cardiac operation. The glue was used in four patients while on bypass and fully heparinized and in 17 patients who continued to bleed after separation from bypass and administration of protamine. Hemostasis was achieved in all patients and none required reexploration for bleeding. In five patients undergoing reexploration for postoperative hemorrhage (none having received cryoprecipitate-topical thrombin glue during the initial operation), the glue provided hemostasis when other measures failed, and no additional reexplorations were needed. No patient exhibited hypersensitivity, fibrinolysis, or coagulopathy following the use of this glue. In 16 patients followed for 9 to 12 months postoperatively, no hepatitis has occurred. The highly concentrated fibrinogen in cryoprecipitate is activated by thrombin to form fibrin and bring about rapid hemostasis. Cryoprecipitate-topical thrombin glue is a readily available, reliable, and inexpensive topical hemostatic agent in the patient undergoing a cardiac operation.

### PMID 3876814 (1985) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Hemostatic effectiveness of fibrin glue derived from single-donor fresh frozen plasma.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(10)60074-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue derived from pooled human blood is an effective sealant for high-porosity vascular grafts and a valuable topical hemostatic agent in heparinized patients. Use of this agent in the United States is prohibited because of potential transmission of hepatitis B, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, and other serologically transmitted illnesses. We have developed a cryoprecipitation technique that allows preparation of fibrin glue from single-donor fresh frozen plasma. Use of this agent presumably entails no greater risk of disease transmission than intravenous administration of single-unit fresh frozen plasma. This report describes our early clinical experience with this material. Fibrin glue was used as a sealant for porous woven Dacron tubular prostheses and cardiovascular patches in 19 patients. The fibrin glue sealant has also been employed to control bleeding from needle holes and small anastomotic tears in 22 patients. No patient in this series had a bleeding complication from a suture line or graft treated with fibrin glue. This experience indicates that like fibrin glue from pooled blood, fibrin glue from single-donor plasma is effective as a graft sealant and topical hemostatic agent. Preparation of fibrin glue from single-donor plasma is simple and economical, and may provide cardiothoracic surgeons in the United States with a widely available, valuable hemostatic adjunct.

### PMID 6340853 (1983) — Clinical chemistry
TITLE: Enzymic assay for phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin in serum.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: We describe a method for the direct enzymatic determination of phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin in serum. Phospholipase C (EC 3.1.4.3) and sphingomyelinase (EC 3.1.4.12) are used to hydrolyze phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin, respectively, with high specificity; alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1) is used to cleave inorganic phosphorus. The choline group, after oxidation with choline oxidase (EC 1.1.3.17), is detected with 4-aminoantipyrine. Alternatively, phosphorus is assayed with metavanadate. The excellent agreement between results of this modification of a procedure described by Artiss et al. (Microchem. J. 26: 1017, 1980) for amniotic fluid and of the conventional thin-layer chromatographic method makes this an attractive method for determination of both phospholipid subclasses in serum.

