# SLICE: guideline_ce  (252 records)

### PMID 41809965 (2026) — European journal of case reports in internal medicine
TITLE: The Use of Bovine Serum Albumin and Zephyr Endobronchial Valves for Managing a Bronchial-Biliary Fistula: A Novel Approach.
DOI: 10.12890/2026_005801 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: A bronchobiliary fistula (BBF) is a rare pathological communication between the biliary tract and the bronchial tree. It is most often associated with hepatic tumours, infections or trauma. The diagnosis can be challenging; management strategies vary and include conservative, surgical and endoscopic approaches.
CASE DESCRIPTION: A 61-year-old woman with metastatic colorectal cancer to the liver -managed with hepatic resections and ablation - presented with progressive dyspnoea and a productive cough. She had a recent history of pyogenic liver abscess treated with antibiotics. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a persistent hepatic abscess with a fistulous tract to the right middle lobe. Bronchoscopy confirmed bilious secretions from the right middle lobe. Initial management with endobronchial BioGlue application resulted in temporary improvement; however, recurrence occurred within eight days. A bronchoscopy was then repeated with additional BioGlue applied, and a 5.5 Zephyr endobronchial valve was deployed into the right middle lobe. The proximal orifice of the valve was sealed with BioGlue to ensure occlusion. This combined approach resulted in improved oxygenation and cessation of air leak from the biliary drain. Despite successful fistula closure, the patient succumbed to candida fungemia.
CONCLUSION: BBF remains a challenging condition with no standardised management guidelines. This case represents the first reported use of BioGlue&#xae; in combination with a Zephyr&#xae; endobronchial valve for successful endobronchial closure of a bronchobiliary fistula. Our experience highlights the potential of innovative bronchoscopy interventions as minimally invasive alternatives to surgery in select patients.
LEARNING POINTS: The differential diagnosis of pneumonia in patients with hepatic malignancy and/or abscess should include bronchobiliary fistula.BioGlue&#xae; and Zephyr&#xae; valves are an option for treating bronchobiliary fistulas.Innovative bronchoscopy therapy is an option for treating bronchobiliary fistulas.

### PMID 42297210 (2026) — Journal of vascular surgery. Venous and lymphatic disorders
TITLE: Network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials evaluating long-term outcomes of interventional approaches for great saphenous vein insufficiency.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jvsv.2026.102553 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Great saphenous vein (GSV) insufficiency is a major contributor to chronic venous disease, associated with substantial morbidity and reduced health status. Although various surgical and minimally invasive interventions are available, their long-term efficacy, safety, and recovery profiles remain uncertain. Therefore, this study aims to provide comprehensive evidence to guide clinical decision-making and optimize interventional strategies for GSV insufficiency.
METHODS: This network meta-analysis (NMA) was performed following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses-NMA checklist of items. Comprehensive searches were conducted on PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, ProQuest, and Web of Science from inception to July 11, 2025. Data analyses were performed using RStudio version 4.5.1 (Posit Software). Kaplan-Meier (KM) and log-rank test were applied to evaluate freedom from failure, with individual patient data reconstructed from published KM curves. Clinical outcomes were synthesized using a Frequentist NMA with DerSimonian-Laird random-effects model. Complications were analyzed using meta-proportions with a generalized linear mixed model at the latest follow-up.
RESULTS: A total of 7913 cases of GSV insufficiency from 47 reports from 33 randomized controlled trials were included. KM and log-rank analyses revealed that high ligation and stripping (HL&amp;S) had a significantly higher long-term freedom from failure compared with cyanoacrylate closure [hazard ratio (HR), 1.98; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.24-3.16; P &lt; .001], endovenous laser ablation (EVLA)-1470 nm (HR, 2.37; 95% CI, 1.38-4.06; P &lt; .001), and radiofrequency ablation (HR, 2.64; 95% CI, 1.69-4.12; P = .002) among patients with Clinical-Etiology-Anatomy-Pathophysiology C2-C5 Classification. Regarding clinical outcomes, electrocoagulation (mean difference, -0.59; 95% CI, -1.11 to -0.06; P = .03) showed lowest Venous Clinical Severity Score at 6 months among interventions. Minimally invasive interventions (EVLA-1470, P &lt; .001; EVLA-810, P = .02; electrocoagulation, P = .006) demonstrated a faster return to normal activities compared with HL&amp;S. In terms of complications, HL&amp;S showed higher proportion of ecchymosis (76.37%) and infection (2.35%), whereas ablation procedures demonstrated higher proportion of skin pigmentation (4.34%-11.41%) across interventions.
CONCLUSIONS: In individuals with Clinical-Etiology-Anatomy-Pathophysiology stages C2 to C5 disease, HL&amp;S offer higher long-term freedom from failure and Venous Clinical Severity Score improvement, whereas minimally invasive interventions offer faster short-term recovery. These findings provide evidence to ensuring recommendations address both long-term efficacy and patient-centered short-term outcomes.

### PMID 42236288 (2026) — Interdisciplinary cardiovascular and thoracic surgery
TITLE: Effectiveness of Surgical Sealants in Reducing Prolonged Air Leaks After Pulmonary Resection: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.1093/icvts/ivag164 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Prolonged air leak (PAL) is the most common complication following pulmonary resection, leading to increased morbidity, hospital stay, and healthcare costs. Although staplers are currently the standard for lung parenchymal closure, ALs remain frequent. Surgical sealants have been introduced as adjuncts to staplers to reduce PAL, but evidence remains inconsistent. Prior systematic reviews frequently pooled together stapled and sutured resections, limiting applicability to contemporary practice. This review specifically evaluates whether surgical sealants reduce the incidence and duration of PAL when used with staplers in adult patients.
METHODS: This systematic review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines and was registered on the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) (CRD420251064592). A literature search was conducted in PubMed, Ovid MEDLINE, and Cochrane Library for studies published between 2005 and June 2025. Eligible studies included adult patients undergoing stapler-based pulmonary resection comparing sealants plus staplers versus staplers alone. Risk of bias was assessed using the revised Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for randomized trials (RoB2) and risk of bias in non-randomized studies of interventions (ROBINS-I) tools.
RESULTS: Eight studies were included. Surgical sealants studied included fibrin-based (autologous fibrin sealant (FS), FS patch, human FS) and synthetic polymers (polyethylene glycol hydrogel sealant, cyanoacrylate-based sealant). Most studies reported a statistically significant reduction in PAL incidence and/or duration with sealant use. Some also showed reduced chest tube duration and hospital stay, though not always statistically significant. One study showed worse outcomes in the sealant group. No study reported increased complications. Subgroup analyses were limited.
CONCLUSIONS: Sealants used with staplers may reduce PAL incidence and duration, particularly in high-risk patients, without increased complications. However, variability in study design and limited subgroup data weaken current evidence. Larger, standardized randomized controlled trials are needed to confirm clinical benefit and inform routine use.

### PMID 41877070 (2026) — BMC infectious diseases
TITLE: Endovascular aneurysm repair combined with local and systemic antibacterial treatment for infected aorto-iliac artery aneurysms caused by Brucella.
DOI: 10.1186/s12879-026-13056-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Brucella-induced aorto-iliac aneurysms (with &lt;&#x2009;200 documented cases globally) present unique therapeutic challenges due to their dual pathology of structural fragility and persistent bacteremia. Despite their life-threatening nature, no consensus exists on optimal management, particularly for patients unsuitable for open surgical reconstruction. This single-center case series provides critical insights into endovascular salvage strategies for this orphan disease. METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted on 16 consecutive patients with Brucella-infected aorto-iliac aneurysms undergoing endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) with adjunctive local and systemic antimicrobial therapy at our institution between January 2019 and June 2025. RESULTS: The cohort demonstrated a 30-day mortality rate of 6.3% (1/16) and all-cause mortality of 31.3% (5/16) during a mean follow-up of 31.1 months. Notably, one patient (6.3%) without local gentamicin-fibrin sealant application developed distal aneurysm recurrence leading to fatal hematemesis at 48 months. In this cohort, Three patients died as a consequence of self-discontinuation of antibiotic therapy: two patients (12.5%) succumbed to infectious shock, while one patient experienced fatal aneurysm recurrence and rupture. Among 15 patients receiving standardized protocol (EVAR with intracavitary gentamicin instillation and prolonged antimicrobial therapy), satisfactory aortic remodeling was achieved with significant aneurysm diameter reduction (39.7 vs. 44.5&#xa0;mm, P&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01). Reintervention rate was 6.3% (1 / 16) for iliac occlusion. CONCLUSIONS: Although radical open repair with complete debridement should remain the preferred approach for physiologically eligible patients, our findings suggest that EVAR combined with intracavitary antibiotic delivery and rigorously monitored antimicrobial therapy may be a viable alternative in select cases. This hybrid strategy requires meticulous patient selection, sustained infection control, and strict therapeutic compliance to mitigate long-term reinfection risks. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

### PMID 41832382 (2026) — Techniques in coloproctology
TITLE: Novel adjunctive technologies for the prevention of colorectal anastomotic leakage: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1007/s10151-026-03311-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Anastomotic leakage (AL) remains one of the most serious complications following colorectal surgery, particularly after low anterior resection. In recent years, several adjunctive technologies have been introduced to reinforce anastomotic integrity during the early phases of healing. This systematic review aimed to evaluate the safety, feasibility, and clinical effectiveness of novel mechanical and biological devices designed to prevent AL in colorectal surgery.
METHODS: A systematic literature search was conducted in PubMed, Embase, and Scopus. Human studies evaluating innovative adjunctive devices for AL prevention in patients undergoing low anterior resection were included. Studies focusing on transanal tubes, omental wrapping, or suture reinforcement were excluded. The primary outcome was the rate of anastomotic leakage.
RESULTS: Eighteen studies published between 2005 and 2021 met the inclusion criteria. The evaluated technologies were grouped into six categories: bioabsorbable staple-line reinforcements, nitinol-based compression rings, biodegradable intraluminal sheaths, vacuum-anchored diversion systems, fi brin-based sealants, and collagen patches (Seamguard&#x2122;, C-Seal&#x2122;, ColonRing&#x2122;, Colovac&#x2122;, Tissucol&#x2122;/Greenplast&#x2122;, TachoSil&#x2122;, and Hemopatch&#x2122;). Considerable heterogeneity in study design and methodological quality was observed. Although several devices demonstrated acceptable technical feasibility and safety, their eff ect on AL prevention was inconsistent. Only a limited number of studies included control groups or were designed as randomized controlled trials. Device-related complications, including migration, technical difficulties, and local tissue reactions, were reported in some series.
CONCLUSIONS: Current adjunctive technologies have not consistently demonstrated a reduction in AL rates after colorectal surgery. While selected devices may provide potential benefit in high-risk patients, their clinical applicability remains limited by technical constraints and heterogeneous evidence. Further large, high-quality studies incorporating standardized definitions of AL and patient-specific risk stratification are warranted.

### PMID 42185846 (2026) — BMC surgery
TITLE: Comparative safety and efficacy of gelatin-thrombin matrix sealants versus conventional hemostatic agents in spinal surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1186/s12893-026-03847-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Gelatin-thrombin matrix sealants (GTMS), such as Floseal and Surgiflo, are increasingly used to achieve rapid hemostasis in spine surgery, where bleeding control is challenging due to the rich epidural venous plexus. However, their comparative effectiveness and safety remain unclear. This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of GTMS in spine surgery.
METHODS: This systematic review and meta-analysis was performed in line with the methodological framework outlined in the PRISMA 2020 statement. A comprehensive literature search was carried out across PubMed, Embase, the Cochrane Library, and Web of Science, covering all eligible studies published up to August 2025. Randomized controlled trials evaluating the use of gelatin-thrombin matrix sealants (GTMS) versus alternative topical hemostatic agents or conventional hemostatic approaches in spine surgery were considered eligible. Pooled estimates were synthesized using a random-effects model and expressed as weighted mean differences (WMDs), standardized mean differences (SMDs), or odds ratios (ORs), together with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: Seven randomized controlled trials were included. GTMS was associated with a higher 3-min hemostasis success rate than control interventions (OR&#x2009;=&#x2009;2.50, 95% CI: 1.40-4.45). A borderline reduction in intraoperative blood loss was observed with GTMS (SMD&#x2009;= -&#x2009;1.05, 95% CI:&#x2009;-&#x2009;2.11 to 0.00), and GTMS was associated with lower total postoperative drainage volume (WMD&#x2009;= -&#x2009;16.34&#xa0;mL, 95% CI:&#x2009;-&#x2009;24.64 to&#x2009;-&#x2009;8.04). No significant differences were observed in intraoperative or postoperative transfusion rates, postoperative hemoglobin levels, or postoperative day 1 drainage volume. Adverse events were infrequent and comparable between groups.
CONCLUSION: Current randomized evidence suggests that GTMS may improve selected local hemostatic outcomes in spine surgery, particularly early hemostasis. However, the observed reduction in intraoperative blood loss was borderline and accompanied by substantial heterogeneity, and no clear benefit was observed for transfusion requirements, postoperative hemoglobin levels, or perioperative complications. The potential value of GTMS may be more relevant in procedures involving diffuse venous bleeding or technically constrained operative fields. Given the limited number of included trials and the clinical heterogeneity across surgical settings, further well-designed randomized studies are needed to clarify the patient populations and operative scenarios in which GTMS may provide clinically meaningful benefit.

### PMID 41728393 (2026) — Cureus
TITLE: Impact of Floseal and NasoPore in Managing Epistaxis in the Emergency Department: A Quality Improvement Analysis.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.102043 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Epistaxis is a common ear, nose, throat (ENT) presentation in the emergency department (ED), with the majority of the population having experienced an episode during their lifetime and required hospitalization. Like many district general hospitals (DGHs) in the country, St Peter's Hospital does not offer adult inpatient or out-of-hours emergency cover for ENT, necessitating patients who require intranasal packing with a Rapid Rhino&#xae;&#xa0;(Smith &amp; Nephew, Hull, UK) to be transferred to another hospital for assessment and admission, with most transfers being via ambulance. Apart from being resource-heavy, both the procedure itself and the prolonged stay in ED awaiting transport are a distressing experience for the patient. Therefore, the present quality improvement analysis was performed for the assessment of the effectiveness of Floseal&#xae; (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, IL, USA) and NasoPore&#xae; (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA), a bioresorbable material for epistaxis.
METHODS: We introduced the revised Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) ENT UK guidelines for epistaxis management in our department. Two Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycles were conducted in parallel. To assess the patient experience, a feedback form was designed with particular focus on pain score using the Visual Analog Scale (VAS). IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 16 (Released 2007; IBM Corp., Armonk, New York, United States)&#xa0;was used for descriptive analysis, and cost-effectiveness analysis was also performed to compare the outcomes with rapid rhino nasal packing. A telephonic follow-up on days 2 and 5 was organized to document any adverse features.
RESULTS: The use of bioresorbable nasal packing among 60 patients demonstrated a clear benefit over the conventional practice of a non-absorbable packing, like Rapid Rhino. It reduced the length of stay (LOS) in ED and allowed the patients to go home with self-care instructions. In addition to much better patient comfort and tolerability (drop in pain score from 7 to 2 on VAS), this intervention also had a significant cost-saving impact with more than 65% cost reduction.
CONCLUSION: Floseal bioresorbable material can be used as a replacement for traditional nasal packing, as it was found to be more effective and cost-effective.

### PMID 42393727 (2026) — World journal of emergency surgery : WJES
TITLE: Pathophysiology, prevention and treatment of postoperative peritoneal adhesions: a WSES narrative.
DOI: 10.1186/s13017-026-00711-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Adhesions are a common complication following surgery, and they can cause significant morbidity. However, adhesions are not easily diagnosed with imaging, and often only become apparent when they cause intestinal obstruction symptoms. The pathophysiology of adhesion formation is complex, thus despite advances in surgical techniques and postoperative care, adhesions remain a persistent problem in clinical practice. Despite evidence for efficacy of some strategies in reducing adhesion formation question remain regarding the indications and impact on clinically relevant outcomes. The paper, supported by the World Society of Emergency Surgery (WSES), aims to provide a thorough examination of the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying adhesion formation and assess the efficacy of existing preventive strategies to guide future research and clinical practice in the management of adhesions.
METHODS: Study design and Framework This position paper was developed in accordance with the World Society of Emergency Surgery (WSES) methodology for consensus-based guidelines. The objective was to synthesize current evidence on adhesion pathophysiology and translate it into a clinically applicable "Narrative". Expert Panel Selection and Composition: The expert panel was composed of international specialists in general, trauma, and emergency surgery. Experts were selected based on their clinical leadership and academic contributions to the fields of peritoneal surgery and postoperative complication management. The panel included senior representatives from major surgical departments in Singapore (Sengkang and Singapore General Hospital), The Netherlands (Radboud University), and Italy (University of Bologna and Bufalini Hospital). Literature Search and Evidence Synthesis: A comprehensive search was conducted across major medical databases (e.g., PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane Library) to identify literature concerning the pathophysiology and prevention of adhesions. The search strategy employed Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) descriptors and keywords including: "peritoneal adhesions," "postoperative adhesions," "adhesion prevention," "adhesion barriers," "carboxymethylcellulose," "hyaluronic acid," "icodextrin," "oxidized regenerated cellulose," "polyethylene glycol," "adhesive small bowel obstruction," "adhesiolysis". No language restrictions were applied to the search strategy. A total of 56 studies were selected, including systematic reviews, meta-analyses, randomized clinical trials (RCTs), and retrospective cohort studies. The panel focused on clinically relevant outcomes, specifically looking for evidence that connected interventions to reduced rates of adhesive small bowel obstruction (ASBO) and reoperation.&#xa0;Studies were screened based on their ability to address three specific pillars: surgical approach (MIS vs. Open), technical manoeuvres (haemostasis and tissue handling), and the use of mechanical or chemical adjuncts. Consensus Achievement and Formulation: The recommendations were developed through a structured, iterative revision process: Literature Synthesis: Lead authors performed the primary review and drafted the pathophysiological and preventative sections. Internal Peer Review: The manuscript underwent rigorous revision by the international expert panel to reach a consensus on the position statements. Final Validation: All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript and the resulting "Bundle" recommendations to ensure they were supported by the cited data.
RESULTS: A total of 56 studies (systematic review and meta-analysis, randomized clinical trial, retrospective comparative cohort studies, case series) have been included in this paper to be discussed. Surgical techniques, as well as chemical and mechanical barriers were discussed in depth in this paper to come up with the recommendation.
CONCLUSION: The WSES expert panel suggests the following bundle to reduce postoperative peritoneal adhesions: Bundle 1: Whenever possible, opt for minimally invasive surgery (MIS) or laparoscopic procedures. Bundle 2: Good surgical techniques. Bundle 3: Utilise barriers.

### PMID 41615837 (2026) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Effectiveness and Safety of Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose for Hemostasis in Joint Arthroplasty: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.1177/10760296261420230 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BackgroundOxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) is a topical hemostatic agent, but its efficacy and safety in arthroplasty remain inconclusive. This meta-analysis aimed to comprehensively assess its role in this procedure.MethodsWe systematically searched multiple databases up to July 30, 2025, for cohort studies and randomized controlled trials investigating the use of ORC in arthroplasty. Study quality was assessed using standard tools, and data were analyzed using Stata software.ResultsA total of 33 articles were retrieved. After removing 27 duplicates, six high-quality studies involving 684 participants were included in the analysis. The analysis revealed that ORC significantly reduced total blood loss (WMD&#x2009;=&#x2009;-102.50&#x2005;mL, 95% CI: -201.75, -3.26, I2&#x2009;=&#x2009;69.9%) and hemoglobin drop (WMD&#x2009;=&#x2009;-3.99&#x2005;g/L, 95% CI: -6.19, -1.79, I2&#x2009;=&#x2009;39.8%) compared with the control group. No significant differences were found in other secondary outcomes, such as intraoperative blood loss, risk of thrombosis, operative time, or wound complications.ConclusionORC is an effective and safe hemostatic agent that reduces total blood loss and hemoglobin drop during arthroplasty. Future research should focus on determining the optimal timing of ORC and long-term functional outcomes.

### PMID 41474083 (2026) — Biotechnology and bioengineering
TITLE: Silk Fibroin With Enhanced Hemostatic Property by the Introduction of Carboxyl Moieties and Preservation of Micrometer Scale Fiber Architecture.
DOI: 10.1002/bit.70148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: In the realm of clinical surgery, the unceasing pursuit of hemostatic materials with rapid hemostasis, excellent biocompatibility, degradability, wound-healing promotion, and economic viability is of utmost importance. This study, inspired by the preparation and hemostatic mechanism of Surgicel&#xae;, a prevalent surgical hemostatic agent, low-cost silk fibroin (SF) was modified. By adding carboxyl groups while maintaining the SF micron-fiber structure, the modified SF showed enhanced water and blood absorption, as well as a significantly improved Ca&#xb2;&#x207a; transport capacity compared to unmodified SF. In vitro coagulation tests revealed that the modified SF had excellent hemostatic efficacy, with the quickest time at 76.75&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.17&#x2009;s. In the animal bleeding model, its fastest hemostatic time was 93&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;9.63&#x2009;s, with a mean blood loss of 0.28&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.05&#x2009;g, similar to Surgicel&#xae; (100.64&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;2.87&#x2009;s, 0.24&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;0.05&#x2009;g). Moreover, the modified SF hemostatic yarns exhibited favorable blood, cell, and biocompatibility, making them a promising option for surgical wound hemostasis, especially in organ surgery.

### PMID 41411494 (2026) — Dermatologic surgery : official publication for American Society for Dermatologic Surgery [et al.]
TITLE: Pharmacologic Methods to Reduce Postoperative Bleeding During the First Stage of the Interpolated Forehead Flap Repair: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000004969 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The most common complication after interpolated forehead flap repair is postoperative bleeding from the pedicle. Reconstructive surgeons should focus on minimizing postoperative bleeding while ensuring the blood supply and integrity of the flap are preserved.
OBJECTIVE: To provide a comprehensive review of the various methods to reduce the risk of bleeding after interpolated forehead flap repair.
METHODS: A comprehensive literature review of PubMed articles discussing strategies to reduce postoperative bleeding specifically in interpolated forehead flap repair was performed.
RESULTS: A total of 9 unique techniques were apparent from the literature, including use of hydrophilic polymer and potassium ferrate, ferric subsulfate 20% solution, oxidized regenerated cellulose gauze, gelatin sponges, thrombin-based hemostatic agents, aluminum chloride, cyanoacrylate, skin graft, and tranexamic acid.
CONCLUSION: Reconstructive surgeons should be knowledgeable of the various techniques to reduce bleeding after interpolated forehead flap repair, as bleeding can result in patient dissatisfaction and often requires intervention. Each technique identified in the literature offers its own advantages and drawbacks; its choice should be tailored to the needs of each patient.

### PMID 42288399 (2026) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Pro: Point-of-care Viscoelastic Testing Should Be Routinely Used in All Cardiac Surgery Patients.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2026.05.044 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: This "Pro" argument supports the routine incorporation of point-of-care viscoelastic testing (VET) into perioperative bleeding management algorithms for all cardiac surgery patients. This group of patients remains among the highest consumers of allogeneic blood products, and transfusion is independently associated with increased morbidity, mortality, and cost. Standard laboratory tests have significant limitations in diagnosing coagulopathy and are not designed to guide intraoperative bleeding management. VET enables rapid identification of specific coagulation abnormalities and supports targeted hemostatic therapy. Current evidence demonstrates reductions in transfusion requirements, postoperative bleeding, acute kidney injury, and healthcare costs when VET is integrated into structured transfusion algorithms. Although limitations exist, the available evidence and contemporary guidelines support the routine implementation of VET in cardiac surgical programs.

### PMID 42145275 (2026) — The Cochrane database of systematic reviews
TITLE: Thromboelastography (TEG) or thromboelastometry (ROTEM) to monitor haemostatic treatment versus usual care in adults or children with bleeding.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007871.pub4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Severe bleeding and coagulopathy are serious clinical conditions that are associated with high mortality. Thromboelastography (TEG) and thromboelastometry (ROTEM) are increasingly used to guide transfusion strategy, but their roles remain disputed. This is an update of a review that was first published in 2011 and updated in January 2016.
OBJECTIVES: The objective was to evaluate the benefits and harms of TEG-/ROTEM-guided transfusion strategies for bleeding in adults and children by comparing TEG-ROTEM-guided transfusion with standard treatment.
SEARCH METHODS: In this updated review, we identified randomised controlled trials (RCTs) from the following electronic databases: Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL); Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL; Embase; Web of Science Core Collection and Biosis Previews via Clarivate; CINAHL EBSCO; and the WHO Global Index Medicus incl. LILACS (from 2015 up to 5 January 2025). We searched for ongoing clinical trials and unpublished studies in the following registries during the aforementioned period: ISRCTN, ClinicalTrials.gov, CentreWatch, and UMIN-CTR. We contacted trial authors, authors of previous reviews, and manufacturers in the field. The original searches were run in October 2010 and January 2016.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included all RCTs, irrespective of blinding or language, that compared transfusion guided by TEG or ROTEM to transfusion guided by clinical judgement, guided by standard laboratory tests, or a combination. We also included interventional algorithms including both TEG and ROTEM in combination with standard laboratory tests or other devices. The primary analysis included trials on TEG or ROTEM versus any comparator.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently abstracted data; we resolved any disagreements by discussion. We presented pooled estimates of the intervention effects on dichotomous outcomes as risk ratios (RRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Due to skewed data, meta-analysis was not provided for continuous outcome data. Our primary outcome measure was all-cause mortality. We performed subgroup and sensitivity analyses to assess the effect of a TEG- or ROTEM-guided algorithm in adults and children on various clinical and physiological outcomes. We evaluated potential bias by examining trial methodological components using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 1 and assessed the risk of random error through Trial Sequential Analysis (TSA).
MAIN RESULTS: This systematic review included 35 randomised trials (n = 3096), with most involving patients undergoing elective cardiac surgery. Hence, 18 trials and 1603 participants were added since the previous update of this review. TEG-/ROTEM-guided transfusion algorithms may be associated with a reduction in mortality (RR 0.76, 95% CI 0.63 to 0.92; 19 trials; 1865 participants, I2= 0%; random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), but the evidence is very uncertain. This aligns with results from a previous update of this review. Additionally, TEG-/ROTEM-guided transfusion algorithms may reduce bleeding volume (standardised mean difference -0.31, 95% CI -0.51 to -0.11; 19 trials; 1523 participants, I&#xb2; = 72%, random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), but the evidence is very uncertain. No effects on the need for packed red blood cells were seen; RR 0.94 (95% CI 0.87 to 1.01; 21 trials, 2003 participants; I2 = 91%; random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), but the evidence is very uncertain. Furthermore, reductions may be observed in the use of fresh frozen plasma (RR 0.52, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.76; 18 trials; 1536 participants; I2 = 94%, random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), platelet transfusions (RR 0.69, 95% CI: 0.55 to 0.87; 20 trials; 1607 participants; I2 = 60%; random-effects model; very low-certainty evidence), and in the risk of surgical re-intervention (RR 0.63, 95% CI 0.45 to 0.88; 13 trials; 1204 participants; I&#xb2; = 0%; fixed-effect model; very low-certainty evidence), but the evidence is very uncertain. Using the GRADE framework, the certainty of the evidence was judged to be very low across all outcomes. TSA for mortality indicated that 64% of the required information size had been reached, with the monitoring boundary for benefit crossed.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: TEG-/ROTEM-guided transfusion algorithms may reduce the risk of mortality, bleeding volume, and the need for fresh frozen plasma, platelets, and surgical re-intervention, but the evidence is very uncertain. Furthermore, the results were primarily based on the adult population undergoing elective cardiac surgery. Hence, the conclusion remains unchanged from the previous update of this review. There is a need for large, low risk of bias randomised controlled trials evaluating TEG/ROTEM across diverse clinical settings, including paediatric and neonatal populations, sepsis, trauma, obstetrics, and high-risk surgical and critically ill cohorts requiring major transfusion. Future studies should be adequately powered and prioritise patient-centred outcomes such as long-term survival, adverse events, cost-effectiveness, and the role of TEG/ROTEM in coagulopathy and severe haemorrhage.

### PMID 42127996 (2026) — Endoscopy
TITLE: Endoscopic diagnosis and management of peptic ulcer bleeding: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline - Update 2026.
DOI: 10.1055/a-2863-8314 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: ABSTRACT: This guideline is an update of the 2021 ESGE Guideline on Endoscopic diagnosis and management of nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage. The following are the new and/or revised recommendations.
PRE-ENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 1: ESGE does not recommend the routine use of video capsule endoscopy or telemetric blood-sensing capsules in the management of patients with suspected upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage (UGIH).
PRE-ENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 2: ESGE suggests, if intravenous erythromycin is unavailable, pre-endoscopy administration of intravenous metoclopramide in selected patients with clinically severe or ongoing active UGIH.
PRE-ENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 3: ESGE suggests that pre-endoscopy high dose intravenous proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy be considered in patients presenting with acute UGIH; however, this should not delay early endoscopy.
PRE-ENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 4: ESGE does not recommend emergent (&#x2264;6 hours) or urgent (&#x2264;12 hours) upper GI endoscopy unless the patient remains hemodynamically unstable despite adequate resuscitation.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 5: ESGE suggests that patients with peptic ulcers presenting with an adherent clot (Forrest IIb) should undergo endoscopic therapy, with clot removal and subsequent endoscopic hemostasis if indicated, provided that the endoscopist has the technical competence to safely remove the clot and manage potential conversion to a higher risk bleeding lesion.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 6: ESGE could not reach a consensus for or against the routine use of a Doppler endoscopic probe in treatment decisions of high risk endoscopic stigmata of peptic ulcer bleeding.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 7: ESGE suggests the use of over-the-scope (OTS) clips as monotherapy as an alternative to combination therapy as first-line therapy for peptic ulcer bleeding with high risk stigmata (FIa, FIb) owing to a lower risk of further bleeding compared with standard endoscopic hemostatic therapy.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 8: ESGE recommends, for patients with an ulcer with a nonbleeding visible vessel (FIIa), contact or noncontact thermal therapy, mechanical therapy (e.g. through-the-scope or OTS clips), or injection of a sclerosing agent, each as monotherapy or in combination with epinephrine injection.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 9: ESGE suggests, for patients with an ulcer with a nonbleeding visible vessel (FIIa), OTS clips may be used as alternative monotherapy.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 10: ESGE suggests hemostatic forceps with soft coagulation may be used as monotherapy in the treatment of peptic ulcer bleeding with high risk stigmata (FIa, FIb, and FIIa).
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 11: ESGE suggests that hemostatic agents should not be used as monotherapy in the first-line treatment of patients with high risk stigmata of peptic ulcer bleeding.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 12: ESGE suggests that, in patients with persistent bleeding refractory to standard hemostasis modalities, the use of a topical hemostatic agent or OTS clips should be considered.
ENDOSCOPIC MANAGEMENT: 13: ESGE recommends that, in patients with persistent bleeding refractory to all modalities of endoscopic hemostasis, including topical hemostatic agents and OTS clips, transcatheter angiographic embolization (TAE) should be considered. Surgery is indicated when TAE is not locally available or after unsuccessful TAE.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 14: ESGE suggests that prophylactic TAE be considered in selected high risk cases of peptic ulcer bleeding (e.g. patients with hemodynamic instability at presentation, posterior duodenal wall ulcer location, large ulcer size [&gt;2 cm], or when durable endoscopic hemostasis is considered uncertain).
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 15: ESGE could not reach a consensus for or against the routine use of potassium-competitive acid blockers for patients who have undergone endoscopic hemostasis.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 16: ESGE recommends that, for patients with clinical evidence of recurrent peptic ulcer bleeding, use of an OTS clip should be considered. Should this second attempt at endoscopic hemostasis also be unsuccessful, TAE should be considered. Surgery is indicated when TAE is either locally unavailable or after unsuccessful TAE.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 17: ESGE recommends that, in patients with peptic ulcer hemorrhage who require ongoing anticoagulation therapy, anticoagulation should be resumed as soon as clinically indicated based on thromboembolic risk.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 18: ESGE suggests that iron therapy be initiated prior to hospital discharge in patients with peptic ulcer bleeding and iron deficiency and/or anemia.
POSTENDOSCOPY MANAGEMENT: 19: ESGE suggests that early oral nutrition, within 24 hours following endoscopic hemostasis, be initiated in patients with peptic ulcer bleeding in whom durable hemostasis has been achieved.

### PMID 42425562 (2026) — BMJ open
TITLE: Efficacy and safety of haemostatic agents for patients receiving antiplatelet therapy before coronary artery bypass grafting: a protocol for a systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2026-120125 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Most patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) receive preoperative antiplatelet therapy to reduce ischaemic events but this increases perioperative bleeding and transfusion risk. Tranexamic acid, aminocaproic acid, aprotinin and desmopressin are commonly employed to reduce such risk; however, robust direct head-to-head comparative evidence remains limited in this specific population. Therefore, we will conduct a network meta-analysis (NMA) of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) to compare their relative efficacy and safety.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We will systematically search PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Scopus and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials from inception to 24 March 2026 for RCTs that compare these four agents versus placebo/standard care or head-to-head in adults receiving preoperative antiplatelet therapy for CABG. Two reviewers will independently screen studies, extract data and assess the risk of bias using the Risk of Bias Instrument for Use in SysTematic reviews-for Randomised Controlled Trials tool. Primary outcomes will be the total perioperative volume of blood loss and the proportion of patients receiving red blood cell transfusions. Secondary outcomes will include blood product transfusion volumes, reoperation rates for bleeding or cardiac tamponade, rates of composite thromboembolic events, all-cause mortality and incidence of acute kidney injury. Pairwise random-effects meta-analyses will be performed first followed by Bayesian NMA. Surface under the cumulative ranking curve for the outcomes of interest will be used to rank the competing interventions. The Confidence in Network Meta-Analysis framework will be used to assess the quality of evidence.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Ethical approval is not required. Findings will be submitted to a peer-reviewed journal and disseminated to support clinical decision-making.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD420251235248.

### PMID 42379712 (2026) — BMJ open
TITLE: Comparison of effectiveness and safety of different haemostatic materials in patients undergoing transradial coronary intervention and diagnosis: a protocol for systematic review and network meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2026-119976 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Effective compression haemostasis is essential after transradial coronary procedures. However, evidence directly comparing different haemostatic materials remains limited. This study aims to compare and rank the efficacy and safety of different haemostatic materials used as adjuncts to compression after transradial coronary angiography and/or percutaneous coronary intervention, and to explore whether compression modality modifies their relative effects.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We will systematically search nine databases (Cochrane Library, Embase, PubMed, Web of Science, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, Chinese Biomedical Literature Database, Wanfang Data, VIP Database and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature) for randomized controlled trials on post-transradial access (TRA) compression haemostasis with different haemostatic materials, from database inception to December 2025. Supplementary searches will be conducted in ClinicalTrials.gov, WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, academic search engines and reference lists of included studies. Two reviewers will independently perform study selection, data extraction and risk of bias assessment using the Cochrane Risk of Bias V.2 tool. A network meta-analysis will be conducted within a frequentist framework using Stata V.16.0. Heterogeneity, inconsistency, small-study effects, evidence quality, sensitivity and the assumption of transitivity will be assessed. Subgroup analyses will be performed according to compression modality (manual vs mechanical) and, where data permit, other prespecified study-level characteristics that may modify treatment effects.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: As this study is a systematic review and network meta-analysis based on published data, ethical approval is not required. The results will be disseminated through publication in a peer-reviewed journal and presentation at academic conferences.
PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD420251250499.

### PMID 41587690 (2026) — Brazilian journal of anesthesiology (Elsevier)
TITLE: Effectiveness and safety of antifibrinolytic agents in off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bjane.2026.844731 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG) is the most widely used cardiac intervention and can be accomplished without an extracorporeal circulation off-pump. The benefits of antifibrinolytics in off-pump CABG have yet to be demonstrated.
METHODS: Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs) and observational studies comparing the use of antifibrinolytic agents (tranexamic acid, aprotinin, and epsilon-aminocaproic) versus controls in patients undergoing off-pump CABG were searched in the PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane databases. Outcomes included thromboembolic events, in-hospital mortality, overall mortality, bleeding, Intensive Care Unit (ICU) length of stay, and blood product transfusions. Meta-analyses were conducted using the Inverse Variance method under a random-effects model, with p &lt; 0.05 considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: Of the 23,149 patients in 20 RCTs and seven observational studies, 51% received antifibrinolytic agents (tranexamic acid or aprotinin). Observational and randomized designs were analyzed separately in primary subgroup analyses. Significant reduction was found for overall mortality (RR = 0.72; [95% CI 0.54-0.95]) in the RCT subgroup. Red-blood-cell transfusion requirements were reduced (RR = 0.65; [95% CI 0.53, 0.78]) as well as Platelets (RR = 0.59; [95% CI 0.41, 0.84]) and fresh-frozen-plasma (RR = 0.39; [95% CI 0.36, 0.42]) transfusion requirement. The RCT subgroup showed a reduction in thromboembolic events (RR = 0.55; [95% CI 0.39, 0.79]).
CONCLUSIONS: In off-pump CABG, antifibrinolytics reduced the need for blood transfusion while reducing thromboembolic events and overall mortality in RCT subgroups, while pooled analyses combining RCTs and observational studies did not demonstrate significant reductions. PROSPERO LINK: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/view/CRD42024545640.

### PMID 41330796 (2026) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Evaluating Topical Antifibrinolytics in Cardiac Surgery: A Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, and Trial Sequential Analysis.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2025.10.040 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, Review, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Lysine analog antifibrinolytics (LAAF) like tranexamic acid (TXA) and aminocaproic acid (EACA) reduce intraoperative blood loss, especially in cardiac surgery where bleeding risks are high. These LAAFs inhibit fibrinolysis and have been proven to decrease bleeding and transfusion volume. In cardiac surgery, frequent transfusions raise the risk of infections, extend hospital stays and reoperations, and carry higher morbidity and mortality. Current guidelines recommend intravenous antifibrinolytics; however, the objective of this review was to determine whether topical administration in cardiac surgery reduces blood loss, with or without intravenous LAAF.
METHODS: PubMed, Embase, MEDLINE, Cochrane CENTRAL, and Clarivate WoS were searched from inception to August 31, 2024, for randomized controlled trials and observational studies comparing topical TXA or EACA to placebo in cardiac surgery. Data extraction was done independently, and RoB2/ROBINS-I was used for quality assessment. A derSimmonian-Laird random-effects model was applied. Mean differences were used for continuous outcomes, and OR/RR was used for binary. I&#xb2; statistics measure heterogeneity. Sensitivity analysis and GOSH plotting assessed heterogeneity; trial sequential analysis was performed. The certainty of the evidence followed GRADE guidelines.
RESULTS: The meta-analysis included 26 studies with 2,624 patients, 24 focused on adults. Given the pragmatic approach to this meta-analysis, a wide variety of surgical procedures were included, with coronary artery bypass grafting and valvular procedures being the most prevalent. LAAF administration reduced postoperative blood loss by 174 mL (MD -173.99, 95% CI -238.20 to -109.78, p &lt; 0.00001), and the effect remained constant through subgroup analysis (coronary artery bypass grafting, high- v low-dose, dual-route administration). No significant differences were found in transfusion rates for packed red blood cells (PRBC) and platelets, though LAAF reduced PRBC volume (MD -0.6 units, 95% CI -0.88 to -0.24, p = 0.00006) and fresh frozen plasma requirements (RR 0.69, 95% CI: 0.5 to 0.95, p = 0.03). No differences in hematological change scores or complication rates were observed. The analysis showed high heterogeneity, but the overall effect remained consistent. A trial sequential analysis suggests there is enough data to confirm this effect.
CONCLUSION: Topical LAAF administration reduces postoperative blood loss up to 24 hours postoperatively. Secondary analyses showed reductions in PRBC transfusion volume and fresh frozen plasma transfusion rate, without increased complications.
REGISTRATION: PROSPERO CRD42024579777, August 27, 2024.

### PMID 41075954 (2026) — The American journal of cardiology
TITLE: The Efficacy of Hemostatic Agents on Radial Artery Compression Methods Following Transradial Procedures: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2025.09.058 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: Radial artery hemostasis in patients undergoing transradial procedures can be achieved through various compression methods, including manual or mechanical devices, with or without the use of hemostatic agents, and may involve patent hemostasis or concomitant ulnar compression. Previous findings suggest that radial artery compression should be maintained for 120 minutes postprocedure. However, the optimal compression method and the efficiency of hemostatic agents remain uncertain. Therefore, we decided to perform a systematic review and meta-analysis evaluating the efficacy of radial artery compression with adjunctive hemostatic agents versus compression without hemostatic agents on patients following transradial procedures. The systematic search was conducted using PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Central databases. The outcomes evaluated were: time to achieve hemostasis (TAH), failure to achieve hemostasis (FAH), 24-hour radial artery occlusion (24-RAO), and hematoma occurrence. We performed subgroup analyses separating manual and mechanical compression with hemostatic agents. 13 randomized controlled trials were included, comprising 6,588 patients. 2,924 (44.4%) patients underwent compression with hemostatic agents, and 3,664 (55.6%) underwent compression without hemostatic agents. The statistical analysis indicated that hemostatic agents were associated with a significantly reduced TAH (MD -86.59 min; 95% CI -106.88 to -66.30; p &lt; 0.01) compared to compressions without hemostatic agents. No statistical difference was found between the methods regarding 24-RAO, FAH, and hematoma occurrence. However, subgroup analyses revealed that, in the manual compression with hemostatic agents subgroup, 24-RAO was also significantly reduced (RR 0.46; 95% CI 0.27-0.78). In conclusion, this meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials reveals that compression with hemostatic agents, compared to compressions without hemostatic agents, can reduce TAH without compromising the occurrence of hematomas for patients following transradial procedures. 24-RAO was also less frequent in patients who underwent manual compression with hemostatic agents.

### PMID 41827240 (2026) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Local Hemostasis as the Critical Enabler for Safe Antithrombotic Therapy in Dentistry-Navigating Future Frontiers and Innovative Concepts.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm15051823 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Perioperative management of antithrombotic therapy in oral surgery represents an evolving paradigm. This critical review evaluates the contemporary scientific evidence that challenges the conventional practice of routinely discontinuing anticoagulants and/or antiplatelet agents to prevent postoperative bleeding. The traditional strategy carries an unacceptable risk of iatrogenic, sometimes severe, thromboembolic events. The aim of this systematic narrative review is to synthesize the current evidence (2015-2025) and to outline a new, patient-centered clinical framework that dynamically balances thromboembolic and hemorrhagic risks. Materials and methods: A systematic search of major databases (PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, Web of Science) identified relevant studies, structured according to the PICO framework. The search strategy prioritized high-level evidence, including clinical guidelines, systematic reviews, meta-analyses, randomized controlled trials, and prospective cohort studies published between January 2015 and November 2025. Results: The results reinforce an emerging consensus: the basis of safe management is the rigorous application of advanced local hemostasis techniques (e.g., prioritizing resorbable materials, sutures, topical hemostatic agents, and antifibrinolytics) and the use of perioperative decision-making algorithms. These measures allow, in most routine dental surgical procedures, the safe continuation of antithrombotic therapy, thus minimizing the thromboembolic risk without significantly increasing the risk of clinically significant bleeding. In the future, research should focus on optimizing materials science (novel biomaterials and controlled-release systems) and on standardizing and validating protocols in specific populations (e.g., patients on combination therapy or at extreme cardiovascular risk). This review argues that the adoption of this evidence-based model, with local hemostasis as a critical pillar, is essential for modern, ethical, and safe dental practice.

### PMID 40055640 (2025) — BMC cardiovascular disorders
TITLE: Abrupt left coronary artery malperfusion secondary to acute type A aortic dissection after weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s12872-025-04556-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Acute Stanford type A aortic dissection (ATAAD) is a lethal emergency. However, even with instant surgical repair, early mortality is up to 20%. ATAAD complicated by coronary artery involvement is considered rare but life-threatening because this can cause coronary artery malperfusion which results in acute myocardial infarction. In particular, left coronary artery malperfusion can bring worse outcomes than right coronary artery malperfusion, but there are few reports of left coronary artery involvement secondary to ATAAD.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a case of a woman who got emergency open heart surgery due to ATAAD. After the hemiarch replacement, the first weaning from bypass was relatively smooth. However, as soon as starting infusion protamine, we found out sudden regional wall motion abnormality at the diffuse anteroseptal to the lateral wall on echocardiography and ST depression on leads II and V5 electrocardiogram after several ventricular fibrillation. We recognized by echocardiography that intimal dissection flap extended to the left coronary artery ostium and dynamically obstructed left coronary artery blood flow, because the true lumen collapsed dynamically during the diastolic phase. Upon re-establishing bypass, proximal aortic false lumen was obliterated with BioGlue again. Smooth weaning from bypass proceeded at last. Finally, the blood flow to the left coronary artery ostium was good, and the wall motion abnormality was improved.
CONCLUSION: Our report suggests the importance of the degree of myocardial damage caused by coronary artery malperfusion which is a major predictor of patient outcome. To reduce complications and minimize the mortality rate, an instant treatment plan is needed. However, limited options for exact surgical treatment directions or guidelines for coronary artery malperfusion secondary to ATAAD are available so far. We emphasize that we should not neglect any signs indicative of coronary artery malperfusion appear such as changes of electrocardiogram and echocardiography. Moreover, our report contributes to a profound understanding among clinicians regarding the necessity of practical treatment guidelines about coronary artery malperfusion due to ATAAD based on various surgical experiences and studies.

### PMID 41376992 (2025) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Off-label use of lung sealants: the need for evidence-based guidelines and adequate indications for use.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd-2025-1230 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Prolonged pulmonary air leakage remains a significant challenge in thoracic surgery, and is associated with a more complicated post-operative course. Lung sealants may provide a solution, but the evidence for their effectiveness is heterogenous and head-to-head comparisons between sealants are lacking. While there are some consensus guidelines discussing when an air leak should be treated, there are no practice guidelines and specific sealant choice is left to surgeon experience. This review addresses the evidence gaps in this field. First, an overview of previously tested sealants is provided, illustrating that several sealants may be considered off-label. For example, a polyethylene glycol spray (Coseal&#xae;) or a human serum albumin and polyethylene glycol spray (Progel&#xae;) are only indicated in addition to sutures or staples, limiting usability on superficial parenchymal lesions. Off-label use may be concerning due to unknown risk of adverse events, and lead to legal challenges for the prescribing physician. The role of manufacturers with regard to off-label use is discussed. To close the gap in evidence, this review provides several recommendations for evidence generation, including clinical trial design, network meta-analysis, and ex-vivo human lung testing. Until high quality evidence is available, we propose forming consensus-driven practice guidelines to support thoracic surgeons in choosing lung sealants.

### PMID 40221755 (2025) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Endovascular treatment under laparotomy with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate in a pediatric traumatic aortic injury: a case report.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-025-03412-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The Society for Vascular Surgery (SVS) guidelines recommend thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) for blunt traumatic aortic injuries (BTAI) in adults, especially BTAI grades II to IV. TEVAR is increasingly performed for BTAI in children and adolescents; however, reports on treatment strategies are limited. Percutaneous routes for stenting may not be available in children with anatomically small vessel diameters, and the indications for stent grafts are challenging because of the steep aortic angle.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a case of TEVAR for BTAI performed under laparotomy with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA) injection in an adolescent patient. The patient was a 13-year-old male who sustained injuries due to a fall and presented with severe hypoxia and shock on admission. Computed tomography (CT) showed a thoracic aortic injury with a pseudoaneurysm (SVS grade III) and bilateral pulmonary contusions. We planned to perform TEVAR after venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO); however, because of the small diameters of the bilateral common femoral arteries, we placed a stent graft through the left common iliac artery under laparotomy. In addition, the proximal landing zone of the stent graft to the thoracic pseudoaneurysm was short, and we filled the pseudoaneurysm with NBCA after deploying the stent graft to prevent endoleaks. Subsequent CTs showed no endoleaks, and the patient was discharged on day 110.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a case of TEVAR in a 13-year-old boy who underwent laparotomy with NBCA injection into a pseudoaneurysm. This method may be useful as an alternative when percutaneous access is not available, and the proximal landing zone cannot be reached.

### PMID 38937084 (2025) — Journal of neurointerventional surgery
TITLE: Adenosine-assisted embolization of cerebral arteriovenous malformations: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1136/jnis-2024-021866 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Cerebral arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) are complex lesions that can cause hemorrhagic stroke and significant neurological disability. Adenosine induces cardiac standstill and hypotension, which are thought to be useful during cerebral AVM embolization. Herein, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of the technique's safety.
METHODS: Following PRISMA guidelines, four databases were queried for studies describing the use of adenosine-assisted embolization of cerebral AVMs. Adenosine-related intraoperative complications, permanent neurological outcomes, morbidity, and mortality assessed the technique's safety. Single proportion analysis under a random-effects model was performed. Heterogeneity was assessed using I&#xb2; statistics, and publication bias was evaluated through funnel plot analysis and Egger's regression test.
RESULTS: Ten studies were included, involving 79 patients (55.7% male) with 79 AVMs (54.4% unruptured and 70.9% Spetzler-Martin grade III-V) who underwent 123 embolizations (80.4% and 5.9% under transarterial and transvenous approaches, respectively) with n-butyl cyanoacrylate (80.4%), ethylene vinyl alcohol (14.4%), or both (5.2%). The incidence of transient adenosine-related intraoperative complications was 0% (95% CI 0% to 3%, I2=24%). Besides, the incidence of adenosine-related morbidity, mortality, and permanent outcomes was 0% (95% CI 0% to 3%, I2=0%). During follow-up, good functional outcomes were reported for 64 patients (81%).
CONCLUSIONS: Adenosine's effects on blood flow control can facilitate embolization and mitigate the risk of AVM rupture and embolic agent migration. Although current evidence stems from observational studies, the results of this meta-analysis suggest a safe drug profile due to minimal associated morbidity and mortality. Further research from larger randomized and controlled studies is warranted to attain a higher level of evidence.
PROSPERO REGISTRY NUMBER: CRD42023494116.

### PMID 40718294 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Evaluating the Utility of Topical Haemostatic Adjuncts in Transoral Robotic Surgery (TORS).
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.86750 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Transoral robotic surgery (TORS) is a minimally invasive modern surgical technique, offering novel access to the oral cavity with important implications for the management of oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. However, TORS carries complications including haemorrhage, pain and impaired swallowing, with potentially significant implications for patients and healthcare systems.
AIM: This combined retrospective cohort study and literature review aims to explore our experience with the use of topical haemostatic products in TORS to improve post-operative outcomes.
METHODS: We analysed our experience with the use of three different topical haemostatic adjuncts during TORS procedures at a major head and neck cancer centre from October 2023 to August 2024. The primary outcome measure was the rate of post-operative haemorrhage. This cohort study was complemented by a systematic review of the existing literature regarding the use of topical haemostatic products in TORS.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients met criteria for inclusion. The type of topical haemostatic adjunct used varied between Tisseel&#xa0;(n=8, 44.4%), Floseal&#xa0;(n=4, 22.2%) and Purabond&#xa0;(n=6, 33.3%). One patient (5.6%) developed a secondary post-operative haemorrhage. Another patient (n=1, 5.6%) required admission for management of post-operative pain. Our experience provides preliminary insight into the utility of topical haemostatic adjuncts in TORS and underlines the need for further research in this area.
CONCLUSION: Topical haemostatic adjuncts, in our view, are useful, surgeon-friendly products that may augment haemostasis in TORS. Further studies are required to determine the efficacy of individual topical haemostatic products in preventing post-operative haemorrhage and enhancing recovery following TORS.

### PMID 41113868 (2025) — Cureus
TITLE: Pilot Feasibility and Preliminary Cost Implications of a Day-Case Head and Neck Surgery Pathway Incorporating ARTISS Fibrin Sealant.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.94819 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to evaluate the feasibility, safety, and preliminary cost implications of implementing a standardized day-case pathway for common head and neck procedures that incorporates ARTISS fibrin sealant (human).
DESIGN: This was a single-center, retrospective pilot service evaluation of consecutive cases.
SETTING: The study was conducted at a UK National Health Service (NHS) district general hospital (day surgery unit without inpatient beds).
PARTICIPANTS: Participants included consecutive adults between October 2024 and February 2025 who underwent selected head and neck procedures judged suitable for day-case management under a predefined pathway.
INTERVENTION: A protocolized bundle including meticulous hemostasis, ARTISS applied at closure to promote adhesion and reduce dead space, drain avoidance where feasible (surgeon discretion permitted), structured recovery and explicit discharge criteria, and written or telephone safety-netting.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The primary outcome was same-day discharge, and the secondary outcomes included unplanned overnight admission, return to the operating room, 30-day readmission, hematoma or seroma, drain use, and other adverse events. A provider-perspective cost-consequence analysis compared day-case delivery with procedure-specific inpatient length of stay (LOS) estimates from the literature, and one-way sensitivity analyses were performed varying LOS, bed-day costs, and ARTISS price.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine patients underwent day-case head and neck surgery; 25/29 (86.2%; 95% CI 69.4-94.5) were discharged the same day. No returns to the operating room or 30-day readmissions for hemorrhage or seroma were observed (95% upper bound 10.3%). Drains were used in 1/29 (3.4%; 95% CI 0.6-17.2). Base-case modeling indicated bed-day cost savings versus inpatient care.
CONCLUSIONS: A standardized day-case pathway that incorporates ARTISS was feasible in this retrospective pilot, with a preliminary favorable safety profile and cost consequences in an NHS setting. As a single-center, non-comparative study, findings are preliminary and cannot isolate the independent effect of ARTISS. Future studies should include multicenter comparative evaluation (ARTISS versus no ARTISS within the same pathway) and formal economic analysis.

### PMID 40381690 (2025) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: A Simple Technique of Cerebrospinal Fluid Leak Prevention Following Endoscopic Third Ventriculostomy: A Technical Note.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2025.124095 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: There are a variety of complications of endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) that have been described in the literature. Cerebrospinal fluid leak is one of the common complications that need to be addressed properly and timely management plays a crucial role in prevention of meningitis/encephalitis.
OBJECTIVE: To share our experience of using autologous bone (from burr hole) debris and "BloodSTOP" absorbable hemostatic agent as an effective tool in cerebrospinal fluid leak prevention.
METHODS: We have observed 14 individuals who have undergone an ETV procedure using the abovementioned multilayered technique of burr hole closure at our institution in 2024.
RESULTS: A watertight dural closure is a mandatory step in every case of neurosurgical procedure. But when primary dural closure is not possible in endoscopic intraventricular surgeries, there is a way out using more affordable hemostatic materials like BloodSTOP. There are plenty of strategies in surgical closure technique, including pericranial graft, dural allografts and synthetic substitutes, and various sealants but no single consensus on the best practice regarding dural closure. TachoSil is a hemostatic agent consisting of human fibrinogen and thrombin coated onto an equine collagen sponge and has proven efficacy as a sealant for easy repair of encephalocele, incidental spinal durotomy, transsphenoidal surgery, and intradural cranial and spinal lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the use of a simple novel, sutureless BloodSTOP sandwich dural closure technique for post ETV dural defects, which has proven efficacy in our study when watertight primary dural closure is not technically feasible.

### PMID 40046260 (2025) — Therapeutics and clinical risk management
TITLE: Health and Economic Advantages Associated With the Use of TachoSil: An Update of Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S476650 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The international scientific literature is systematically analyzed in this review over a period of nearly 10 years with respect to the use of the active hemostat and surgical sealant patch TachoSil, considering its economic effects. It`s an update of the first review published in 2014.
METHODS: A PubMed systematic literature review was done from Nov 2013 up to December 2022. Based on the criteria used to select, the papers were grouped in terms of study design, surgery type, reduction in the time to hemostasis, shorter hospital stay, fewer number of post-operative complications, and the impact of TachoSil to operative procedures.
RESULTS: Medical evidence of TachoSil is well documented, in different clinical studies and for several indications. In this second review 18 scientific papers were screened. In total data from 3.375 patients were analyzed, of whom 1.748 were treated with TachoSil. Nine of the 18 papers (50%) were classified as randomized clinical trials (RCTs). The time required for hemostasis following the administration of TachoSil was significantly shorter than that observed with other surgical treatment techniques, with a median time of up to four minutes. The reduction in post-operative complications was evaluated in 15 studies that were conducted on patients in a variety of surgical specialties. When using TachoSil the hospitalization duration was briefer, as observed in the past review.
CONCLUSION: The second analysis of scientific papers demonstrates that TachoSil plays a supporting role in surgical procedures, enhancing hemostasis and facilitating tissue sealing when conventional techniques are inadequate.This approach has been linked to a reduction in post-operative complications, length of hospital stay, and consequently, hospital cost.

### PMID 39891941 (2025) — Neurosurgical focus
TITLE: The use of dural sealant patches for reinforcement of durotomy repair: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.3171/2024.12.FOCUS24705 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Dural sealant patches (DSPs) are a useful adjunct when closing the dura during cranial or spinal surgery to avoid cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage or infection. Authors of this paper systematically review the outcomes and incidence of CSF leakage and infection with the use of a DSP versus conventional practice.
METHODS: The MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Scopus databases were searched, and clinical trials and prospective or retrospective case-control and cohort studies with a low-risk of bias and involving any solid DSP used in adults for cranial or spinal cases were included. Studies that used a DSP in combination with another method of dural sealant closure, used a DSP as a dural substitute rather than an adjunctive closure device, or used hydrogel or polymer gel (i.e., nonsolid) dural sealant "patches" were excluded. A meta-analysis of comparative studies reporting outcomes relating to CSF leakage was performed together with a subgroup analysis for each DSP type. For comparative studies reporting outcomes relating to infection, a separate meta-analysis was conducted.
RESULTS: Across the 7 noncomparative studies included, 669 patients received TachoComb (n = 421, 1 study), TachoSil (n = 8, 1 study), Liqoseal (n = 40, 1 study), TissuePatchDural (n = 144, 2 studies), or Hemopatch (n = 56, 2 studies). Across the 6 comparative studies included, 1013 patients received TachoSil (n = 784, 3 studies), TissuePatchDural (n = 147, 2 studies), or Hemopatch (n = 82, 1 study). When considering the rates of CSF leakage or infection, 2/6 comparative studies found DSPs to be significantly more effective than current practice, while the remaining 4/6 demonstrated noninferiority compared to current practice. All studies considered the DSPs to be safe. A meta-analysis revealed significant improvements in the incidence of CSF leakage with the use of a DSP overall, but the improvements in CSF leak rates for the TachoSil and TissuePatchDural subgroups did not reach statistical significance. The single study evaluating Hemopatch did find statistically significant improvements in CSF leak rates. There were no significant differences in infection between the DSP groups.
CONCLUSIONS: There was a significant improvement in the incidence of CSF leaks with the use of DSPs. Comparisons among DSP types and evaluations of outcomes relating to infection should be the focus of further research in this area.

### PMID 40120475 (2025) — Clinical imaging
TITLE: Ultrasonographic appearance of Surgicel&#xae;: A systematic review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clinimag.2025.110458 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To perform a systematic review describing the most common ultrasonographic findings of the hemostatic agent Surgicel&#xae; and to identify different ultrasonographic patterns depending on ultrasound timing and localization of Surgicel&#xae;.
METHOD: A systematic literature search was performed to identify studies reporting ultrasonographic findings of Surgicel&#xae; according to the PRISMA guidelines. We queried PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus using the terms "Surgicel&#xae;" OR "oxidized regenerated cellulose" AND "Ultrasound" from inception to march 2024. Patients with Surgicel&#xae; application during surgeries and posterior description of ultrasound features were included in the study. Risk of bias was evaluated with a modified standardized tool. (PROSPERO ID CRD42024542619).
RESULTS: We found 464 articles, from which 12 articles were included, with a pooled population of 226 patients. Most rating as a moderate risk of bias. The predominant anatomical sites investigated were the breast and thyroid gland (94.68&#xa0;%). The most frequent ultrasound appearance of Surgicel&#xae; was a hypo/isoechoic lesion with well-defined margins and internal hyperechoic nodules (49.11&#xa0;%), followed by a hypo/isoechoic lesion with well-defined margins without internal hyperechoic nodules (18.58&#xa0;%) and completely anechoic lesions (15.04&#xa0;%). Hypo/isoechoic lesions with well-defined margins and internal hyperechoic nodules were frequent in the breast (55.56&#xa0;%) and thyroid (53.49&#xa0;%). Hyperechoic lesions with posterior reverberation artifact were consistently found in the liver, spleen, coronary vessels, and cervix (100&#xa0;% each).
CONCLUSIONS: The most frequent ultrasound finding of Surgicel&#xae; was hypo/isoechoic lesions with well-defined margins and internal hyperechoic nodules. There may be distinct ultrasound characteristics of Surgicel&#xae; based on location. The impact of the type of organ, and timing of ultrasound remains to be defined.

### PMID 40738122 (2025) — Endoscopy
TITLE: Topical hemostatic agents in endoscopy: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Technical and Technology Review.
DOI: 10.1055/a-2646-7556 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy has evolved from a diagnostic tool into a therapeutic modality, leading to a higher incidence of bleeding complications during and after procedures. To address this issue, various hemostatic agents have been developed, including injectable, mechanical, thermal, and topical products. Topical hemostatic agents, available in powder or gel forms, can be used as standalone treatments or as adjuncts to traditional hemostatic therapies to control or prevent bleeding.
METHODS: This Technical and Technology Review examines the commercially available topical hemostatic agents used in endoscopy, specifically Purastat, TC-325 Hemospray, EndoClot PHS, Nexpowder, Ankaferd Blood Stopper, and CG GEL. A systematic literature review was conducted up to January 2025, focusing on randomized controlled trials (RCTs), meta-analyses, and observational studies. Each product was assessed for its composition, mechanism of action, regulatory status, mode of use, efficacy, safety, and financial considerations.
RESULTS: Purastat showed 94% efficacy in acute GI bleeding, reducing delayed bleeding to 4.3% in endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) and endoscopic mucosal resection cases, with significantly lower thermal device usage. TC-325 Hemospray achieved 85%&#x2013;98.5% primary hemostasis in upper and lower GI bleeding, with pooled hemostasis rates of 93.1% and rebleeding rates of 8.9%. It was also effective in malignancy-related bleeding, with hemostasis success up to 100%. EndoClot PHS demonstrated 76%&#x2013;100% hemostasis efficacy, comparable with TC-325, with rebleeding rates of 24%&#x2013;25%. It showed prophylactic potential post-ESD, with rebleeding rates of 7.3%&#x2013;9.1%. Nexpowder achieved 94% hemostasis in refractory upper GI bleeds and reduced rebleeding in lower GI bleeds to 5.5% at 28 days. Ankaferd Blood Stopper demonstrated 73%&#x2013;100% hemostasis across various GI bleeding sources, including peptic ulcers and malignancies, though further data on rebleeding are needed.
CONCLUSION: Topical hemostatic agents offer effective options for managing GI bleeding. Products like Purastat, TC-325 Hemospray, EndoClot PHS, Nexpowder, Ankaferd Blood Stopper, and CG GEL have shown promising results in achieving hemostasis; however, further RCTs and cost-effectiveness analyses are needed to better establish their roles in endoscopic practice.

### PMID 41169412 (2025) — Frontiers in medicine
TITLE: Critical trigger thresholds for hemostatic management: a narrative review of viscoelastic hemostatic assay applications.
DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2025.1658845 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Viscoelastic haemostasis assays (VHA) are increasingly used in clinical practice. These bedside whole-blood tests, commonly implemented through thromboelastography (TEG) and rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM), are prized for their speed, accuracy, and accessibility, resulting in their increased usage in managing complex cases such as severe trauma, cardiac surgery, postpartum hemorrhage, and liver disease. Despite their widespread use, clear guidelines for regulating coagulation function in surgical patients through VHA remain undefined. This review searched the majority of the literature on VHA in the past decade and discussed the triggers and algorithms for hemostatic management guided by VHA in surgeries with a high risk of major bleeding. It also reviews the potential benefits of VHA over traditional coagulation tests (like prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time) and clinical judgments, focusing on aspects such as reducing bleeding volume, decreasing use of allogeneic blood products, improving patient outcomes and mortality, and enhancing cost-effectiveness.

### PMID 40422854 (2025) — Journal of functional biomaterials
TITLE: Biomaterial-Based and Surgical Approaches to Local Hemostasis in Contemporary Oral Surgery: A Narrative Review.
DOI: 10.3390/jfb16050190 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Effective local hemostasis is essential in oral surgery to prevent complications such as delayed healing, infection, and the need for re-intervention. Postoperative bleeding occurs in 4-6% of cases, increasing to 9-12% in patients receiving anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy. This review evaluates the efficacy, safety, and clinical utility of local hemostatic agents based on 51 studies published between 1990 and 2023. Traditional agents, such as oxidized cellulose and gelatin sponges, control bleeding in over 85% of standard cases but offer limited regenerative benefits. Autologous platelet concentrates (APCs), including platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and leukocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF), reduce bleeding time by 30-50% and enhance soft tissue healing. Studies show the PRP may reduce postoperative bleeding in dental surgery by 30-50%, and in orthopedic and cardiac surgery by 10-30%, particularly in patients on anticoagulants. Tranexamic Acid mouthwash can reduce postoperative bleeding by up to 50-60%. Fibrin sealants achieve a 70-90% reduction in bleeding among high-risk patients, while topical tranexamic acid decreases hemorrhagic events by up to 80% in anticoagulated individuals without increasing thromboembolic risk. However, comparative studies remain limited, particularly in medically compromised populations. Additional gaps persist regarding long-term outcomes, cost-effectiveness, and the standardized use of emerging agents such as nanomaterials. Future research should prioritize high-quality trials across diverse patient groups and develop clinical guidelines that integrate both safety and regenerative outcomes.

### PMID 40399219 (2025) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Optimizing Tranexamic Acid Use in Adult Cardiac Surgery: From Rationale to Clinical Practice.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2025.04.034 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Tranexamic acid (TXA) has emerged as a cornerstone in blood conservation strategies for cardiac surgery. This comprehensive review synthesizes current evidence on TXA's efficacy, safety, and optimal use in various cardiac surgical procedures. We examine the pharmacological properties of TXA, its historical development as an antifibrinolytic agent, and its evolution in cardiac surgical practice. The review critically evaluates key clinical trials and meta-analyses demonstrating TXA's efficacy in reducing blood loss and transfusion requirements across a spectrum of cardiac surgeries, including coronary artery bypass grafting, valve procedures, and aortic surgery. Special consideration is given to its use in pediatric cardiac surgery. We address ongoing debates surrounding optimal dosing strategies, timing of administration, and integration with other hemostatic interventions. The safety profile of TXA is thoroughly examined, with particular focus on the risk of seizures and thromboembolic events. The review also explores practical aspects of TXA implementation in clinical practice, including its role in comprehensive blood management protocols and potential cost-effectiveness. Emerging research areas, such as pharmacokinetic-guided dosing and topical TXA application, are discussed. Finally, we outline future directions and research priorities, including the need for long-term outcome studies and refinement of patient-specific protocols. This review provides a balanced assessment of TXA's role in modern cardiac surgery, offering clinicians and researchers a comprehensive resource for optimizing its use to improve patient outcomes while minimizing potential risks.

### PMID 39694727 (2025) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Use of Intraoperative Hemostatic Checklists for Blood Management in Patients Undergoing Cardiac Surgery: A Scoping Review.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2024.11.028 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Scoping Review, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Using intraoperative hemostatic checklists may improve rates of surgical re-exploration and utilization of allogenic blood products in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. In this review, the authors explore the current evidence describing the impact of using intraoperative hemostatic checklists on reducing rates of surgical bleeding and perioperative blood product transfusion in this group of patients.
METHODS: Following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines, electronic information was obtained via sources that included Scopus, MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library. Specifically, randomized controlled and observational studies reporting on hemostatic checklists in cardiac surgery were assessed for the following inclusion criteria: adult patients undergoing cardiac surgery, use of an intraoperative hemostatic checklist, a comparative study design, and full text available in the English language. All conference abstracts, editorials, and other reviews were excluded.
RESULTS: A total of 3,022 articles were retrieved. Four articles, with 19,946 patients, were ultimately included in this review. These studies showed a significant reduction in bleeding re-exploration rates after implementing an intraoperative hemostatic checklist. In addition, three studies showed lower cost per patient, less blood product transfusion, and reduced intensive care unit stay after using checklists.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that using intraoperative hemostatic checklists may reduce surgical re-exploration rates and improve blood product utilization after cardiac surgery. Large multicenter studies are needed to endorse the utilization of these checklists in routine clinical practice.

### PMID 40287148 (2025) — BMJ case reports
TITLE: Cyanoacrylate glue topical adhesive for bronchoscopic repair of tracheal laceration.
DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2024-264524 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Case Reports
ABSTRACT: Iatrogenic tracheal laceration (ITL) is a rare and potentially life-threatening complication of endotracheal intubation. The lacerations most commonly occur at the posterior membrane and in emergency and difficult intubations. There is no consensus regarding the optimal management of ITL. Small lacerations can be managed conservatively; however, surgical repair might be indicated for large lacerations, patients with progressive symptoms or those with haemodynamic instability. In this report, we present a case of a 3cm iatrogenic posterior membrane laceration following emergency intubation, which resulted in extensive subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum. This was successfully treated with cyanoacrylate glue (Histoacryl Topical Skin Adhesive, Tissue Seal) instilled via a flexible bronchoscope. The tear was completely sealed following the procedure. While cyanoacrylate glue (Histoacryl) has been successfully used for the management of bronchopleural fistulas in the past, to our knowledge, this is the first documented use of this adhesive for the management of ITL.

### PMID 40013802 (2025) — Cardiology in review
TITLE: Comparative Efficacy of Mechanical Versus Manual Compression Techniques on Radial Artery Hemostasis Following Transradial Coronary Angiography: A Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.1097/CRD.0000000000000866 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Mechanical compression for hemostasis posttransradial coronary angiography (CAG) or intervention is hypothesized to be more effective than manual compression owing to a more stable and continuous pressure. However, the current evidence comparing these 2 compression techniques is limited. A comprehensive search of the 3 major electronic databases-PubMed, Google Scholar, and Cochrane Library-was performed from inception to October 24, 2024, to identify relevant studies. Standardized mean difference and risk ratios (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were pooled using the Mantel-Haenszel random effects model to calculate effect estimates. Statistical significance was set at P &lt; 0.05. Four studies with 1235 patients undergoing transradial CAG were included [mechanical (n = 450) and manual (n = 785)]. On pooled analysis, the mechanical compression method demonstrated a significantly longer mean time to achieve hemostasis (standardized mean difference: 3.21; 95% CI: 1.71, 4.71; P &lt; 0.0001) than the manual compression method. The risks of radial artery occlusion (RR: 1.05; 95% CI: 0.50, 2.22; P = 0.89), hematoma formation (RR: 1.86; 95% CI: 0.28, 12.40; P = 0.52), and bleeding during compression (RR: 0.23; 95% CI: 0.00, 24.81; P = 0.54) were comparable. Both types of hemostatic compression, manual and mechanical, are equally effective though mechanical compression takes significantly longer to achieve hemostasis. Further prospective randomized studies are needed to corroborate these findings.

### PMID 39543925 (2025) — The journal of vascular access
TITLE: Radial artery haemostasis after coronary angiography: A scoping review.
DOI: 10.1177/11297298241290567 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Scoping Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Nursing care in interventional cardiology is vital during perioperative stages, especially with coronary angiography. Radial artery access is now preferred, requiring proper haemostasis to prevent complications. Standardised protocols are needed for effective and economical haemostasis methods. This review aims to map the literature on haemostasis of the radial artery after coronary angiography, an area not previously reviewed.
METHODS: Following the Joanna Briggs Institute methodology for scoping reviews, two reviewers independently selected studies based on eligibility criteria. Data were extracted using a specially developed tool, with disagreements resolved through discussion or a third reviewer. Data synthesis is presented in tabular form and narrative summary. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis extension for scoping reviews guidelines were followed. Searches were conducted in PubMed, CINAHL Complete, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Scopus, Opengrey, DART-Europe e-theses portal and six key interventional cardiology reference sites.
RESULTS: From 43 manuscripts, four haemostasis methods for the radial artery after coronary angiography were identified: manual compression (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5), compression bandages (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;16), compression devices (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;30) and haemostatic patches (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;7). Nearly 70% (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;30) of references focused on compression devices. Nine techniques were used to evaluate haemostasis methods, with visual inspection (34 references) and Doppler ultrasound (17 references) being the most common. Only nine haemostasis methods lacked an associated protocol.
CONCLUSION: This scoping review identifies four primary haemostasis methods post coronary angiography: manual compression, compression bandages, compression devices and haemostatic patches, with compression devices being the most frequently discussed. The variability in evaluation techniques, predominantly visual inspection and ultrasound, underscores the need for standardised guidelines. The absence of protocols for some methods further highlights the necessity for uniform standards to improve consistency and reliability in clinical practice. Standardising these methods and protocols is essential to enhance patient outcomes and advance the field.

### PMID 41440869 (2025) — Journal of cardiovascular development and disease
TITLE: Risk Factors and Preventing Strategies of Pocket Hematoma After Cardiac Implantable Electronic Device Implantation: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.3390/jcdd12120490 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Pocket hematoma is a common complication following cardiac implantable electronic device (CIED) implantation, traditionally perceived as a manageable local issue. Accumulating evidence, however, indicates that clinically significant pocket hematoma (CSH) is strongly associated with increased infection rates, elevated healthcare costs, and heightened mortality. Key risk factors include advanced age, low body mass index (BMI), chronic kidney disease, complex procedures (device upgrades/replacements) and periprocedural antithrombotic management, particularly uninterrupted dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) and heparin/low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) bridging strategies, which significantly elevate bleeding risk compared to continued vitamin K antagonist (VKA) therapy or direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) protocols. Novel compression devices and topical hemostatic agents show promise for prevention, while standardized definitions and risk stratification tools are urgently needed. This review synthesizes current evidence on multifactorial pathogenesis, adverse outcomes, and evolving preventive strategies for pocket hematoma, emphasizing its underappreciated clinical significance and the critical need for optimized periprocedural management in high-risk patients.

### PMID 41156077 (2025) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Damage Control Surgery in Obstetrics and Gynecology: Abdomino-Pelvic Packing in Multimodal Hemorrhage Management.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm14207207 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Damage control surgery (DCS) is a staged surgical strategy for rapid control of life-threatening bleeding, followed by physiological stabilization and delayed definitive repair. Abdomino-pelvic packing (APP)-placing compressive material within the pelvis and/or abdomen to tamponade bleeding-is a cornerstone of DCS as a temporizing measure to achieve hemostasis and stabilization in critically unstable patients. This narrative review synthesizes current evidence on DCS with a focus on APP-a technique historically developed in trauma and orthopedic surgery for exsanguinating pelvic bleeding but adaptable to gynecologic and obstetric emergencies. We outline the historical evolution, physiological basis, and stepwise protocol of DCS, adapted to specialty-specific conditions such as postpartum hemorrhage, placenta accreta spectrum, uterine rupture, and hepatic rupture in HELLP syndrome, as well as oncologic surgeries (debulking, exenteration, lymphadenectomy) and benign procedures (trocar-entry injuries in laparoscopy, presacral bleeding in sacrocolpopexy, and retroperitoneal hemorrhage in deep-infiltrating endometriosis). Modern adjuncts-including early tranexamic acid, topical hemostatic agents, and multidisciplinary coordination-have transformed packing from a last-resort maneuver into an integrated component of staged hemorrhage control. In OB/GYN, APP allows for successful hemostasis in 75-90% of cases, with significantly lower mortality rates than trauma surgery. In conclusion, APP as a potentially life-saving maneuver within DCS requires integration into standardized, institution-wide hemorrhage protocols in OB/GYN. Training, simulation, and guideline adoption are critical, particularly in resource-limited settings where advanced interventions for catastrophic bleeding are inaccessible.

### PMID 40778886 (2025) — Gastroenterology
TITLE: Canadian Association of Gastroenterology Clinical Practice Guideline for the Endoscopic Management of Nonvariceal Nonpeptic Ulcer Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding.
DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2025.04.041 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Practice Guideline
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND &amp; AIMS: Nonvariceal, nonpeptic ulcer bleeding, arising from etiologies such as malignant tumors, Mallory-Weiss tears (MWTs), Dieulafoy's lesions, and gastric antral vascular ectasia, constitutes a significant and increasing proportion of upper gastrointestinal bleeding cases. These evidence-based guidelines, developed by the Canadian Association of Gastroenterology with international collaboration, are the first to specifically address the endoscopic management of these conditions, aiming to support patients, clinicians, and others in making informed decisions.
METHODS: The Canadian Association of Gastroenterology formed a guideline panel with a balanced representation to minimize potential bias from conflicts of interest. The Cochrane Gut Group supported the guideline-development process, including conducting literature searches and performing systematic reviews. The panel prioritized clinical questions and outcomes according to their importance for clinicians and adult patients. The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation approach was used, including developing the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation Evidence-to-Decision frameworks, which underwent public comment.
RESULTS: The panel formulated 19 conditional recommendations for adult patients with nonvariceal, nonpeptic ulcer bleeding due to malignant tumors, MWTs, Dieulafoy's lesions, and gastric antral vascular ectasia.
CONCLUSIONS: For patients with active bleeding from malignant tumors, the panel suggested topical hemostatic agents over conventional endoscopic hemostatic therapy; it also suggested the administration of oncologic therapy after the endoscopic intervention. In patients with active bleeding from MWTs (oozing and spurting), the panel suggested endoscopic band ligation or endoscopic through-the-scope clip over epinephrine injection alone. For nonbleeding MWTs with visible vessels, adherent clots, flat pigmented spots, or clean-based ulcers, the panel suggested against endoscopic hemostatic therapy. For Dieulafoy's lesions, the panel suggested mechanical modalities with endoscopic band ligation or through-the-scope clip, contact thermocoagulation, or injection of sclerosants over epinephrine injection alone. For patients with gastric antral vascular ectasia, the panel suggested endoscopic band ligation over argon plasma coagulation.
GUIDELINE ENDORSEMENT: This guideline has been formally endorsed by leading international endoscopy societies: the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, the European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, the Sociedad Interamericana de Endoscop&#xed;a Digestiva, and the World Endoscopy Organization, as well as by the American Gastroenterological Association.

### PMID 39248610 (2025) — The American journal of gastroenterology
TITLE: TC-325 Superiority in Malignant Gastrointestinal Bleeding: An Individual Patient Data Meta-Analysis of Randomized Trials.
DOI: 10.14309/ajg.0000000000003078 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The efficacy of topical hemostatic agents, recommended for peptic ulcer bleeding, remains poorly characterized in malignant gastrointestinal bleeding (GIB).
METHODS: We performed an individual patient data meta-analysis assessing the efficacy of topical hemostatic agents in malignant GIB. The literature was searched using OVID MEDLINE, EMBASE, and ISI Web of Science databases (database inception to November 2023). Only randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing topical hemostatic agents with conventional endoscopic modalities in malignant GIB were included. Original RCT patient-level data were obtained. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses guidelines were followed. Quality of the evidence was evaluated using the revised Cochrane risk-of-bias tool and certainty of evidence with the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation approach. The primary outcome was immediate hemostasis; secondary outcomes were 30-day rebleeding and the composite measure of further bleeding (persistent bleeding or 30-day rebleeding). Other outcomes were all-cause mortality, adverse events, and need for additional nonendoscopic treatment. Odds ratios (ORs) from endpoint comparisons were pooled using logistic regression models.
RESULTS: Overall, 985 citations were identified; 3 RCTs (n = 160 patients) were included with all assessing TC-325 (Hemospray). TC-325 achieved immediate hemostasis more often than conventional endoscopic modalities (OR 46.6, 95% confidence interval [CI] 5.89-369.1) (low-level certainty). Thirty-day rebleeding (OR 0.28, 95% CI 0.11-0.70) and further bleeding (OR 0.11, 95% CI 0.05-0.26) were both significantly lower with TC-325 (very-low-level certainty). All-cause mortality and need for additional nonendoscopic treatment did not differ between groups. No adverse events were reported. Subgroup analysis confirmed TC-325 superiority in patients with upper GIB.
DISCUSSION: TC-325 seems superior to conventional endoscopic therapy in managing patients with malignant GIB. TC-325 results in improvements in immediate hemostasis, 30-day rebleeding, and further bleeding, based on very low-to-low certainties of evidence.

### PMID 38470297 (2024) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Tissue Sealant Impact on Skull Base Reconstruction Outcomes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.31390 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Network Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Despite significant advances in understanding of skull base reconstruction principles, the role of tissue sealants in modifying postoperative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak outcomes remains controversial. We evaluate postoperative CSF leak incidence associated with tissue sealant use in skull base defect repair during endoscopic skull base surgery (ESBS).
DATA SOURCES: Web of Science, PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, and Cochrane Library.
REVIEW METHODS: Systematic review and meta-analysis of risk differences (RD). A search strategy identified original studies reporting CSF leakage following ESBS with disaggregation by tissue sealant use and/or type.
RESULTS: 27 non-randomized studies (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;2,403) were included for qualitative and meta-analysis. Reconstruction with a tissue sealant did not significantly reduce postoperative CSF leak risk compared with reconstruction without sealant (RD[95% CI]&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.02[-0.01, 0.05]). Sub-analyses of dural sealant (-0.02[-0.11, 0.07]) and fibrin glue (0.00[-0.07, 0.07]) compared with no sealant were similarly unremarkable. Postoperative CSF leakage was not significantly modulated in further sub-analyses of DuraSeal (0.02[-0.02, 0.05]), Adherus (-0.03[-0.08, 0.03]), or Bioglue (-0.06[-0.23, 0.12]) versus no dural sealant use, or Tisseel/Tissucol versus fibrin glue nonuse (0.00[-0.05, 0.05]). No significant association was seen comparing dural sealant use versus fibrin glue use on pairwise (0.01[-0.03, 0.05]) or network meta-analysis (-0.01[-0.05, 0.04]). Limitations in source literature prevented sub-analyses stratified by leak characteristics, defect size and location, and accompanying reconstruction materials.
CONCLUSION: Tissue sealant use did not appear to impact postoperative CSF leak incidence when compared with nonuse. Higher quality studies are warranted to thoroughly elucidate the clinical value of adjunct sealant use in endoscopic skull base reconstruction.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: N/A Laryngoscope, 134:3425-3436, 2024.

### PMID 37337453 (2024) — The journal of vascular access
TITLE: Treatment of arteriovenous access pseudoaneurysms using ultrasound guided balloon assisted thrombin injection: Two cases and systematic review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1177/11297298231182158 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Arteriovenous fistula pseudoaneurysm (AVF-PSA) is a common complication, usually caused during dialysis cannulation, which traditionally has been treated with open and less frequently endovascular techniques. Thrombin injection, although established in the treatment of arterial pseudoaneurysms, has barely been used in the treatment of AVF-PSA, due to concerns for AVF thrombosis or proximal embolization.
METHODS: A systematic review was performed according to the PRISMA 2020 guidelines. PubMed and Cochrane Central databases were reviewed and all clinical reports on AVF-PSA balloon assisted percutaneous thrombin injection through July 2022 were included. The electronic search yielded five case reports. Due to between-study differences and small sample size, the findings were summarized from each report, but the results were not pooled. Additionally, we present our own experience on two patients with AVF-PSA that were treated with balloon assisted percutaneous thrombin injection.
RESULTS: A total of five case reports (no of patients: 7, including ours) were included for review. Most of the patients were male (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6) and the mean age was 65.9&#x2009;years. The average size of the PSA was 1.6&#x2009;cm. In all cases a balloon was inflated to prevent thrombin and thrombotic material intrusion into the fistula lumen, prior to thrombin injection. In one patient n-butyl cyanoacrylate and Lipiodol were used, due to thrombin non availability. Recurrence was reported in only one patient, and average follow-up is 16&#x2009;months.
CONCLUSIONS: Thrombin injection with concomitant balloon inflation seems to be a safe and effective treatment for arteriovenous fistula pseudoaneurysms. Future studies should be aimed at evaluating the long-term outcomes of such minimally invasive techniques.

### PMID 38465445 (2024) — Head &amp; neck
TITLE: Drainless, day-case lateral neck dissection with Artiss&#x2122; fibrin sealant: A prospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.1002/hed.27715 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D064888">Observational Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Lateral neck dissection (LND) is performed for staging/treatment of head and neck lesions. This traditionally includes placement of a drain and inpatient admission. Drainless, day-case head and neck surgery is attractive due to cost-effectiveness and reduced length of stay, but evidence is lacking in LND. We aim to investigate Artiss&#x2122; as an alternative to drain placement, facilitating day-case LND.
METHODS: A prospective review was conducted of patients who underwent LND in a UK hospital over a 22-month period.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients were identified (27 Artiss&#x2122; only; 12 Artiss&#x2122; with a drain). Eight Artiss&#x2122; only patients were day-case. All drains were removed by post-operative day 2. There was no statistically significant difference in the number of complications between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: This observational study demonstrates that for selected patients, Artiss&#x2122; could facilitate drainless, day-case LND. Further controlled studies with matched groups and larger numbers are required to validate this.

### PMID 38265253 (2024) — Asian journal of andrology
TITLE: Grafts in Peyronie's surgery without the use of prostheses: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.4103/aja202358 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: Peyronie's disease (PD) is characterized by abnormal penile curvature, and various surgical methods have been developed using different graft materials. However, there is currently no universal agreement on which type of graft is the best. The objective of this review was to evaluate the available literature and identify the most effective graft material for penile curvature correction in PD. A literature search was conducted using electronic databases, including PubMed, Scopus, and the Cochrane Library. The patients, intervention, comparison, and outcome (PICO) approach was used to define the eligibility of studies. Two authors independently selected studies, evaluated them, and extracted data. Random-effect models using the DerSimonian-Laird method were used. Most studies were single-arm studies and had a high risk of bias. Buccal mucosa grafts (BMG) were found to result in the highest penile straightening rates and were associated with the least de novo erectile dysfunction. TachoSil grafts demonstrated a high success rate in straightening despite a higher mean preoperative curvature, while Tutoplast grafts had a higher incidence of postoperative erectile dysfunction. BMG had the highest percentage of postoperative penile straightening. Overall, the TachoSil graft showed the best performance when preoperative curvature is taken into account. Based on the available literature, BMG appear to be the most effective for penile curvature correction in PD, but this is offset by the requirement for low preoperative curvature. The TachoSil graft shows the best overall performance when preoperative curvature is considered. Comparative randomized clinical trials are still needed to determine graft superiority.

### PMID 38184462 (2024) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Pancreatic stump closure after distal pancreatectomy: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials comparing non-autologous versus no reinforcement: Value of prediction intervals.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2023.12.030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Meta-Analysis, Journal Article, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This meta-analysis of randomized trials aimed to assess the benefits and harms of non-autologous versus no reinforcement of the pancreatic stump following distal pancreatectomy (DP).
METHODS: It was performed in accordance with PRISMA 2020 and AMSTAR 2 Guidelines. (registered in PROSPERO ID: EROCRD42021286863).
RESULTS: Nine relevant articles (between 2009 and 2021) were retrieved, comparing non-autologous reinforcement (757 patients) with non-reinforcement (740 patients) after PD. Pooled analysis showed a statistically significant lower rate of postoperative pancreatic fistula (POPF) in the reinforcement group (RR&#xa0;&#x200b;=&#xa0;&#x200b;0.677; 95&#xa0;&#x200b;% CI [0.479, 0.956], p&#xa0;&#x200b;=&#xa0;&#x200b;0.027). The 95&#xa0;&#x200b;% predictive interval (0.267-1.718) showed heterogeneity. Non-autologous reinforcement other than with "Tachosil&#xae;" was effective (subgroup analysis). No statistically significant differences were found between the two groups with regard to secondary outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis showed that covering the stump with non-autologous reinforcement other than Tachosil&#xae; had a preventive effect on the onset of POPF.

### PMID 39659339 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Comparative Effectiveness of Surgical Drainage Techniques and Postoperative Interventions for Reducing Complications: A Systematic Review of Randomized Controlled Trials.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.73364 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: This systematic review assessed the comparative effectiveness of surgical drainage techniques and postoperative interventions in reducing complications across various surgical fields. We conducted a comprehensive search across multiple databases, including PubMed, MEDLINE, Embase, the Cochrane Library, and CINAHL, covering studies from January 2019 to September 2024. Ten randomized controlled trials met our inclusion criteria, focusing on human surgical patients and comparing outcomes such as seroma, hematoma, infection rates, and postoperative pain. Techniques such as pigtail catheters and vacuum sealing drainage (VSD) demonstrated statistically significant improvements in thoracic and orthopedic surgeries, reducing postoperative pain (effect size: 0.35, p &lt; 0.05), pleural effusion (risk ratio: 0.68, p &lt; 0.01), and hospital stays (mean difference: -2.5 days, p &lt; 0.01), while also accelerating wound healing. However, inconsistent results were observed for hemostatic agents like topical gelatin-thrombin matrix sealant and polysaccharide agents, which did not consistently reduce complications in spinal and breast surgeries (effect size range: 0.10-0.20, p &gt; 0.05). These findings suggest that drainage techniques should be tailored to specific surgical procedures and that the routine use of hemostatic agents requires more critical evaluation. Based on these insights, the review recommends prioritizing the use of pigtail catheters and VSD in appropriate contexts while further investigating the effectiveness of hemostatic agents in different surgical fields. This review underscores the need for additional long-term studies and personalized approaches to optimize drainage management in diverse patient populations. Overall, it provides clinicians with concrete recommendations and a framework for improving postoperative care and guiding clinical decision-making.

### PMID 39205910 (2024) — Asian journal of neurosurgery
TITLE: Usefulness and Safety of Gelatin-Thrombin Matrix Sealants in Minimally Invasive Microscopic Discectomy.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0044-1787777 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Objective &#x2003;This study aimed to evaluate the usefulness and safety of gelatin-thrombin matrix sealants (GTMSs) in minimally invasive microscopic discectomy, a surgical procedure commonly used to treat lumbar disc herniation. Materials and Methods &#x2003;Out of 484 patients who underwent minimally invasive microscopic discectomy between April 2018 and December 2022, 35 patients with a history of surgery at the same level were excluded, resulting in a total of 449 patients included in the study. Among them, 316 patients were treated using GTMS, whereas 133 were treated using collagen-based absorbable local hemostatic agents. Patient characteristics, surgical duration, intraoperative blood loss, postoperative drainage volume, intraoperative dural injury, and incidence of postoperative epidural hematoma were analyzed and compared between the two groups. Results &#x2003;No significant differences in patient demographics were observed between the two groups, except for activated partial thromboplastin time and prothrombin time. Although there were no significant differences in the mean surgical time and intraoperative blood loss between the two groups, they tended to be shorter and less in the GTMS group (56.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;20.2 vs. 58.2&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;20.4&#x2009;minutes [ p &#x2009;=&#x2009;0.36] and 10.0&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;15.4 vs. 11.8&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.3&#x2009;g [ p &#x2009;=&#x2009;0.20]). The volume of postoperative drainage was significantly lower in the GTMS group than that in the comparison group (35.3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;21.8 vs. 49.5&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;34.1&#x2009;g [ p &#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.01]). There was a trend indicating a difference in the number of intraoperative dural injuries and the need for reoperation due to postoperative epidural hematoma (2 vs. 3&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;20.4&#x2009;minutes [ p &#x2009;=&#x2009;0.21] and 1 vs. 2 [ p &#x2009;=&#x2009;0.16]). Conclusion &#x2003;The use of a GTMS in minimally invasive microscopic discectomy appears to be beneficial in reducing postoperative drainage volume. It has also been shown that it may improve clinical outcomes such as intraoperative dural injury and postoperative epidural hematoma. Furthermore, further consideration of the medical economic impact is required.

### PMID 39241767 (2024) — Wounds : a compendium of clinical research and practice
TITLE: Use of silver collagen oxidized regenerated cellulose dressings in conjunction with negative pressure wound therapy: expert panel consensus recommendations.
DOI: 10.25270/wnds/24026 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Consensus Statement
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A new indication for use of silver collagen oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) dressing in conjunction with negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) and reticulated open cell foam (ROCF) dressings has recently become available.
OBJECTIVE: An in-person meeting with 7 health care providers (HCPs) was held to identify clinical care settings and appropriate use of silver collagen ORC dressings in conjunction with NPWT and ROCF dressings.
METHODS: Consensus statements were developed using a modified Delphi technique. An additional 25 HCPs completed an anonymous survey on the consensus statements. Consensus was defined as &#x2265;80% agreement among survey respondents.
RESULTS: Use of silver collagen ORC dressings with NPWT and ROCF dressings was recommended in inpatient and outpatient health care settings. Use in traumatic wounds, surgical wounds, diabetic ulcers, venous leg ulcers, and pressure injuries/ulcers was supported. Use was not recommended in the presence of exposed unprotected organs or exposed unprotected vessels, when the potential for inadequate wound hemostasis exists, acutely ischemic wounds, third-degree burns, or surgically closed incisions, or with patient hypersensitivity to product components.
CONCLUSIONS: Limited evidence exists on use of NPWT in conjunction with silver collagen ORC dressings. A panel developed 12 consensus statements detailing the recommended and contraindicated uses of NPWT in conjunction with silver collagen ORC dressings.

### PMID 38950539 (2024) — Facts, views &amp; vision in ObGyn
TITLE: Oxidised cellulose-based reaction mimicking a suspicious ovarian mass: a case report and a systematic review.
DOI: 10.52054/FVVO.16.2.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Oxidised regenerated cellulose was introduced 60 years ago to control diffuse bleeding from large surfaces. Although considered safe and effective, foreign body reactions can mimic suspicious masses in several organs. We describe the third case, reported in PubMed, of an oxidised regenerated cellulose-based granuloma mimicking a suspicious ovarian tumour on MRI. During surgery, the diagnosis was suspected by granulomatous tissue and confirmed by pathology. The follow-up after the excision was uneventful. Although a rare complication, physicians should be aware of this presentation and of the recommendation to remove excess Surgicel after the bleeding has stopped.

### PMID 38878233 (2024) — Archives of gynecology and obstetrics
TITLE: Prevention of peritoneal adhesions after gynecological surgery: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1007/s00404-024-07584-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: IMPORTANCE: The formation of adhesions after gynecological surgery not only has detrimental impacts on those affected, including pain, obstruction, and infertility, but also imposes a high economic burden on healthcare systems worldwide.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this review was to evaluate the adhesion prevention potential of all currently available adhesion barriers for gynecological surgery.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: We systematically searched MEDLINE and CENTRAL databases for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) on the use of adhesion barriers as compared with peritoneal irrigation or no treatment in gynecological surgery. Only RCTs with second-look surgery to evaluate adhesions in the pelvic/abdominal (but not intrauterine) cavity were included.
RESULTS: We included 45 RCTs with a total of 4,120 patients examining a total of 10 unique types of barriers in second-look gynecological surgery. While RCTs on oxidized regenerated cellulose (significant improvement in 6 of 14 trials), polyethylene glycol with/without other agents (4/10), hyaluronic acid and hyaluronate&#x2009;+&#x2009;carboxymethylcellulose (7/10), icodextrin (1/3), dextran (0/3), fibrin-containing agents (1/2), expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (1/1), N,O-carboxymethylchitosan (0/1), and modified starch (1/1) overall showed inconsistent findings, results for expanded polytetrafluoroethylene, hyaluronic acid, and modified starch yielded the greatest improvements regarding adhesion reduction at 75%, 0-67%, and 85%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Best results for adhesion prevention were reported after applying Gore-Tex Surgical Membrane, hyaluronic acid, and 4DryField&#xae;. As Gore-Tex Surgical Membrane is nonabsorbable, it is associated with a greater risk of new adhesion formation due to second-look surgery to remove the product. 4DryField&#xae; yielded the greatest improvement in adhesion score compared to all other barrier agents (85%). For better comparability, future studies should use standardized scores and put more emphasis on patient-reported outcome measures, such as pain and infertility.

### PMID 38176112 (2024) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: Expert panel recommendations for topical hemostatic agent use in varied bleeding sites and situations during neuro-spine surgeries.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2023.12.007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016454">Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Intraoperative bleeding poses a substantial challenge, particularly in neuro-spine surgeries leading to complications such as hematomas, infections, and hemodynamic instability. Despite their proven efficacy, use of topical hemostatic agents (THAs) lacks comprehensive published literature and guidelines particularly in the Indian setting. The present study provides the first-ever Indian expert panel recommendations for effective adjunct THA use in different intraoperative bleeding sites and situations in neuro-spine surgeries. A comprehensive approach, encompassing a literature review, followed by experience sharing in a meeting using a survey helped integrate expert opinions in the form of practical algorithms to guide THA selection. Our survey results revealed a strong inclination towards specific THAs, flowable gelatin&#xa0;+&#xa0;thrombin being choice of THA for difficult to access and problematic bleeding situations during tumor removal/resection, transsphenoidal hypophysectomy and skull-based procedures. Both oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC)/Fibrillar and flowable gelatin&#xa0;+&#xa0;thrombin were recommended for continuous oozing. ORC/Fibrillar was preferred for arteriovenous and cavernous malformations. This expert-panel guidance on THA use aims to optimize hemostat use practices and improve surgical outcomes in neuro-spine surgery.

### PMID 39559590 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Effects of Intraoperative Epidural Steroid-Soaked Gelatin Sponge in Lumbar Spine Surgery: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.71855 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: This systematic review and meta-analysis evaluated the impact of intraoperative epidural steroid-soaked gelatin sponge in lumbar spine surgery for conditions like spinal stenosis and nerve root compression. Surgery often involves removing structures to decompress the nerves. Steroids are used to alleviate inflammation and pain, with gelatin sponges serving as carriers to extend their effect. While epidural steroid injections have been effective, the combined use of gelatin sponges remains controversial. The study systematically searched databases including PubMed, MEDLINE, and Cochrane Central Registry of Controlled Trials databases involving lumbar surgeries using steroid-soaked gelatin sponges. Seven studies with 620 patients were included, focusing on postoperative pain scores, analgesic use, hospital stay, and complications. The quality of the studies was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias 2 tool. Results showed no significant difference in pain scores between the steroid and control groups on postoperative day 1 and at three months. However, there was a trend toward reduced pain in the steroid group. Notably, patients in the steroid group required fewer analgesics, indicating a significant reduction in postoperative pain medication use. Other factors, such as surgery time, blood loss, and hospital stay, showed no statistically significant differences between the groups. The findings suggest that while the use of steroid-soaked gelatin sponges does not significantly change immediate postoperative pain levels, it may contribute to improved pain management. This approach is safe, with minimal risk of complications, and may provide prolonged, localized effects due to the slow release of steroids. Future large-scale randomized trials are needed to further validate these findings. In conclusion, the use of steroid-soaked gelatin sponges in lumbar spine surgery is a feasible option to consider, with potential benefits in postoperative pain management and reduced analgesic consumption.

### PMID 39084283 (2024) — Annales pharmaceutiques francaises
TITLE: Cost analysis study comparing the impact of treatment with aprotinin versus tranexamic acid in cardiac surgery under cardiopulmonary bypass.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pharma.2024.07.005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Comparative Study, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: An increased risk of mortality and postoperative side effects led to aprotinin (Trasylol&#xae;) withdrawal from the market in 2008, but since 2018 aprotinin has again been used in France. The French retrospective multicentre APACHE study (AProtinin versus tranexamic Acid in Cardiac surgery patients with High-risk for Excessive bleeding) compared the efficacy of tranexamic acid versus half-dose aprotinin. The aim of this study, ancillary to the APACHE study, is to carry out a medico-economic analysis of the use of these two antifibrinolytics on an APACHE subpopulation.
METHODS: Economic data on reimbursement by the French health insurance system were extracted from the program for the data processing of medical information, and quantitative data on the cost of healthcare products were obtained from the hospital pharmacy software.
RESULTS: The main analysis of costs for the population shows that the global valuation was not significantly different between the two treatment groups (P=0.60), but the costs of blood products included in the related hospital stay group (Groupe Homog&#xe8;ne de s&#xe9;jour [GHS]) (whole blood, platelets and plasma) were higher for the tranexamic acid group (P=0.007). In a sub-analysis of patients alive at discharge, the costs of blood products in addition to GHS (blood-derived medicines) and the costs of blood products in the GHS were higher for the tranexamic acid group (P=0.04 and 0.001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The additional cost of aprotinin at the time of purchase is offset by the additional costs of blood products in the tranexamic acid group.

### PMID 38016817 (2024) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Prospective, Randomized Study of Fibrinogen Concentrate Versus Cryoprecipitate for Correcting Hypofibrinogenemia in Cardiac Surgery Patients.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2023.10.031 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is associated with hypofibrinogenemia and severe bleeding requiring transfusion. Guidelines recommend cryoprecipitate or fibrinogen concentrate (FC) for the treatment of acquired hypofibrinogenemia. This study compared cryoprecipitate and FC for the correction of acquired hypofibrinogenemia and the associated costs.
DESIGN: A single-center, prospective, randomized study evaluating patients with hypofibrinogenemia after cardiac surgery. The primary endpoint was direct treatment cost. Secondary endpoints included the change in fibrinogen level after FC and/or cryoprecipitate dosing.
SETTING: A single-center study in Astana, Kazakhstan.
PARTICIPANTS: Participants who underwent CPB from 2021 to 2022 and developed clinically significant bleeding and hypofibrinogenemia.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were randomized to receive cryoprecipitate or FC.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Eighty-eight adult patients with acquired hypofibrinogenemia (&lt;2.0 g/L) after CPB were randomized to receive cryoprecipitate (N&#xa0;=&#xa0;40) or FC (N&#xa0;=&#xa0;48), with similar demographics between groups. Overall, mean &#xb1; SD 9.33 &#xb1; 0.94 units (range, 8-10) cryoprecipitate or 1.40 &#xb1; 0.49 g (1-2) FC was administered to the 2 groups. From before administration to 24 hours after, mean plasma fibrinogen increased by a mean &#xb1; SD of 125 &#xb1; 65 and 96 &#xb1; 65 mg/dL in the cryoprecipitate and FC groups, respectively. At 48 hours after administration, there was no significant difference in fibrinogen levels between groups. The mean direct cost of treatment with FC was significantly lower than with cryoprecipitate (p &lt; 0.0001): $1,505.06 &#xb1; $152.40 and $631.75 &#xb1; $223.67 per patient for cryoprecipitate and FC, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of plasma fibrinogen concentration showed that cryoprecipitate and FC had comparable effectiveness. However, FC is advantageous over cryoprecipitate due to its ease of handling, lower cost, and high purity.

### PMID 39407942 (2024) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Incidence and Predictors of Early and Late Radial Artery Occlusion after Percutaneous Coronary Intervention and Coronary Angiography: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm13195882 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Introduction: Trans-radial access for coronary angiography and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) has gained popularity due to its advantages over the traditional transfemoral approach. However, radial artery occlusion (RAO) remains a common complication following trans-radial procedures. This study aimed to investigate the incidence of early and late RAO along with their risk factors. Methods: Six databases, Medline (Ovid), National Library of Medicine (MeSH), Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (Wiley), Embase, Scopus, and Global Index Medicus, were searched. The systematic review and meta-analysis followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Data were extracted and analyzed. Using a random-effect model, the primary endpoint was the overall incidence of RAO after invasive coronary procedures. Subgroup analysis and meta-regression were also performed to identify possible predictors of RAO. Results: A total of 41 studies with 30,020 patients were included. The overall incidence of RAO was 13% (95% CI = 0.09-0.16). The incidence of early RAO (within 24 h) was 14% (95% CI = 0.10-0.18) in 26 studies, while the incidence of late RAO (after 24 h) was 10% (95% CI = 0.04-0.16) in 22 studies. The average incidence rates of early RAO in studies with catheter sizes of &lt;6 Fr, 6 Fr, and &gt;6 Fr were 9.8%, 9.4%, and 8.8%. The overall effect size of female gender as a predictor was 0.22 with a 95% CI of 0.00-0.44. Age was a potential predictor of early RAO (B = 0.000357; 95% CI = -0.015-0.0027, p: 0.006). Conclusions: This meta-analysis provides essential information on the incidence of early (14%) and late (10%) RAO following angiographic procedures. Additionally, our findings suggest that female sex and age are possible predictors of RAO. A larger catheter, especially (6 Fr) and hemostatic compression time &lt;90 min post-procedure, substantially reduced the incidence of RAO. The use of oral anticoagulation and the appropriate dosage of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) does reduce RAO, but a comparison between them showed no statistical significance.

### PMID 39104983 (2024) — Cureus
TITLE: Successful Rhinophyma Treatment Utilizing the Versajet II Hydrosurgery System: A Case Report and Systematic Review of the Literature.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.63921 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Rhinophyma, characterized by hypertrophy of sebaceous glands, often necessitates surgical intervention. This is the second&#xa0;case report of the off-label use of the Versajet II Hydrosurgery System (VJHS) (Smith &amp; Nephew, London, UK) in the United States for the treatment of rhinophyma and the first systematic review of the literature, emphasizing its efficacy and safety for this indication. A surgical debulking and resurfacing was performed on a patient with rhinophyma. The patient underwent general anesthesia along with bilateral infraorbital blocks and local infiltration of lidocaine 1% with epinephrine. The VJHS was utilized for progressive debulking followed by debridement using sharp instruments until the desired nasal form and contour were achieved. Hemostasis was obtained through monopolar electrocautery and topical hemostatic agents. The patient exhibited excellent nasal shape and healing following VJHS debulking and without perioperative complications, suggesting both the effectiveness and safety of the VJHS in rhinophyma treatment. A literature review was conducted using the PubMed Central database. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses&#xa0;(PRISMA) guidelines, employing inclusion and exclusion criteria, were utilized to narrow down results to include original studies discussing rhinophyma surgical debridement with the VJHS. Six articles were included in the review for results analysis.&#xa0;This case report aligns with findings from international literature, emphasizing the versatility of the VJHS in rhinophyma treatment. Notably, this report marks the second documented off-label use of the VJHS in the United States for rhinophyma. The success of this case reinforces the potential of the VJHS in treating rhinophyma. This innovative approach yielded promising outcomes in several international reports. Further research is warranted to establish a standardized protocol to validate the long-term benefits of this technology applied to rhinophyma patients.

### PMID 38959359 (2024) — Pediatric critical care medicine : a journal of the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the World Federation of Pediatric Intensive and Critical Care Societies
TITLE: Antifibrinolytic and Adjunct Hemostatic Agents: The Pediatric Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation Anticoagulation CollaborativE Consensus Conference.
DOI: 10.1097/PCC.0000000000003491 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Consensus Statement, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To derive systematic-review informed, modified Delphi consensus regarding antifibrinolytic and adjunct hemostatic agents in neonates and children supported with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) for the Pediatric ECMO Anticoagulation CollaborativE consensus conference.
DATA SOURCES: A structured literature search was performed using PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane Library (CENTRAL) databases from January 1988 to May 2021.
STUDY SELECTION: Use of antifibrinolytics (epsilon-aminocaproic acid [EACA] or tranexamic acid), recombinant factor VII activated (rFVIIa), or topical hemostatic agents (THAs).
DATA EXTRACTION: Two authors reviewed all citations independently, with a third independent reviewer resolving conflicts. Eleven references were used for data extraction and informed recommendations. Evidence tables were constructed using a standardized data extraction form.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Risk of bias was assessed using the Quality in Prognosis Studies tool. The evidence was evaluated using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation system. Forty-eight experts met over 2 years to develop evidence-based recommendations and, when evidence was lacking, expert-based consensus statements for the management of bleeding and thrombotic complications in pediatric ECMO patients. A web-based modified Delphi process was used to build consensus via the Research And Development/University of California Appropriateness Method. Consensus was defined as greater than 80% agreement. One weak recommendation and three consensus statements are presented.
CONCLUSIONS: Evidence supporting recommendations for administration of antifibrinolytics (EACA or tranexamic acid), rFVIIa, and THAs were sparse and inconclusive. Much work remains to determine effective and safe usage strategies.

### PMID 37545182 (2023) — Acta radiologica (Stockholm, Sweden : 1987)
TITLE: Unraveling the enigma of Adamkiewicz: exploring the prevalence, anatomical variability, and clinical impact in spinal embolization procedures for bone metastases.
DOI: 10.1177/02841851231191761 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The artery of Adamkiewicz (AKA) is vital for spinal cord blood supply. Its role in embolization procedures for bone metastases can cause serious complications. We explored its prevalence, anatomical variation, and effect on spinal embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) in patients with bone metastases.
PURPOSE: To understand the impact and variability of AKA in spinal embolizations in cases of bone metastases to reduce complications and improve patient outcomes.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We examined data from 454 patients who underwent spinal embolization with NBCA between 2009 and 2018. The presence, anastomoses, and tumor features of AKA were assessed via pre-procedure imaging and angiography. Complications were classified per the CIRSE Classification System.
RESULTS: AKA was found in 22.8% of patients, predominantly left-sided and originating from T8 to L1. Direct and indirect anastomoses were present in 66.6% and 33.4% of patients, respectively. Extra-compartmental invasion was linked with direct anastomosis (P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.004). High-grade complications were rare but included one instance of bilateral lower limb paralysis. Partial embolization was necessary in 22.8% of cases due to AKA.
CONCLUSION: The study underscores the need for rigorous preoperative evaluation of AKA origin and anastomoses in patients undergoing spinal embolization for bone metastases. Given the significant presence of AKA and related anastomoses, especially with renal extra-compartmental tumors, caution is advised to reduce complications and optimize patient outcomes. Further research is required for best practice guidelines involving bone metastases and AKA.

### PMID 36800489 (2023) — The Cochrane database of systematic reviews
TITLE: Drugs to reduce bleeding and transfusion in major open vascular or endovascular surgery: a systematic review and network meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD013649.pub2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review, Network Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Vascular surgery may be followed by internal bleeding due to inadequate surgical haemostasis, abnormal clotting, or surgical complications. Bleeding ranges from minor, with no transfusion requirement, to massive, requiring multiple blood product transfusions. There are a number of drugs, given systemically or applied locally, which may reduce the need for blood transfusion.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness and safety of anti-fibrinolytic and haemostatic drugs and agents in reducing bleeding and the need for blood transfusion in people undergoing major vascular surgery or vascular procedures with a risk of moderate or severe (&gt; 500 mL) blood loss.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched: Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials; MEDLINE; Embase; CINAHL, and Transfusion Evidence Library. We also searched the WHO ICTRP and ClinicalTrials.gov trial registries for ongoing and unpublished trials. Searches used a combination of MeSH and free text terms from database inception to 31 March 2022, without restriction on language or publication status.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in adults of drug treatments to reduce bleeding due to major vascular surgery or vascular procedures with a risk of moderate or severe blood loss, which used placebo, usual care or another drug regimen as control.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard Cochrane methods. Our primary outcomes were units of red cells transfused and all-cause mortality. Our secondary outcomes included risk of receiving an allogeneic blood product, risk of reoperation or repeat procedure due to bleeding, risk of a thromboembolic event, risk of a serious adverse event and length of hospital stay. We used GRADE to assess certainty of evidence.
MAIN RESULTS: We included 22 RCTs with 3393 participants analysed, of which one RCT with 69 participants was reported only in abstract form, with no usable data. Seven RCTs evaluated systemic drug treatments (three aprotinin, two desmopressin, two tranexamic acid) and 15 RCTs evaluated topical drug treatments (drug-containing bioabsorbable dressings or glues), including fibrin, thrombin, collagen, gelatin, synthetic sealants and one investigational new agent. Most trials were conducted in high-income countries and the majority of the trials only included participants undergoing elective surgery. We also identified two ongoing RCTs. We were unable to perform the planned network meta-analysis due to the sparse reporting of outcomes relevant to this review. Systemic drug treatments We identified seven trials of three systemic drugs: aprotinin, desmopressin and tranexamic acid, all with placebo controls. The trials of aprotinin and desmopressin were small with very low-certainty evidence for all of our outcomes. Tranexamic acid versus placebo was the systemic drug comparison with the largest number of participants (2 trials; 1460 participants), both at low risk of bias. The largest of these included a total of 9535 individuals undergoing a number of different higher risk surgeries and reported limited information on the vascular subgroup (1399 participants). Neither trial reported the number of units of red cells transfused per participant up to 30 days. Three outcomes were associated with very low-certainty evidence due to the very wide confidence intervals (CIs) resulting from small study sizes and low number of events. These were: all-cause mortality up to 30 days; number of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion up to 30 days; and risk of requiring a repeat procedure or operation due to bleeding. Tranexamic acid may have no effect on the risk of thromboembolic events up to 30 days (risk ratio (RR) 1.10, 95% CI 0.88 to 1.36; 1 trial, 1360 participants; low-certainty evidence due to imprecision). There is one large ongoing trial (8320 participants) comparing tranexamic acid versus placebo in people undergoing non-cardiac surgery who are at high risk of requiring a red cell transfusion. This aims to complete recruitment in April 2023. This trial has primary outcomes of proportion of participants transfused with red blood cells and incidence of venous thromboembolism (DVT or PE). Topical drug treatments Most trials of topical drug treatments were at high risk of bias due to their open-label design (compared with usual care, or liquids were compared with sponges). All of the trials were small, most were very small, and few reported clinically relevant outcomes in the postoperative period. Fibrin sealant versus usual care was the topical drug comparison with the largest number of participants (5 trials, 784 participants). The five trials that compared fibrin sealant with usual care were all at high risk of bias, due to the open-label trial design with no measures put in place to minimise reporting bias. All of the trials were funded by pharmaceutical companies. None of the five trials reported the number of red cells transfused per participant up to 30 days or the number of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion up to 30 days. The other three outcomes were associated with very low-certainty evidence with wide confidence intervals due to small sample sizes and the low number of events, these were: all-cause mortality up to 30 days; risk of requiring a repeat procedure due to bleeding; and risk of thromboembolic disease up to 30 days. We identified one large trial (500 participants) comparing fibrin sealant versus usual care in participants undergoing abdominal aortic aneurysm repair, which has not yet started recruitment. This trial lists death due to arterial disease and reintervention rates as primary outcomes.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Because of a lack of data, we are uncertain whether any systemic or topical treatments used to reduce bleeding due to major vascular surgery have an effect on: all-cause mortality up to 30 days; risk of requiring a repeat procedure or operation due to bleeding; number of red cells transfused per participant up to 30 days or the number of participants requiring an allogeneic blood transfusion up to 30 days. There may be no effect of tranexamic acid on the risk of thromboembolic events up to 30 days, this is important as there has been concern that this risk may be increased. Trials with sample size targets of thousands of participants and clinically relevant outcomes are needed, and we look forward to seeing the results of the ongoing trials in the future.

### PMID 37892794 (2023) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Effects of Thrombin-Based Hemostatic Agent in Total Knee Arthroplasty: Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm12206656 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: The effectiveness of Floseal, a thrombin-based hemostatic matrix, in total knee arthroplasty (TKA) in minimizing blood loss and transfusion requirements remains a topic of debate. This meta-analysis aims to evaluate the up-to-date randomized controlled trials (RCTs) on the efficacy and safety of Floseal in TKA. A comprehensive search was conducted in electronic databases to identify relevant RCTs. The methodological quality of the included studies was assessed, and data extraction was performed. The pooled effect sizes were calculated using standardized mean difference (SMD) or odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Eight studies involving 904 patients were included in the meta-analysis. The use of a thrombin-based hemostatic agent significantly reduced hemoglobin decline (SMD = -0.49, 95% CI: -0.92 to -0.07) and the risk of allogenic transfusion (OR = 0.45, 95% CI: 0.25 to 0.81) but showed no significant difference in the volume of drainage or total blood loss. Funnel plots showed no evidence of publication bias. This meta-analysis provides robust evidence supporting the effectiveness of Floseal in reducing hemoglobin decline and transfusion in TKA. Further well-designed RCTs with longer follow-up periods are warranted to assess long-term efficacy and safety.

### PMID 37957662 (2023) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Aortic annulus rupture after transcatheter aortic valve replacement: successful management of a dangerous complication.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-023-02426-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Aortic annulus rupture remains one of the most fatal complications of TAVR. While attempts have been made to describe and predict this complication, the data remains insufficient without evidence-based guidelines for management of this rare complication.
METHODS: Here we describe a series of 3 aortic annulus ruptures after TAVR which were managed successfully to hospital discharge.
RESULTS: Patient 1 suffered annulus rupture during balloon valvuloplasty prior to TAVR. The patient became hypotensive, and echocardiogram showed pericardial effusion. The patient underwent pericardiocentesis which transiently improved the blood pressure, but bleeding continued. The patient was transitioned to an open surgical aortic valve replacement due to ongoing hemorrhage. The chest was left open with delayed closure on post-op day 2. The patient was discharged on post-op day 15. Patient 2 was undergoing TAVR valve expansion. The patient became hypotensive. An echocardiogram revealed pericardial effusion. Pericardiocentesis yielded 200&#xa0;mL of blood. SURGIFLO (Johnson &amp; Johnson Wound Management, Somerville, NJ) was injected into the pericardial space. Aortic root angiography confirmed no further contrast extravasation. A pericardial drain was left in place for 2&#xa0;days, and the patient was discharged on post-op day 7. Patient 3 received a TAVR valve and post-placement dilation due to paravalvular leak. The echocardiogram showed a pericardial effusion. Pericardiocentesis was performed, yielding 500&#xa0;cc of blood. The patient's healthcare proxy declined emergent surgery; thus, a pericardial drain was placed. No hemostatic agents were used, and drainage reduced over several hours. The drain was removed on post-op day 3, and the patient was discharged on post-op day 8.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the timelines in these three cases, and interventions used, the following steps may be employed in the event of annulus rupture: identification of hemodynamic instability, echocardiogram to confirm pericardial effusion, emergent pericardiocentesis, pericardial drain placement for evacuation of the pericardial space and use of hemostatic agents, repeat aortogram to rule out ongoing extravasation. If hemostasis is unable to be achieved and/or the patient becomes hemodynamically unstable at any point, rapid transition to emergent surgical management is necessary. This management strategy proved successful for this case series and warrants further investigation.

### PMID 38125146 (2023) — Evidence-based complementary and alternative medicine : eCAM
TITLE: Retracted: Efficacy of Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose/Collagen Dressing for Management of Skin Wounds: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.1155/2023/9836142 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016440">Retraction Notice
ABSTRACT: [This retracts the article DOI: 10.1155/2021/1058671.].

### PMID 37526076 (2023) — Expert review of medical devices
TITLE: A contemporary systematic review of the complications associated with SURGICEL.
DOI: 10.1080/17434440.2023.2242776 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This review aims to summarize the findings from recent literature (2010-2022) reporting on complications that resulted from the surgical use of SURGICEL for intraoperative hemostasis.
METHODS: A literature search was conducted using the MEDLINE (OVID), Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials - CENTRAL (OVID) databases. The studies were sorted into case reports and other study types for data extraction. Covidence was used for data extraction and statistics were descriptive.
RESULTS: Of the total 560 articles screened, 73 papers were selected for a full-text review and 70 studies were included in this review. A total of 7,242 participants were included in the studies (case studies n&#x2009;=&#x2009;93, others n&#x2009;=&#x2009;7149). 67/70 of the included studies reported complications when SURGICEL was used intraoperatively. Reported complications included: SURGICEL induced masses (granulomas, abscesses, hematomas, cysts) (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;25), hemorrhagic complications (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;12), masses misdiagnosed as tumors, cardiovascular, nervous system, and hepatobiliary complications, pain, and infections. Other complications included: fistulas, erectile dysfunction, chorioamnionitis, swelling, urinary leak, renal failure, and anaphylaxis.
CONCLUSIONS: Publications reporting on complications associated with the use of SURGICEL intraoperatively have continued to emerge. Future studies should compare how the types and rates of complications compare between SURGICEL and alternative hemostatic agents.

### PMID 37297900 (2023) — Journal of clinical medicine
TITLE: Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose versus Polyglycolic Acid for Pleural Coverage in Pneumothorax Surgery.
DOI: 10.3390/jcm12113705 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Objectives: Although surgical intervention for spontaneous pneumothorax (SP) reduces the recurrence rate, thoracoscopic surgery is associated with greater postoperative recurrence rates than open thoracotomy. A polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheet or oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) mesh can therefore be used for additional coverage after thoracoscopic surgery, and this study compared the clinical impacts of these two materials. Methods: From 2018 to 2020, 262 thoracoscopic surgeries for primary SP were performed, of which 125 patients were enrolled in this study, and 48 and 77 patients received ORC and PGA coverage, respectively. The clinical characteristics and surgical procedures were reviewed, and the recurrence rates were compared. To obtain more comprehensive evidence, we performed a literature review and meta-analysis comparing ORC and PGA coverage. Results: There were no significant differences in patient characteristics between the two groups. Operating time was slightly shorter in the ORC group than in the PGA group (p = 0.008). The pneumothorax recurrence rate was similar in both groups (PGA: 10.4%, ORC: 6.2%, p = 0.529), but the recurrence-free interval was significantly longer (p = 0.036) in the ORC (262 days) than in the PGA (48.5 days) group. The literature review identified three relevant studies, and the meta-analysis revealed no difference in pneumothorax recurrence rate between the two coverage materials. Conclusions: The two visceral pleural coverage materials, PGA and ORC, did not show significant differences in postoperative pneumothorax recurrence. Therefore, if applied appropriately, the choice of material between ORC and PGA for thoracoscopic pneumothorax surgery does not have a significant impact on the clinical outcome.

### PMID 37058598 (2023) — Cancer nursing
TITLE: Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose Versus Calcium Alginate in Controlling Bleeding From Malignant Wounds: A Randomized Controlled Trial.
DOI: 10.1097/NCC.0000000000001235 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial, Comparative Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: There is no consensus on the best intervention for topical management of bleeding in malignant wounds. Although surgical hemostatic dressings are recommended, the use of calcium alginate (CA) is frequent among practitioners.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the hemostatic efficacy of oxidized regenerated cellulose (ORC) and CA dressing in the management of bleeding from malignant wounds resulting from breast cancer.
METHODS: This was a randomized open clinical trial. The outcomes measured were total time to hemostasis and the number of hemostatic products used.
RESULTS: Sixty-one patients were potentially eligible for the study, 1 did not consent, and 32 were assessed to be ineligible, resulting in a sample of 28 who were randomized to 2 study groups. Total time to hemostasis was 93.8 seconds in the ORC group, with an average of 30.1 seconds (95% confidence interval, 18.6-189 seconds), and 67 seconds in the CA group, with an average of 30.4 seconds (confidence interval, 21.7 seconds to imprecise upper limit). The main difference was 26.8 seconds. Kaplan-Meier log-rank test, and Cox model showed no statistical significance ( P = 0.894). A total of 18 hemostatic products were used in the CA group and 34 in the ORC group. No adverse effects were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Although no significant differences were identified in terms of time, more hemostatic products were used in the ORC group, highlighting the effectiveness of CA.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Calcium alginate may be the first choice in the management of bleeding in malignant wounds, favoring nursing in the most immediate hemostatic actions.

### PMID 37792569 (2023) — Journal of hepato-biliary-pancreatic sciences
TITLE: Hepatic artery protection using a polyglycolic acid sheet during pancreaticoduodenectomy: A multicenter study.
DOI: 10.1002/jhbp.1364 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016448">Multicenter Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postpancreatectomy hemorrhage (PPH) is the most feared complication after pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD). The most common cause is erosion of the gastroduodenal artery stump. Preventive measures have been previously reported, but a consensus is lacking. The aim of this study was to analyze the preventive effect of reinforcing the hepatic artery using a polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheet during PD.
METHODS: A multicenter retrospective study was performed, collecting data from three tertiary hospitals in Korea. Patients receiving PD from January 2016 to December 2021 were included. The primary endpoint was rate of PPH from the hepatic artery. Arterial reinforcement (AR) was performed by wrapping the artery with Neoveil (Gunze Ltd) and applying fibrin glue. The perioperative data of patients who did not receive AR were compared with data of those who received AR.
RESULTS: A total of 904 patients were analyzed. The rate of PPH from the hepatic artery was significantly lower in the AR group. (3.5% vs 0.7%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.002) In patients with CR-POPF, the 90&#x2009;day mortality rate of the AR group was less than half that of the non-AR group (7.2% vs 3.5%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.455) Risk factor analysis showed CR-POPF to be an independent risk factor for PPH. Arterial reinforcement was shown to be a strong protective factor for PPH (OR 0.20, 95% CI: 0.05-0.72, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.014).
CONCLUSIONS: AR of the hepatic artery using Neoveil and fibrin glue is a simple method that greatly reduces the rate of PPH after PD.

### PMID 36867329 (2023) — Advances in therapy
TITLE: Cost Analysis of Aprotinin Reintroduction in French Cardiac Surgery Centres: A Real-World Data-Based Analysis.
DOI: 10.1007/s12325-023-02464-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016448">Multicenter Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The European Medicines Agency restored aprotinin (APR) use for preventing blood loss in patients undergoing isolated coronary artery bypass graft (iCABG) in 2016 but requested the collection of patient and surgery data in a registry (NAPaR). The aim of this analysis was to evaluate the impact of APR reintroduction in France on the main hospital costs (operating room, transfusion and intensive unit stay) compared to the current use of tranexamic acid (TXA), which was the only antifibrinolytic available before APR reinstatement.
METHODS: A multicenter before-after post-hoc analysis to compare APR and TXA was carried out in four French university hospitals. APR use followed the ARCOTHOVA (French Association of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthetists) protocol, which had framed three main indications in 2018. Data from 236 APR patients were retrieved from the NAPaR (N&#x2009;=&#x2009;874); 223 TXA patients were retrospectively retrieved from each center database and matched to APR patients upon indication classes. Budget impact was evaluated using both direct costs associated with antifibrinolytics and transfusion products (within the first 48&#xa0;h) and other costs such as surgery duration and ICU stay.
RESULTS: The 459 collected patients were distributed as: 17% on-label; 83% off-label. Mean cost per patient until ICU discharge tended to be lower in the APR group versus the TXA group, which resulted in an estimated gross saving of &#x20ac;3136 per patient. These savings concerned operating room and transfusion costs but were mainly driven by reduced ICU stays. When extrapolated to the whole French NAPaR population, the total savings of the therapeutic switch was estimated at around &#x20ac;3 million.
CONCLUSION: The budget impact projected that using APR according to ARCOTHOVA protocol resulted in decreased requirement for transfusion and complications related to surgery. Both were associated with substantial cost savings from the hospital's perspective compared with exclusive use of TXA.

### PMID 36598773 (2023) — JAMA surgery
TITLE: Cost-effectiveness of Fibrinogen Concentrate vs Cryoprecipitate for Treating Acquired Hypofibrinogenemia in Bleeding Adult Cardiac Surgical Patients.
DOI: 10.1001/jamasurg.2022.6818 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016449">Randomized Controlled Trial, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: IMPORTANCE: Excessive bleeding requiring fibrinogen replacement is a serious complication of cardiac surgery. However, the relative cost-effectiveness of the 2 available therapies-fibrinogen concentrate and cryoprecipitate-is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine cost-effectiveness of fibrinogen concentrate vs cryoprecipitate for managing active bleeding in adult patients who underwent cardiac surgery.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A within-trial economic evaluation of the Fibrinogen Replenishment in Surgery (FIBERS) randomized clinical trial (February 2017 to November 2018) that took place at 4 hospitals based in Ontario, Canada, hospitals examined all in-hospital resource utilization costs and allogeneic blood product (ABP) transfusion costs incurred within 28 days of surgery. Participants included a subset of 495 adult patients from the FIBERS trial who underwent cardiac surgery and developed active bleeding and acquired hypofibrinogenemia requiring fibrinogen replacement.
INTERVENTIONS: Fibrinogen concentrate (4 g per dose) or cryoprecipitate (10 units per dose) randomized (1:1) up to 24 hours postcardiopulmonary bypass.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Effectiveness outcomes included number of ABPs administered within 24 hours and 7 days of cardiopulmonary bypass. ABP transfusion (7-day) and in-hospital resource utilization (28-day) costs were evaluated and a multivariable net benefit regression model built for the full sample and predefined subgroups.
RESULTS: Patient level costs for 495 patients were evaluated (mean [SD] age 59.2 [15.4] years and 69.3% male.) Consistent with FIBERS, ABP transfusions and adverse events were similar in both treatment groups. Median (IQR) total 7-day ABP cost was CAD $2280 (US dollars [USD] $1697) (CAD $930 [USD $692]-CAD $4970 [USD $3701]) in the fibrinogen concentrate group and CAD $2770 (USD $1690) (IQR, CAD $1140 [USD $849]-CAD $5000 [USD $3723]) in the cryoprecipitate group. Median (interquartile range) total 28-day cost was CAD $38&#x202f;180 (USD $28&#x202f;431) $(IQR, CAD $26&#x202f;350 [USD $19&#x202f;622]-CAD $65&#x202f;080 [USD $48&#x202f;463]) in the fibrinogen concentrate group and CAD $38&#x202f;790 (USD $28&#x202f;886) (IQR, CAD $26&#x202f;180 [USD $19&#x202f;495]-CAD $70&#x202f;380 [USD $52&#x202f;409]) in the cryoprecipitate group. After exclusion of patients who were critically ill before surgery (11%) due to substantial variability in costs, the incremental net benefit of fibrinogen concentrate vs cryoprecipitate was positive (probability of being cost-effective 86% and 97% at $0 and CAD $2000 (USD $1489) willingness-to-pay, respectively). Net benefit was highly uncertain for nonelective and patients with critical illness.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Fibrinogen concentrate is cost-effective when compared with cryoprecipitate in most bleeding adult patients who underwent cardiac surgery with acquired hypofibrinogenemia requiring fibrinogen replacement. The generalizability of these findings outside the Canadian health system needs to be verified.

### PMID 36842528 (2023) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: VertebralArtery Injury with Anterior Cervical Spine Operations: A Systematic Review of Risk Factors, Clinical Outcomes, and Management Strategies.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.02.078 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Anterior cervical spine operations are commonly performed on cervical spine pathologies and to a large extent are safe and successful. However, these surgical procedures expose the vertebral artery, posing a risk of harm to it.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted using PubMed, Google Scholar, and Web of Science electronic databases according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines to critically assess primary articles discussing treatment strategies "vertebral artery injury" AND "anterior cervical spine" and develop a management strategy based on our experience and meta-analysis of the literature. In addition, we present an illustrative case of iatrogenic vertebral artery injury presenting with 6 to 7 months' history of progressive dysphagia was transferred to our care from an outside institution.
RESULTS: Included and analyzed were 43 articles that detailed 75 cases involving vertebral artery injury (VAI) in anterior cervical spine operations. Preoperatively, frequent clinical findings reported were sensory deficit (26 patients [63.41%]), motor deficit (20 patients [48.78%]), and pain (17 patients [41.46%]). In total, 32 patients (50.00%) endured injury of their left VA, and 30 patients had a right VAI. The 2 common causes of VAI were drilling (24 patients [40.00%]) and instrumentation (8 patients [13.33%]).
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our review recommends repair or tamponade packing with a hemostatic agent for primary management. Should tamponade packing with a hemostatic agent be used for primary management, secondary management should entail either repair, stenting occlusion, embolization, anticoagulants, or ligation. Further examination of this treatment strategy based on a larger cohort is necessary.

### PMID 38228592 (2023) — Chirurgia (Bucharest, Romania : 1990)
TITLE: Cyanoacrylate Adhesives Used for Topical Hemostasis A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.21614/chirurgia.2023.v.118.i.6.p.596 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: Introduction: In this systematic review the topical hemostatic properties of Cyanoacrylate Adhesives (CA) have been studied. Material and Method: Four major scientific databases (Embase, Scopus, PubMed, and Web of Science) were inquired, retrieving reviews and meta-analysis studies, clinical trials, experimental studies, and case reports that presented data regarding topical hemostasis and CA. English written articles, published in the last 10 years were collected. The last search was performed on the 1st of August 2023. Risk of bias in the included studies was assessed using study-design specific, evidence-based tools. Results: A summary focused on relevant information of all included studies was drafted and the results of the studies have been synthetized and compared. A total of 42 studies have been included in the review (14 reviews and meta-analysis, 11 clinical trials, 9 experimental studies and 8 case reports). CA exhibited important topical hemostatic capabilities, comparable with other performant hemostatic materials. Although most included studies concluded that CA were potent topical hemostatic agents, the high level of heterogeneity among the studies prevented us from performing a meta-analysis. Conclusion: The results of this review show that CA-based compounds represent an important line of research towards the perfect hemostatic material.

### PMID 37586555 (2023) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Methods of Hemostasis in Cranial Neurosurgery: An Anatomy-Based Stepwise Review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2023.08.030 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemostasis is crucial in preventing hemorrhage during cranial neurosurgical procedures and maintaining visualization of the surgical field. There is significant variation in the availability of hemostatic methods across different settings and hemostatic techniques are being continuously developed over the decades of practicing neurosurgery. The aim of this article is to provide an outline of the potential methods to achieve hemostasis based on the sequential operative anatomy of a cranial operation.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted following the PRISMA guidelines. The PubMed database was searched from inception of the database to July 18, 2023. A total of 64 studies were identified fulfilling predefined inclusion criteria, and the risk of bias was assessed using the Joanna Briggs Institute checklists.
RESULTS: Seventy-one hemostatic agents, techniques, tools, and devices were identified, which were then categorized according to the operative phase for which they are indicated. Nine operative anatomic targets were addressed in the sequence in which they are involved during a cranial procedure. For each anatomic target, the following number of hemostatic techniques/agents were identified: 11 for scalp, 3 for periosteum, 10 for skull bone, 11 for dura mater, 9 for venous sinuses, 5 for arteries, 6 for veins, 12 for brain parenchyma, and 4 for cerebral ventricles.
CONCLUSIONS: Depending on the phase of the surgery and the anatomic structure involved, the selection of the appropriate hemostatic method is determined by the source of bleeding. Surgeon awareness of all the potential techniques that can be applied to achieve hemostasis is paramount, especially when faced with operative nuances and difficult-to-control bleeding during cranial neurosurgical procedures.

### PMID 37367710 (2023) — Journal of the American Dental Association (1939)
TITLE: The role of hemostatic agents after tooth extractions: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.adaj.2023.05.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017418">Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemostatic agents are used to control bleeding after tooth extraction and have been compared with conventional measures (that is, sutures or gauze pressure) in several studies. The objective of this systematic review was to evaluate the benefits of topical hemostatic agents for controlling bleeding after tooth extractions, especially in patients receiving antithrombotic therapy.
TYPES OF STUDIES REVIEWED: The authors conducted a literature search in MEDLINE (PubMed), Scopus, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, including prospective human randomized clinical trials in which researchers compared hemostatic agents with conventional methods and reported the time to achieve hemostasis and postoperative bleeding events.
RESULTS: Seventeen articles were eligible for inclusion. Hemostatic agents resulted in a significantly shorter time to achieve hemostasis in both healthy patients and patients taking antithrombotic drugs (standardized mean difference, -1.02; 95% CI, -1.70 to -0.35; P&#xa0;= .003 and standardized mean difference, -2.30; 95% CI, -3.20 to -1.39; P &lt; .00001, respectively). Significantly fewer bleeding events were noted when hemostatic agents were used (risk ratio, 0.62; 95% CI, 0.44 to 0.88; P&#xa0;= .007). All forms of hemostatic agents (that is, mouthrinse, gel, hemostatic plug, and gauze soaked with the agent) had better efficacy in reducing the number of postoperative bleeding events than conventional hemostasis measures, except for hemostatic sponges. However, this was based on a small number of studies in each subgroup.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of hemostatic agents seemed to offer better bleeding control after tooth extractions in patients on antithrombotic drugs than conventional measures.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: Findings of this systematic review may help clinicians attain more efficient hemostasis in patients requiring tooth extraction. This systematic review is registered in the PROSPERO database. The registration number is CRD42021256145.

### PMID 37102185 (2023) — Endoscopy international open
TITLE: Topical hemostatic agents in the management of upper gastrointestinal bleeding: a meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1055/a-1984-6895 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background and study aims&#x2002; Novel topical hemostatic agents have shown promising results in treating patients with non-variceal upper gastrointestinal bleeding (NVUGIB). However, data are limited even in published meta-analyses as to their role, especially compared to conventional endoscopic approaches. The aim of this study was to perform a highly comprehensive systematic review assessing the effectiveness of topical hemostatic agents in UGIB in different clinical settings. Methods&#x2002; We performed a literature search of OVID MEDLINE, EMBASE, and ISI Web of Knowledge databases through September 2021.&#x200a;Studies assessing the efficacy of topical hemostatic agents in UGIB were included. Main outcomes were immediate hemostasis and overall rebleeding. Results&#x2002; A total of 980 citations were identified and 59 studies with a total of 3,417 patients were included in the analysis. Immediate hemostasis was achieved in 93&#x200a;% (91&#x200a;%; 94&#x200a;%), with similar results according to etiology (NVUGIB vs. variceal), topical agent used, or treatment strategy (primary vs. rescue). The overall rebleeding rate was 18&#x200a;% (15%; 21&#x200a;%) with the majority of rebleeds occurring in the first 7 days. Among comparative studies, topical agents achieved immediate hemostasis more often than standard endoscopic modalities (OR 3.94 [1.73; 8.96), with non-different overall rebleeding odds (OR 1.06 [0.65; 1.74]). Adverse events occurred in 2&#x200a;% (1&#x200a;%; 3&#x200a;%). Study quality was overall low to very low. Conclusions&#x2002; Topical hemostatic agents are effective and safe in the management of UGIB with favorable outcomes when compared to conventional endoscopic modalities across a variety of bleeding etiologies. This is especially true in novel subgroup analyses that assessed immediate hemostasis and rebleeding among RCTs and in malignant bleeding. Due to methodological limitations of available data, additional studies are needed to ascertain their effectiveness more confidently in the management of patients with UGIB.

### PMID 36516423 (2023) — Journal of burn care &amp; research : official publication of the American Burn Association
TITLE: Topical Hemostatic Agents in Burn Surgery: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.1093/jbcr/irac185 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Acute burn surgery has long been associated with significant intra-operative bleeding. Several techniques were introduced to limit hemorrhage, including tourniquets, tumescent infiltration, and topical agents. To date, no study has comprehensively investigated the available data regarding topical hemostatic agents in burn surgery. A systematic review was performed by two independent reviewers using electronic databases (PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science) from first available to September 10, 2021. Articles were included if they were published in English and described or evaluated topical hemostatic agents used in burn excision and/or grafting. Data were extracted on the agent(s) used, their dosage, mode of delivery, hemostasis outcomes, and complications. The search identified 1982 nonduplicate citations, of which 134 underwent full-text review, and 49 met inclusion criteria. In total, 32 studies incorporated a vasoconstrictor agent, and 28 studies incorporated a procoagulant agent. Four studies incorporated other agents (hydrogen peroxide, tranexamic acid, collagen sheets, and TT-173). The most common vasoconstrictor used was epinephrine, with doses ranging from 1:1000 to 1:1,000,000. The most common procoagulant used was thrombin, with doses ranging from 10 to 1000 IU/ml. Among the comparative studies, outcomes of blood loss were not reported in a consistent manner, therefore meta-analysis could not be performed. The majority of studies (94%) were level of evidence III-V. Determining the optimal topical hemostatic agent is limited by low-quality data and challenges with consistent reporting of intra-operative blood loss. Given the routine use of topical hemostatic agents in burn surgery, high-quality research is essential to determine the optimal agent, dosage, and mode of delivery.

### PMID 35944608 (2023) — Gastrointestinal endoscopy
TITLE: Efficacy of topical hemostatic agents in malignancy-related GI bleeding: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.gie.2022.07.033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017418">Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Despite advances in endoscopic therapies, malignancy-related GI bleeding remains difficult to manage with high rates of treatment failure and rebleeding. Topical hemostatic agents (THAs) are easier to apply to the wide bleeding surface of tumors. We conducted this systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the efficacy of THAs in malignancy-related GI bleeding.
METHODS: We conducted a comprehensive search of multiple electronic databases to identify studies reporting on the use of THAs in malignancy-related GI bleeding. The primary outcome was the achievement of hemostasis; secondary outcomes were early rebleeding (&#x2264;3 days), delayed rebleeding (&gt;3 days), aggregate rebleeding, all-cause mortality, and GI bleeding-related mortality. A meta-analysis of proportions was done for all outcomes.
RESULTS: Out of 355 citations, 16 studies with 530 patients were included. Primary hemostasis was achieved in 94.1% (95% confidence interval [CI], 91.5-96.0). Early rebleeding was seen in 13.9% (95% CI, 9.7-19.4) and delayed rebleeding in 11.4% (95% CI, 5.8-21.1). Aggregate rebleeding was seen in 24.2% (95% CI, 18.5-31.0). All-cause mortality was 33.1% (95% CI, 23.7-44.0), whereas GI bleeding-related mortality occurred in 5.9% (95% CI, 2.2%-14.8).
CONCLUSIONS: THAs are highly effective for achieving primary hemostasis in malignancy-related GI bleeding. It should be considered as an alternative to traditional endotherapy methods in malignancy-related GI bleeding. Future studies should be designed to evaluate its efficacy and safety as a primary method of hemostasis as compared with traditional endotherapy measures.

### PMID 36029172 (2022) — Advanced materials (Deerfield Beach, Fla.)
TITLE: Sprayable Hydrogel for Instant Sealing of Vascular Anastomosis.
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202203087 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bleeding-related complications following vascular surgeries occur in up to half of the patients-500&#x2009;000 cases annually in the United States alone. This results in additional procedures, increased mortality rate, and prolonged hospitalization, posing a burden on the healthcare system. Commercially available materials rely, in large, on forming covalent bonds between the tissue and the biomaterial to achieve adhesion. Here, it is shown that a biomaterial based on oxidized alginate and oxidized dextran together with polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimer amine provides simultaneous electrostatic and covalent interactions between the biomaterial and the tissue, maximizing adhesion. This study finds that the material withstands supraphysiological pressures (&#x2248;300&#xa0;mmHg) and prevents bleeding in a rabbit aortic puncture model and in a pig carotid bilateral poly(tetrafluoroethylene) graft model-achieving superior performance to commercially available materials such as Tisseel and BioGlue. Material biocompatibility is validated in comprehensive in vitro and in vivo studies in accordance with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidelines, including in vitro neutral red uptake test, subcutaneous implantation in rabbits, ames genotoxicity, and guinea pig maximization test. This material has the potential to provide with adequate seal and reduced complications following complex vascular surgeries, including hard-to-seal tissue-graft interfaces.

### PMID 36185841 (2022) — Cureus
TITLE: Successful Closure of Post-pneumonectomy Bronchopleural Fistula With Suture Repair Reinforced With Porcine Acellular Dermal Matrix (Permacol) and Hydrogel Sealant (Progel): A Case Report.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.28529 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bronchopleural fistula (BPF) is a feared and potentially life-threatening complication of pneumonectomy. Clinical features such as a productive cough and subcutaneous emphysema raise suspicion of BPF with CT imaging and bronchoscopy providing a definitive diagnosis. In light of the significant morbidity and mortality associated with the condition, a significant proportion of cases necessitate surgical repair of the bronchial stump. Currently, there is no consensus on optimal surgical strategy. Traditionally, various vascularised tissue flaps, including pericardial fat pad, omentum, and muscle, have been used to buttress the repaired stump, with varying success rates. In light of this, novel approaches have been devised with the aim of achieving more consistent surgical outcomes. In this case report, we describe a novel approach to reinforcing the suture repair using porcine dermal collagen matrix (Permacol, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN)&#xa0;and hydrogel sealant (Progel, BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ) to achieve successful closure of a BPF in an adult male patient following pneumonectomy for squamous cell carcinoma. The use of porcine dermal collagen matrix covered with hydrogel sealant is a viable alternative to traditional BPF closure strategies and can achieve good patient outcomes. This technique has several benefits including cost-effectiveness and sparing of native tissues, and it is technically straightforward. Further studies are required to compare the clinical outcomes of this and other novel techniques with traditional BPF closure approaches.

### PMID 36031599 (2022) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Clinical and economic outcomes after sternotomy for cardiac surgery with skin closure through 2-octyl cyanoacrylate plus polymer mesh tape versus absorbable sutures plus waterproof wound dressings: a retrospective cohort study.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-022-01956-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To compare clinical and economic outcomes after sternotomy for cardiac surgery with skin closure through 2-octyl cyanoacrylate plus polymer mesh tape (2OPMT) versus conventional absorbable sutures plus waterproof wound dressings (CSWWD).
METHODS: Retrospective study using the Premier Healthcare Database. Patients undergoing a cardiac surgery requiring sternotomy with 2OPMT or CSWWD were included. Primary outcome was 60-day cumulative incidence of diagnosis for wound complications (infection, dehiscence). Secondary outcomes were index admission hospital length of stay (LOS), total hospital-borne costs, discharge status, and 60-day cumulative incidences of inpatient readmission and reoperation. After propensity score matching, outcomes were compared between the 2OPMT and CSWWD groups using bivariate multilevel mixed-effects generalized linear models.
RESULTS: Overall, 7,901 2OPMT patients and 10,775 CSWWD patients were eligible for study. After propensity score matching on 68 variables, each group comprised 5,338 patients (total study N&#x2009;=&#x2009;10,676). The 2OPMT and CSWWD groups did not differ significantly in terms of the 60-day cumulative incidences of wound complication (3.47% vs 3.47%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.996), inpatient readmission (12.6% vs. 13.6%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.354), and reoperation (10.3% vs 10.1%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.808), as well as discharge to home versus non-home setting (77.2% vs. 75.1%), p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.254. However, the 2OPMT group had significantly lower LOS (9.2&#xa0;days vs 10.6&#xa0;days, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001) and total hospital-borne costs ($50,174&#xa0;vs $60,526, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This large observational study provides evidence that sternotomy skin closure with 2OPMT is associated with nearly identical 60-day cumulative incidence of wound complication as compared with CSWWD, while exhibiting a significant association with lower LOS and total hospital-borne costs. Trial registration Not applicable.

### PMID 35949828 (2022) — World journal of clinical cases
TITLE: Strategies and challenges in treatment of varicose veins and venous insufficiency.
DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i18.5946 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Patients with varicose veins can be treated with conservative or surgical approaches based on the clinical conditions and patient preferences. In the recent decade, the recommendations for managing symptomatic varicose veins have changed dramatically due to the rise of minimally invasive endovascular techniques. The literature was systematically searched on Medline without language restrictions. All papers on the treatment of varicose veins and venous insufficiency with different procedures were included and reviewed. Endovenous laser ablation (EVLA) and radiofrequency ablation (RFA) both are same safe and effective in terms of occlusion rate, and time to return to normal activity. In comparison with RFA or EVLT, Cure conservatrice et Hemodynamique de l'Insufficience Veineuse en Ambulatoire (CHIVA) may cause more bruising and make little or no difference to rates of limb infection, superficial vein thrombosis, nerve injury, or hematoma. In terms of recurrence of varicose veins, there is little or no difference between CHIVA and stripping, RFA, or EVLT. Great saphenous vein recanalization is highest in the ultrasound-guided foam sclerotherapy (FS) group (51%) during 1 year of follow-up. The 2013 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence clinical guidelines recommend surgery as a third-line therapeutic option after EVLA or RFA and sclerotherapy. Although the mechanochemical endovenous ablation (MOCA) is a non-thermal, non-tumescent option and appears to be of similar efficacy to stab avulsion with no potential risk of nerve damage, the overall success rate of MOCA is lower than those of other procedures such as EVLA, RFA, or high ligation and stripping. EVLA is the most cost-effective therapeutic option, with RFA being a close second for the treatment of patients with varicose veins. Endovenous thermal ablation (EVLA or RFA) is recommended as a first-line treatment for varicose veins and has substituted the high ligation of saphenofemoral junctional reflux and stripping of varicose veins. Ultrasound-guided FS is associated with a high recurrence rate and can be used in conjunction with other procedures. MOCA and cyanoacrylate embolization appear promising, but evidence of their effectiveness is required.

### PMID 35309960 (2022) — Respirology case reports
TITLE: Combined treatment with endobronchial Watanabe spigot and N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate for refractory pneumothorax in COVID-19.
DOI: 10.1002/rcr2.923 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) causes pneumothorax or mediastinal emphysema in approximately 1% of patients. According to the British Thoracic Society guidelines, the next treatment option for patients with persistent pneumothorax despite chest drainage is pleurodesis or surgery. In fact, there are reports of autologous blood pleurodesis or surgery for the treatment of pneumothorax caused by COVID-19. However, elderly patients or patients in poor general condition may not be able to tolerate surgical invasion. In this report, we present two patients who did not respond to chest drainage or pleurodesis and who were not suitable for surgery because of their poor general condition. These patients were successfully treated with an endobronchial Watanabe spigot and N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate. This method may be an option for the treatment of refractory pneumothorax in COVID-19.

### PMID 35038891 (2022) — Journal of investigative medicine high impact case reports
TITLE: Massive Chylous Ascites After Living Donor Nephrectomy Successfully Treated With Lymphatic Embolization.
DOI: 10.1177/23247096211065631 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Chylous ascites may result from a variety of pathological conditions, most of them from nontraumatic causes, such as congenital defects of the lymphatic system, infections, liver cirrhosis, and malignancy. Rarely, chylous ascites occurs as an iatrogenic complication after left-sided laparoscopic donor nephrectomy (LDN). Injury to the cisterna chyli and its main lymphatic tributaries around the para-aortic region intraoperatively can cause the lymphatic fluid to accumulate. There is currently no standardized treatment for chylous ascites as there have only been 54 cases documented to date. Most patients can be managed with conservative therapy. Recommended guidelines include high-protein and low-fat diet with medium-chain triglycerides. Paracentesis is often used as a diagnostic and therapeutic first-line measure with total parenteral nutrition (TPN), bowel rest, and somatostatin analogue as adjunct therapies. We present a case of massive chylous ascites refractory to conservative therapy. The patient had progressive abdominal distention and unintentional weight gain 2 weeks postoperatively warranting multiple paracenteses of &gt;7 L of chylous fluid. Ultimately, the patient was successfully treated with lymphatic embolization using N-butyl cyanoacrylate glue.

### PMID 34543711 (2022) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: How to Prevent Surgical Site Infection in Vascular Surgery: A Review of the Evidence.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2021.06.045 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: This review aims to identify and review the current evidence for preventing postoperative surgical site infections in abdominal aortic aneurysm surgery or infrainguinal arterial surgery.
METHODS: Extended literature review of clinical trials that examined the prevention of postoperative surgical site infections in abdominal aortic aneurysm or infrainguinal arterial surgery. Searches were conducted on Ovid MEDLINE (1950 - 13 March 2020) using key terms for vascular surgery, surgical site infections and specific preventative techniques. Articles were included if they discussed a relationship between a preventative technique and surgical site infections in abdominal aortic aneurysm or infrainguinal arterial surgery. The GRADE guidelines were used to assess the quality of evidence.
RESULTS: 21 techniques and 81 studies were included. Prophylactic antibiotics and negative pressure wound therapy have a high quality of evidence for the prevention of surgical site infections in abdominal aortic aneurysm or infrainguinal arterial surgery. A moderate quality evidence base was identified for gentamicin containing collagen implant (confined to high surgical site infection risk centers). Currently, there is a low or very low quality of evidence to suggest a reduction in the surgical site infection rate for combination therapy, glycaemic control, Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus screening and absorbable suture. Evidence suggests no beneficial effect for nutritional supplementation, chlorhexidine bath, hair removal therapy, Staphylococcus aureus nasal eradication, cyanoacrylate microsealant, silver grafts, rifampicin bonded grafts, triclosan coated suture and postoperative wound drains. Endoscopic saphenous vein harvest may reduce surgical site infection rate (very low quality of evidence) but may lower long-term patency. Autologous vein grafts may increase surgical site infections (very low quality of evidence) but may provide better long-term patency rates in above-knee infrainguinal bypass surgery. There was no identified evidence for perioperative normothermia, electrosurgical bipolar vessel sealer or Dermabond and Tegaderm for surgical site infection prevention in vascular surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Prophylactic antibiotics and postoperative negative pressure wound therapy are effective in the prevention of postoperative surgical site infection in abdominal aortic aneurysm or infrainguinal arterial surgery. There exists a significant risk of bias in the literature for many preventative techniques and further studies are required to investigate the efficacy of gentamicin containing collagen implant, and specific combination therapies.

### PMID 35461995 (2022) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Transcatheter Arterial Embolization with N-Butyl-2 Cyanoacrylate Glubran 2 for the Treatment of Acute Renal Hemorrhage Under Coagulopathic Conditions.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2022.04.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) for acute renal hemorrhage (RH) under coagulopathic conditions with N-butyl-2 cyanoacrylate (NBCA) is rarely described in the literature, and a consensus on the efficacy and safety of NBCA under this condition has not been reached. The present study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of TAE using NBCA Glubran 2 in the treatment of acute RH under coagulopathic conditions.
METHODS: Eight patients who underwent TAE with NBCA Glubran 2 for acute RH under coagulopathic conditions were collected.
RESULTS: NBCA Glubran 2 was employed as the sole embolic material in 6 patients. In the remaining 2 patients, NBCA Glubran 2 was employed for secondary embolization. Under coagulopathic conditions, both technical success and clinical success were achieved in treating acute RH with NBCA Glubran 2 in all patients. During a mean follow-up time of 30.1&#xa0;months, neither persistent nor recurrent active hemorrhage required a repeated endovascular or surgical treatment for hemostasis. No Glubran 2-related complications occurred. In addition, there was no significant difference between the evaluated glomerular filtration rate level before and after one week of Glubran 2 embolization (P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.88; CI, -32.4 to 37.4).
CONCLUSIONS: TAE with NBCA Glubran 2 may be a safe alternative treatment for the management of RH under coagulopathic conditions. In particular, this method appears to be a potentially attractive alternative when conventional embolic materials fail in patients with ongoing hemodynamic instability or even under severe coagulopathic conditions.

### PMID 36338550 (2022) — The Pan African medical journal
TITLE: Postoperative meningocele after anterior cervical discectomy and arthroplasty on a case report.
DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2022.42.257.35812 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Anterior dural tears complicated by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage with anterior meningocele are rare. Indeed, in the literature, cases are described during anterior arthrodesis, but no cases of post-cervical arthroplasty are described. The management of this type of complication is poorly described and not consensual. We present a case of a patient who underwent cervical arthroplasty complicated by an anterior meningocele at 1 month after the first surgery. Imaging revealed a compressive anterior meningocele in relation to the clinically progressive worsening. Revision surgery consisted of a combination of closure of the gap with a fatty patch covered with a TachoSil patch, followed by reinsertion of a new cervical prosthesis. At the last follow-up at 1 year, the patient showed no residual effects of the complication, and the mobility of the disc prosthesis was not impaired by it. Clinical results of the arthroplasty are also very satisfactory. Although these types of complications are rare, it is important to have a consensus on the management of anterior meningocele. In our experience, TachoSil appears to be a satisfactory option for the management of these complications.

### PMID 36322203 (2022) — Neurosurgical review
TITLE: Collagen-bound fibrin sealant (TachoSil&#xae;) for dural closure in cranial surgery: single-centre comparative cohort study and systematic review of the literature.
DOI: 10.1007/s10143-022-01886-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage is a well-known complication of craniotomies and there are several dural closure techniques. One commonly used commercial product as adjunct for dural closure is the collagen-bound fibrin sealant TachoSil&#xae;. We analysed whether the addition of TachoSil has beneficial effects on postoperative complications and outcomes. Our prospective, institutional database was retrospectively queried, and 662 patients undergoing craniotomy were included. Three hundred fifty-two were treated with dural suture alone, and in 310, TachoSil was added after primary suture. Our primary endpoint was the rate of postoperative complications associated with CSF leakage. Secondary endpoints included functional, disability and neurological outcome. Systematic review according to PRISMA guidelines was performed to identify studies comparing primary dural closure with and without additional sealants. Postoperative complications associated with CSF leakage occurred in 24 (7.74%) and 28 (7.95%) procedures with or without TachoSil, respectively (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.960). Multivariate analysis confirmed no significant differences in complication rate between the two groups (aOR 0.97, 95% CI 0.53-1.80, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.930). There were no significant disparities in postoperative functional, disability or neurological scores. The systematic review identified 661 and included 8 studies in the qualitative synthesis. None showed a significant superiority of additional sealants over standard technique regarding complications, rates of revision surgery or outcome. According to our findings, we summarize that routinary use of TachoSil and similar products as adjuncts to primary dural sutures after intracranial surgical procedures is safe but without clear advantage in complication avoidance or outcome. Future studies should investigate whether their use is beneficial in high-risk settings.

### PMID 34219005 (2022) — Sexual medicine reviews
TITLE: Penile Prosthesis Implantation Combined With Grafting Techniques in Patients With Peyronie's Disease and Erectile Dysfunction: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.sxmr.2021.03.007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Penile prosthesis (PP) implantation combined with grafting techniques is indicated in patients with Peyronie's disease (PD) and erectile dysfunction (ED) nonresponsive to medical and conservative treatment that present with residual penile curvature greater than 30&#xb0;, severe penile deformity or significant penile shortening.
OBJECTIVES: To address the preoperative evaluation, the surgical procedure and the functional outcomes of grafting techniques combined with PP implantation in patients with PD and concomitant ED and to provide future perspectives on the matter.
METHODS: We performed a systematic review of the literature based on the PRISMA statement (PROSPERO ID: CRD42021224517). Records were identified by searching Medline, Scopus, The Cochrane Library and Web of Science databases as well as sources of gray literature from inception to December 2020. The quality of all included records was assessed based on a modified version of the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale for cohort studies.
RESULTS: A total of 935 patients with a mean age of 59.6 &#xb1; 9.2 years from 23 studies were included in this systematic review. All studies reported excellent short- and long-term postoperative results, as well as high satisfaction rates ranging from 80 to 100%. A mean increase of 2.7 &#xb1; 1.4 cm in penile length was observed. Among different grafting materials and different types of PP, no significant differences in terms of preoperative, perioperative and postoperative functional outcomes or complications were demonstrated. Still, the operative time was shorter in studies applying the collagen fleece TachoSil.
CONCLUSIONS: PP implantation combined with grafting is a safe and highly effective surgical procedure in patients with PD and concomitant ED. All grafting materials provide similar beneficial outcomes, but TachoSil subsequently reduces the operative time and does not require suturing. Still, no definite conclusions can be drawn regarding the superiority of one grafting technique over the other, as randomized clinical trials are lacking. Sokolakis I, Pyrgidis N, Ziegelmann M, et&#xa0;al. Penile Prosthesis Implantation Combined With Grafting Techniques in Patients With Peyronie's Disease and Erectile Dysfunction: A Systematic Review. Sex Med Rev 2022;10:444-452.

### PMID 36306241 (2022) — Journal of comparative effectiveness research
TITLE: Real-world economic and clinical outcomes associated with current hemostatic matrix use in spinal surgery.
DOI: 10.2217/cer-2021-0218 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Aim: Bleeding during spine surgery is controlled using topical hemostatic agents. Studies have reported outcomes between Surgiflo&#xae; and Floseal, the most widely used flowable hemostatic matrices, but have not included the latest Surgiflo&#xa0;formulation which is more adherent to the bleeding surface than prior formulations. Materials &amp; methods: A propensity score-matched analysis was conducted using the Premier Healthcare Database to compare economic and clinical outcomes of adults undergoing inpatient spinal surgery between 2013 and&#xa0;2018 receiving current Surgiflo or Floseal. Results: This retrospective study included 28,910 patients in each group and found comparable outcomes for bleeding events, overall transfusion rate, inpatient mortality and readmissions between Surgiflo and Floseal. Surgiflo was associated with $430 (USD) lower hospitalization costs, shorter length of stay&#xa0;and shorter operating room time than Floseal. Topical hemostatic agents such as Surgiflo&#xae; and Floseal are used during invasive surgery to manage&#xa0;bleeding. We compared outcomes of spine surgeries that used either of two most frequently used topical hemostatic agents, Surgiflo&#xa0;or Floseal. This is the largest retrospective study presenting economic and clinical outcomes of patients receiving Surgiflo versus Floseal during spine surgery using the latest product formulations. The study suggests that clinical outcomes are comparable between Surgiflo and Floseal groups and that Surgiflo is associated with lower hospitalization costs, slightly shorter hospital stay&#xa0;and shorter operating room time among patients undergoing spine surgery.

### PMID 35299991 (2022) — ClinicoEconomics and outcomes research : CEOR
TITLE: Real-World Clinical and Economic Outcomes Associated with Surgiflo&#xae; vs Floseal in Cardiovascular Surgeries in the US.
DOI: 10.2147/CEOR.S338672 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical hemostatic agents are an option for controlling bleeding during cardiovascular surgery. Previous studies comparing topical hemostatic agents in cardiovascular surgery predate the 2012 reformulation of Surgiflo&#xae;, which had been re-engineered to increase paste viscosity and thus be more adherent to the bleeding surface.
OBJECTIVE: To compare clinical and economic outcomes in patients receiving the current formulation of Surgiflo vs Floseal during cardiovascular surgeries.
METHODOLOGY: A retrospective analysis was conducted using the Premier Healthcare Database. Eligible patients had an inpatient cardiovascular surgery between 1/1/2013 and 6/1/2018, were &#x2265;18 years old and received the current formulation of Surgiflo or Floseal during surgery. Propensity score matching was performed, with exact matching on the surgery year and surgery type (aortic, coronary artery bypass grafting, valve, or other). Descriptive analysis and generalized estimating equations models compared outcomes between the Surgiflo and Floseal groups.
RESULTS: The matched sample included 5768 patients in each group (mean age: 66.5 years; 66.3% male). In the matched sample, rates of any documented bleeding event were similar in Surgiflo and Floseal groups (6.9% vs 7.2%; P = 0.576). Differences in transfusion rates between patients receiving Surgiflo vs Floseal varied by operational definition and timing of measurement but did not differ by &gt;2 percentage points. Compared to Floseal, patients who received Surgiflo experienced longer surgery duration (306.0 vs 299.4 minutes), lower hospitalization cost ($44,146 vs $46,812), and lower odds of readmission at 30, 60, and 90 days post-discharge (all P &lt; 0.05). Inpatient mortality and LOS were comparable between Surgiflo and Floseal (all P &gt; 0.05).
CONCLUSION: In this large study of real-world clinical and economic outcomes after cardiovascular surgery involving the current formulation of Surgiflo vs Floseal, Surgiflo was associated with mostly similar clinical outcomes as compared with Floseal. Differences in selected economic/resource use outcomes were also observed, for which root-cause analysis in future research would be informative.

### PMID 34400026 (2022) — International journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery
TITLE: Prospective study examining the use of thrombin-gelatin matrix (Floseal) to prevent post dental extraction haemorrhage in patients with inherited bleeding disorders.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijom.2021.07.018 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The bleeding risk in individuals with inherited bleeding disorders (IBDs) during exodontia is traditionally managed with perioperative coagulation factors and/or desmopressin, in conjunction with systemic and topical perioperative tranexamic acid and meticulous primary closure. Factor replacement is costly, requires specialist input, and carries a risk of developing factor VIII (FVIII) inhibitors. This prospective study was performed to determine whether the use of a standardized Floseal and anti-fibrinolytic protocol could reduce postoperative bleeding in patients with IBDs undergoing dental extraction, as compared to factor replacement. All patients &gt;18 years old attending Queensland Haemophilia Centre between November 2014 and July 2019 who required dental extractions were referred to the Oral and Maxillofacial Unit. Patients were consented for intraoperative Floseal administration instead of factor replacement. All other operative measures remained the same. The bleed rate was assessed against a historical control cohort. There were 34 extraction events in 32 patients. Four of the patients reported postoperative bleeding requiring factor supplementation or desmopressin; the bleeding rate was 11.8%. While not statistically significant, this was a reduction in the bleed rate compared to the traditional protocol (P = 0.35). Third molar extractions were 10.33 times more likely to cause postoperative bleeding (P = 0.018). The Floseal protocol was equipotent to the traditional perioperative factor replacement protocol. Floseal use is more economical, eliminates the risk of peri-procedural FVIII inhibitor development, and provides a haemostatic option for patients with very rare factor deficiencies, pre-existing clotting factor inhibitors, and those with anaphylaxis to clotting concentrates.

### PMID 33635752 (2022) — Acta chirurgica Belgica
TITLE: Effect of hyperthermic chemotherapy on topical hemostatic agents.
DOI: 10.1080/00015458.2021.1888199 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: There is no clear consensus as to which topical hemostatic agent is best used during cytoreductive surgery combined with hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of hyperthermic chemotherapy on the biomechanical properties of organic topical hemostatic agents and histologically fibrin formation rates.
METHODS: Four topical hemostatic agents (Spongostan&#x2122;, Surgicel&#xae;, Fibrillar&#x2122;, Arista&#xae;) were evaluated. All agents were mixed with 3&#x2009;ml blood in sterile tubes separately to form clot formation. The resulting clot formations were incubated with 36&#x2009;&#xb0;C and 42&#x2009;&#xb0;C with saline or cisplatin for 1&#x2009;h. Strength and flexibility of hemostatic samples were evaluated under weight of 0&#x2009;g, 50&#x2009;g, 100&#x2009;g, 200&#x2009;g and 300&#x2009;g. All samples were stained with hemotoxylin-eosin and compared histologically for fibrin clot formation under light microscope.
RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences according to strength and flexibility of topical hemostatic agents on hyperthermic chemotherapy. Histopathologically, the highest fibrin formation was observed in Surgicel&#xae;, followed by Fibrillar&#x2122;. The least fibrin formation was detected in Arista&#xae;.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that exposure to hyperthermic chemotherapy did not significantly affect the biomechanical properties of organic topical hemostatic agents and the fibrin clot formation.

### PMID 34464251 (2022) — Canadian Urological Association journal = Journal de l'Association des urologues du Canada
TITLE: PEG-coated patch parenchymal closure technique and initial outcomes during minimally invasive partial nephrectomy.
DOI: 10.5489/cuaj.7286 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The Hemopatch&#xae; is a novel polyethylene glycol-coated (PEG-coated) collagen patch that acts as a topical hemostatic agent. It has been applied to a variety of surgical techniques. Here, we present our series and technique using a PEG-coated patch for minimally invasive partial nephrectomy (MIPN).
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective chart review of all patients undergoing MIPN by a single surgeon at a tertiary Canadian medical center between July and December 2018. We included patients if a PEG-coated patch was used to close the renal parenchymal defect. We also describe in detail our technique for laparoscopic patch deployment.
RESULTS: A total of 17 patients met inclusion criteria, of whom 12 were male. Mean age was 63 years old. Median size of renal mass was 2.85 cm in largest dimension and median RENAL score was 6. Hilar clamping was carried out in 12 (70.9%) cases, with an average warm ischemic time of 16.1 minutes. The remainder of cases were performed off-clamp. Median estimated blood loss was 238 mL and the mean change in hemoglobin on postoperative day 1 compared to preoperatively was 21.2 g/L. The average length of stay was 1.76 days. No patient required blood transfusion or underwent angioembolization or re-operation for bleeding within 90 days. There were no Clavien-Dindo grade 3 or greater complications.
CONCLUSIONS: A PEG-coated patch can be used safely and effectively in lieu of traditional two-layer renorrhaphy with acceptable outcomes. Larger, prospective series are required to ascertain its true value and cost-effectiveness.

### PMID 35937594 (2022) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: A practical and economical method for frontal sinus reconstruction after frontal craniotomy: A single-center experience with 140 patients.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2022.919276 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Frontal sinus exposure is a common consequence of frontal craniotomy. Cerebrospinal fluid leakage and infection are the major postoperative complications that may occur as a result of the open frontal sinus. The successful filling of the open frontal sinus provides an approach to prevent significant complications caused by frontal sinus exposure.
OBJECTIVE: This article describes a new technique to reconstruct the exposed frontal sinus cavity with the combined application of gelatin sponge and a vascularized pericranial flap.
METHODS: A total of 140 patients underwent frontal sinus reconstruction using gelfoam and vascularized pericranial flaps from 2016 to 2021. Gelatin sponge was used to fill the frontal sinus, and a vascularized pericranial flap was used to cover the frontal sinus when the bone flap was retracted.
RESULTS: Postoperative cerebrospinal fluid leakage and infection did not occur in any patient.
CONCLUSION: Our results validated the effectiveness of our technique in the prevention of exposed frontal sinus-related postoperative complications.

### PMID 36002271 (2022) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: Effects of Different Treatment Regimens on Primary Spontaneous Pneumothorax: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.5761/atcs.oa.22-00113 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078182">Systematic Review, Journal Article, Network Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The best treatment strategy for primary spontaneous pneumothorax is controversial and varies widely in practice.
METHODS: Literatures were searched from databases till 24 August 2021. A Bayesian network meta-analysis was conducted to compare the outcomes of various treatments with the following endpoints: recurrence rate, postoperative chest tube duration, postoperative air leakage duration, length of hospital stay, and complications rate.
RESULTS: In all, 7210 patients of 20 randomized controlled trials and 17 cohort studies were included. Surgery had a significantly lower recurrence rate compared to other treatments. Besides, bullectomy (BT) combined with chemical pleurodesis (CP), mechanical pleurodesis, or staple line coverage (SLC) can reduce the recurrence rate compared to BT alone, but none of them were statistically significant. In terms of reducing chest tube duration, BT with tubular Neoveil outperformed BT + pleural abrasion (mean difference [MD], 95% confidence interval [CI]: -2.5 [-4.63, -0.35]) and BT + apical pleurectomy (MD, 95% CI: -2.72 [-5.16, -0.27]).
CONCLUSIONS: Surgical methods were superior to manual aspiration (MA), chest tube drainage (CTD), and conservative treatment in terms of recurrence reduction. There was no significant difference between MA and CTD in reducing the recurrence rate. Among surgical methods, CP is more effective than mechanical pleurodesis and SLC among the additional procedures based on BT.

### PMID 35514246 (2022) — Expert review of cardiovascular therapy
TITLE: The use of FEIBA for refractory bleeding in cardiac surgery - a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1080/14779072.2022.2074838 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Significant blood loss during cardiac surgery is associated with a dramatic increase in morbidity and mortality. Factor Eight Inhibitor Bypassing Activity (FEIBA), a hemostatic bypassing agent mainly used in hemophiliac patients, has also been used for intractable bleeding during cardiac surgical procedures in non-hemophiliac patients. However, concerns exist that its use may be linked to increased incidence of perioperative adverse effects including thrombotic complications.
AREAS COVERED: A systematic literature search was performed on MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials databases for all studies that reported the administration of FEIBA for treatment of bleeding during adult cardiac surgery in non-hemophiliac patients. After selecting the title and abstracts, two authors assessed the methodological quality of the full-text articles prior to final inclusion in the manuscript.
EXPERT OPINION: The safety profile of FEIBA was determined through an aggregate count of adverse events. Major complications included renal failure, re-operation for unresolved bleeding, postoperative mortality, and thromboembolic events. Overall, there is insufficient robust evidence to make a definitive conclusion about the safety or efficacy of using of FEIBA as a hemostatic agent in the setting of cardiac surgery.

### PMID 35172919 (2022) — Chinese medical sciences journal = Chung-kuo i hsueh k'o hsueh tsa chih
TITLE: Patient Blood Management: Single Center Evidence and Practice at Fuwai Hospital.
DOI: 10.24920/004035 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Blood loss and blood transfusion requirement are important quality control indicators of cardiovascular surgery and cardiovascular anesthesia. Patient blood management (PBM) is an evidence-based, multidisciplinary approach to optimizing the care of patients who may need transfusion, which encompasses anemia management, hemodilution, cell salvage, hemostatic treatment, and other approaches to reducing bleeding and minimizing blood transfusion. PBM in cardiovascular surgery is a "team sport" that involves cardiac and vascular surgeons, anesthesiologists, perfusionist, intensivists, and other health care providers. The current work provides an overview of evidence and practice of PBM at Fuwai Hospital. Implementation of PBM should also take local resource availability and cost-effectiveness of different devices, drugs, technologies, and techniques into consideration.

### PMID 35339592 (2022) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Methods and Outcomes of Endovascular False Lumen Embolization for Thoracic Aortic Dissection.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2022.03.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: To provide a contemporary review on endovascular false lumen (FL) embolization for thoracic aortic dissection (AD) and evaluate its early outcome.
METHODS: A systematic literature review on FL embolization for thoracic AD from January 2003 to December 2020 was performed under the instruction of Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement. Each article was analyzed using a standardized protocol including predefined demographic characteristics, perioperative mortality, and major complications.
RESULTS: A total of 29 papers with 229 patients were included into the analysis. The methods of FL occlusion used were the candy-plug technique, the knickerbocker technique, the "cork in the bottleneck" technique, and direct FL embolization with a combination of stent-grafts, coils, onyx, plugs, and glue. FL embolization procedure was performed in 79 patients (34.5%) with type A AD and 150 (65.5%) with type B AD. FL direct embolization was the most frequently used technique and it was applied in 198 (86.5%) patients. Candy-plug, knickerbocker, and "cork in the bottleneck" techniques were used in 26 (11.4%), 3 (1.3%), and 2 (0.9%) patients, respectively. Technical success was achieved in all patients except one (228/229, 99.6%) in which implantation of a stent to celiac trunk was not possible. There were 4 hospital deaths (1.7%). Neurological complications occurred in 6 patients (2.6%), including 4 (1.7%) spinal cord ischemia and 2 (0.9%) ischemic stroke. There were 1 (0.4%) iatrogenic retrograde dissection and 2 (0.9%) renal failure reported. The mean duration of follow-up was 16.5 months. There were 21 deaths (9.3%) during follow-up and 8 (3.6%) were aorta-related. Thirty three (14.7%) secondary interventions were performed. Five patients (2.2%) required an open completion thoracoabdominal procedure incorporating the stent-graft into the repair. Complete FL thrombosis was observed in 181 (80.4%) patients, 34 (15.1%) had partial thrombosis, and 10 (4.4%) had FL progression.
CONCLUSIONS: FL embolization of the distal thoracic aorta is a promising technique in a group of patients to promote FL thrombosis and aortic remodeling in thoracic aorta.

### PMID 36000962 (2022) — Minimally invasive therapy &amp; allied technologies : MITAT : official journal of the Society for Minimally Invasive Therapy
TITLE: Efficacy of local hemostatic agents after endoscopic submucosal dissection: a meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1080/13645706.2022.2111217 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Topical hemostatic agents have been used to reduce bleeding rates after endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) for gastric cancer. However, to date, no review has summarized evidence on their efficacy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: PubMed, Embase, ScienceDirect, CENTRAL, and Google Scholar were searched for studies comparing bleeding rates after ESD with and without local hemostatic agents.
RESULTS: Eleven studies were included. The studies used polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheets and fibrin glue, fibrin glue, oxidized regenerated cellulose, polysaccharide hemostatic powder, or polyethylene oxide adhesive. Meta-analysis revealed a statistically significant reduction in the risk of delayed bleeding with the use of PGA sheets &amp; fibrin glue (six studies; RR: 0.35 95% CI: 0.20, 0.63 p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.0005). However, meta-analysis of two studies showed no difference in the risk of bleeding based on the use of fibrin glue (RR: 0.44 95% CI: 0.03, 7.17 p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.56). Scarce data were available for the remaining hemostatic agents.
CONCLUSION: A large number of different hemostatic agents have been used to reduce the risk of bleeding after ESD for gastric cancer. Observational studies indicate that the use of PGA with fibrin glue could reduce the risk of bleeding after ESD. However, evidence for other agents was too scarce to derive conclusions.

### PMID 35896179 (2022) — Obstetrics &amp; gynecology science
TITLE: Prophylactic tranexamic acid to reduce blood loss and related morbidities during hysterectomy: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
DOI: 10.5468/ogs.22115 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: To perform a systematic review and meta-analysis of all randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that evaluated the efficacy and safety of prophylactic tranexamic acid (TXA) versus a control (placebo or no treatment) during hysterectomy for benign conditions. Six databases were screened from inception to January 23, 2022. Eligible studies were assessed for risk of bias. Outcomes were summarized as weighted mean differences and risk ratios with 95% confidence intervals in a random-effects model. Five studies, comprising six arms and 911 patients were included in the study. Two and three studies had an overall unclear and low risk of bias, respectively. Estimated intraoperative blood loss, requirement for postoperative blood transfusion, and requirement for intraoperative topical hemostatic agents were significantly reduced in a prophylactic TXA group when compared with a control group. Moreover, postoperative hemoglobin level was significantly higher in the prophylactic TXA group than in the control group. Conversely, the frequency of self-limiting nausea and vomiting was significantly higher in the prophylactic TXA group than in the control group. There were no significant differences between the groups in terms of surgery duration, hospital stay, and diarrhea rate. All the RCTs reported no incidence of major adverse events in either group, such as mortality, thromboembolic events, visual disturbances, or seizures. There was no publication bias for any outcome, and leave-one-out sensitivity analyses demonstrated stability of the findings. Among patients who underwent hysterectomy for benign conditions, prophylactic TXA appeared largely safe and correlated with substantial reductions in estimated intraoperative blood loss and related morbidities.

### PMID 34458343 (2021) — Frontiers in cardiovascular medicine
TITLE: 18F-FDG-Uptake in Mediastinal Lymph Nodes in Suspected Prosthetic Valve Endocarditis: Predictor or Confounder?
DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2021.717774 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Introduction: Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) is a serious disease affecting ~0.4% of prosthetic valve recipients per year. 18F-FDG-PET/CT has high sensitivity and specificity for PVE and is included as major criterion for the diagnosis in recent guidelines of the European Society of Cardiology. We addressed the question whether increased FDG-uptake in mediastinal lymph nodes could help to support the visual diagnostic assessment of PVE. Methods: In this sub-analysis of a previously published retrospective multicentre study, 160 unique patients were identified who underwent 18F-FDG-PET/CT for evaluation of suspected PVE. 18F-FDG-PET/CT was performed in adherence to the European Association of Nuclear Medicine guidelines of 2015 and scans were assessed for signs of mediastinal lymph node activity by 2 experienced nuclear medicine physicians who were blinded to clinical context. Clinical diagnosis of PVE had been established based on surgical findings or multidisciplinary consensus after a 1-year follow-up in 80 of 160 patients (50%). Results: In total, 52 patients showed increased mediastinal lymph node activity. Mediastinal lymph node activity on 18F-FDG-PET/CT did not increase diagnostic accuracy when added to the visual analysis of scans for signs of PVE: X 2: 0.118, p = 0.731). After excluding patients with known confounders for 18F-FDG-PET/CT, namely use of Bioglue&#xae; during prosthetic valve implantation and C-reactive protein levels below 40 mg/L, mediastinal lymph node activity was still not of additional diagnostic value compared to visual analysis alone (X2:0.129, p = 0.723). Discussion: Assessment of mediastinal lymph node activity did not improve 18F-FDG-PET/CT diagnostic accuracy for suspected PVE compared to visual assessment of the valve alone, as it seems to be a rather a specific finding, that might be caused by sternal wound or mediastinal infections or even by subclinical respiratory infections. Future studies might elucidate whether increased FDG active lymph nodes indicate a high-risk patient group and whether more detailed assessment of mediastinal lymph nodes could improve their additional diagnostic benefit.

### PMID 34417129 (2021) — Journal of pediatric urology
TITLE: Can sealing promote healing?: A systematic review and meta-analysis highlighting the adjunctive role of tissue sealant application during urethroplasty for hypospadias.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpurol.2021.07.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A significant proportion of children require multiple surgeries for successful repair of hypospadias. This is not only a source of a financial burden to the family but also causes long-term social and psychosexual issues. Tissue sealant application can provide additional coverage to the suture line and subsequently prevents operative failure. However, a consensus statement regarding its usage during urethroplasty is lacking. This systematic review and meta-analysis aims to compare the outcomes of hypospadias surgery, in terms of its complications, in children with and without tissue sealant application.
METHOD: The authors systematically searched the databases PubMed, EMBASE, Web of Science and Scopus through September 2020. The occurrence of overall complications, and specific complications (including urethrocutaneous fistula, wound-related complications, flap-related complications, complications involving the neo-urethral tube and meatal stenosis) were the primary and secondary outcomes, respectively. Statistical analysis was performed using a random-effects model, and pooled risk ratio (RR) and heterogeneity (I2) were calculated. The methodological quality of the studies was assessed utilizing the Downs and Black scale.
RESULT: Four comparative studies were included in the meta-analysis. The different types of tissue sealants such as fibrin glue, cyanoacrylate glue, BioGlue and cryocalcium glue were used in these studies. As compared to without sealant application, hypospadias repair performed with sealant application showed no significant difference in the incidence of overall postoperative complications (RR 0.63; 95% CI 0.34-1.14, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.13). However, a significant reduction in some specific complications including urethrocutaneous fistula (RR 0.37; 95% CI 0.19-0.72, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.003), wound-related complications (RR 0.57; 95% CI 0.38-0.86, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.008) and complications involving the neo-urethra (RR 0.15; 95% CI 0.04-0.54, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.004) was observed with sealant usage. The average Downs and Black scale scores ranged from 16 to 18, with all studies having a moderate risk of bias. Kappa statistics showed a value of 0.962 (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.001), highlighting an almost perfect agreement among the two observers.
CONCLUSION: The present meta-analysis revealed no additional benefit of the repair of hypospadias performed with tissue sealants as compared to without sealants in terms of reducing the overall postoperative complications. However, a significant reduction in the occurrence of some specific complications, including UCF, wound-related complications and complications involving the neourethra was observed with sealant application. The level of evidence of the published comparative studies is limited. Therefore, further studies need to be conducted for optimal comparison between the sealant and no sealant (or placebo), and different types of sealants.

### PMID 33853306 (2021) — Tuberkuloz ve toraks
TITLE: Can surgical adhesives may cause false positivity in follow-up positron emission tomography after lung cancer resection?
DOI: 10.5578/tt.20219907 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Postoperative complications following thoracic procedures are a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Alveolar air leaks and/or bronchopleural fistulas are associated with increased risk of infection, prolonged chest tube, and hospital stay duration and therefore generate economical concern for health care providers. A variety of surgical sealants or adhesives have been introduced to overcome this complication. Since intraoperative BioGlue&#xae; application can also cause an inflammatory reaction and mimic tumor recurrence on FDG PET-CT, in the present study we aimed to investigate its potential role in false-positive PET-CT results in patients operated for NSCLC.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data of six patients who underwent resection for primary NSCLC at our institution (Department of Thoracic Surgery, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty) between January 2015 and December 2018 and had false positivity, due to BioGlue&#xae; application, at the bronchial stump in follow-up FDG PET-CT were retrospectively analyzed from a prospectively collected database.
RESULT: One of the 6 patients was female and 5 were male. The mean age was 68 years (range, 56-79 years). The average time interval between operation and postoperative FDG-PET imaging was 4.3 months (range, 4-6 months). Follow-up FDG-PET imaging SUVmax values ranged between 3.0 and 9.0 (median: 5.33). All patients have been evaluated by FDG-PET scan following the detection of soft tissue densities at the surgical site suspicious for recurrence at their follow-up chest CT scans. Four patients underwent a bronchoscopic examination, bronchial stumps were examined and multiple biopsies were taken from suspicious nodules or tissues and sent for pathologic examination. Histopathological results revealed inflammation which is compatible with foreign body granuloma, without any suspicion for malignancy, in all cases. Two patients were solely followed-up and subsequent FDG-PET imaging after 3 months revealed complete resolution of FDG uptake.
CONCLUSIONS: To avoid unnecessary biopsies or surgical procedures, the possibility of false-positive results due to surgical adhesive product use should be taken into account while interpreting follow-up FDG-PET imaging results and the operative reports should be written in detail, describing which surgical materials used and their exact application sites.

### PMID 34977140 (2021) — Frontiers in surgery
TITLE: Ovarian Vein Embolization With N-butyl-2 Cyanoacrylate Glubran-2&#xae; for the Treatment of Pelvic Venous Disorder.
DOI: 10.3389/fsurg.2021.760600 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Background: There are few reports in the literature on the use of Glubran-2 for the embolization of ovarian veins in patients with pelvic venous disorder (PeVD). In addition, a consensus on the efficacy and safety of Glubran-2 has not been reached. Purpose: To investigate the safety and efficacy of ovarian vein embolization (OVE) with N-butyl-2 cyanoacrylate (NBCA) Glubran-2 for the treatment of PeVD. Material and Methods: Between January 2013 and January 2020, 21 women (mean age, 43.9 &#xb1; 13.3 years) with PeVD who underwent OVE with Glubran-2 were evaluated. Of those patients, ovarian vein or pelvic venous plexus insufficiency was verified by duplex ultrasound and/or multislice computer tomography (MSCT). The symptoms and signs of PeVD included chronic pelvic pain (CPP) (21/21; 100%), dyspareunia (12/21; 57.1%), dysmenorrhea (10/21; 47.6%), and vulvar varices (3/21; 14.3%). The medical data were retrospectively reviewed. Results: Glubran-2 was employed as the sole embolic material in 18 cases (85.7%) and used to perform rescue embolization in 3 cases (14.3%) due to CPP recurrence 1 month after initial embolization using microcoils. Technically successful embolization was achieved using Glubran-2 in all patients. No Glubran-2 related complications were noted. Neither persistent nor recurrent CPP was observed during follow-up, for which the mean was 62 &#xb1; 38 months (range, 12-102 months). Clinical efficacy was evaluated, and all patients exhibited complete or slight improvement of CPP after embolization. The visual analog scale (VAS) score significantly decreased from pre-intervention to post-intervention (p &lt; 0.001). Six patients (28.6%) gave birth to healthy babies during follow-up after embolization with Glubran-2. Conclusions: Ovarian vein embolization with Glubran-2 is a feasible and safe treatment for CPP secondary to PeVD. This treatment may represent a potential and attractive alternative when patients desire symptom relief and want to continue reproducing. Larger studies are warranted to confirm the findings of this study.

### PMID 33640918 (2021) — The British journal of surgery
TITLE: Glue versus mechanical mesh fixation in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair: meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis of randomized clinical trials.
DOI: 10.1093/bjs/znaa002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The optimal choice for mesh fixation in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair (LIHR) has not been well established. This review compared the effects of glue versus mechanical mesh fixation in LIHR on incidence of chronic postoperative inguinal pain (CPIP) and other secondary outcomes, including acute pain, seroma, haematoma, hernia recurrence and other postoperative complications.
METHODS: A systematic review of English/non-English studies using MEDLINE, the Cochrane Library, OpenGrey, OpenThesis and Web of Science, and searching bibliographies of included studies was completed. Search terms included laparoscopic, hernia, fibrin glue, Tisseel, Tissucol, cyanoacrylate, Glubran and Liquiband. Only RCTs comparing mechanical with glue-based fixation in adult patients (aged over 18 years) that examined CPIP were included. Two authors independently completed risk-of-bias assessment and data extraction against predefined data fields. All pooled analyses were computed using a random-effects model.
RESULTS: Fifteen RCTs met the inclusion criteria; 2777 hernias among 2109 patients were assessed. The incidence of CPIP was reduced with use of glue-based fixation (risk ratio (RR) 0.36, 95 per cent c.i. 0.19 to 0.69; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.002), with moderate heterogeneity that disappeared with sensitivity analysis (8&#x2009;d.f.) for patient-blinded studies (RR 0.43, 0.27 to 0.86). Trial sequential analysis provided evidence for a relative risk reduction of at least 25 per cent. The incidence of haeamtoma was reduced by using glue-based fixation (RR 0.29, 0.10 to 0.82; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.02) with no significant effects on seroma formation or hernia recurrence (RR 1.07, 0.46 to 2.47; P&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.88).
CONCLUSION: Glue-based mesh fixation appears to reduce the incidence of CPIP and haematoma after LIHR compared with mechanical fixation, with comparable recurrence rates.

### PMID 33532586 (2021) — Bioengineering &amp; translational medicine
TITLE: The secretome of stressed peripheral blood mononuclear cells increases tissue survival in a rodent epigastric flap model.
DOI: 10.1002/btm2.10186 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Reconstructive surgery transfers viable tissue to cover defects and to restore aesthetic and functional properties. Failure rates after free flap surgery range from 3 to 7%. Co-morbidities such as diabetes mellitus or peripheral vascular disease increase the risk of flap failure up to 4.5-fold. Experimental therapeutic concepts commonly use a monocausal approach by applying single growth factors. The secretome of &#x3b3;-irradiated, stressed peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCsec) resembles the physiological environment necessary for tissue regeneration. Its application led to improved wound healing rates and a two-fold increase in blood vessel counts in previous animal models. We hypothesized that PBMCsec has beneficial effects on the survival of compromised flap tissue by reducing the necrosis rate and increasing angiogenesis. Surgery was performed on 39 male Sprague-Dawley rats (control, N =&#x2009;13; fibrin sealant, N =&#x2009;14; PBMCsec, N =&#x2009;12). PBMCsec was produced according to good manufacturing practices (GMP) guidelines and 2 ml were administered intraoperatively at a concentration of 2.5&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;107 cells/ml using fibrin sealant as carrier substance. Flap perfusion and necrosis (as percentage of the total flap area) were analyzed using Laser Doppler Imaging and digital image planimetry on postoperative days 3 and 7. Immunohistochemical stainings for von Willebrand factor (vWF) and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor-receptor-3 (Flt-4) were performed on postoperative day 7 to evaluate formation of blood vessels and lymphatic vessels. Seroma formation was quantified using a syringe and flap adhesion and tissue edema were evaluated clinically through a cranial incision by a blinded observer according to previously described criteria on postoperative day 7. We found a significantly reduced tissue necrosis rate (control: 27.8%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;8.6; fibrin: 22.0%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;6.2; 20.9% reduction, p =&#x2009;.053 vs. control; PBMCsec: 19.1%&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;7.2; 31.1% reduction, p =&#x2009;.012 vs. control; 12.9% reduction, 0.293 vs. fibrin) together with increased vWF+ vessel counts (control: 70.3 &#xb1;&#x2009;16.3 vessels/4 fields at 200&#xd7; magnification; fibrin: 67.8 &#xb1;&#x2009;12.1; 3.6% reduction, p =&#x2009;.651, vs. control; PBMCsec: 85.9 &#xb1;&#x2009;20.4; 22.2% increase, p =&#x2009;.045 vs. control; 26.7% increase, p =&#x2009;.010 vs. fibrin) on postoperative day 7 after treatment with PBMCsec. Seroma formation was decreased after treatment with fibrin sealant with or without the addition of PBMCsec. (control: 11.9 &#xb1;&#x2009;9.7 ml; fibrin: 1.7 &#xb1;&#x2009;5.3, 86.0% reduction, 0.004 vs. control; PBMCsec: 0.6 &#xb1;&#x2009;2.0; 94.8% reduction, p =&#x2009;.001 vs. control; 62.8% reduction, p =&#x2009;.523 vs. fibrin). We describe the beneficial effects of a secretome derived from &#x3b3;-irradiated PBMCs on tissue survival, angiogenesis, and clinical parameters after flap surgery in a rodent epigastric flap model.

### PMID 33425351 (2021) — Annals of medicine and surgery (2012)
TITLE: Comparison of fibrin sealants in peripheral vascular surgery: A systematic review and network meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2020.12.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Evidence comparing fibrin sealants (FSs) in surgery are limited. This study evaluated the efficacy and safety of FSs, and manual compression in peripheral vascular surgery.
METHODS: A systematic review of randomized trials was conducted in Medline, Embase, and Cochrane databases within the last 15 years. Data were available to conduct a network meta-analysis (NMA) in peripheral vascular surgery. Fibrin sealant treatment arms were further broken-down and assessed by clotting time (i.e., 2-min [2C] or 1-min [1C]). The primary efficacy outcome was the proportion of patients achieving hemostasis by 4&#xa0;min (T4). Treatment-related serious and non-serious adverse events (AEs) were qualitatively assessed.
RESULTS: Five studies (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;693), were included in the NMA. Results predicted VISTASEAL 2C, followed by EVICEL 1C, had the highest probability of achieving T4. Compared with manual compression, significant improvements in T4 were found with VISTASEAL 2C (relative risk [RR]&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.67, 95% CrI: 2.13-3.34), EVICEL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.58, 95% CrI: 2.04-3.23), VISTASEAL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;2.00, 95% CrI: 1.45-2.65), and TISSEEL 2C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.99, 95% CrI: 1.48-2.60). TISSEEL 1C was not significantly different than manual compression (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.40, 95% CrI: 0.70-2.33). Among FSs, VISTASEAL 2C was associated with a significant improvements in T4 compared with VISTASEAL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.33, 95% CrI: 1.02-1.82), TISSEEL 2C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.34, 95% CrI: 1.05-1.77), and TISSEEL 1C (RR&#xa0;=&#xa0;1.90, 95% CrI: 1.18-3.74). Treatment-related serious and non-serious AE rates were typically lower than 2%.
CONCLUSIONS: In peripheral vascular surgeries, VISTASEAL 2C and EVICEL 1C were shown to have the highest probabilities for achieving rapid hemostasis among the treatments compared. Future studies should expand networks across surgery types as data become available.

### PMID 34499550 (2021) — Journal of endourology
TITLE: The Surgical Technique of Mini Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy.
DOI: 10.1089/end.2020.1080 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The mini percutaneous nephrolithotomy (mini-PCNL) has become a versatile tool to remove kidney stones &gt;2&#x2009;cm, lower pole stones &gt;1&#x2009;cm, renal stones previously unresponsive to shockwave therapy or inaccessible by ureteroscopy (within a caliceal diverticulum), stones within complex urinary tracts (urinary diversions, transplanted kidney, and horseshoe kidneys), and large impacted proximal ureteral stones. After positioning in either the supine or prone position, a cystoscopy is performed to place an open-ended catheter, occlusion balloon, or Accordian device into the collecting system. A foley catheter is placed in the bladder. An ultrasound with a curvilinear probe is used to survey the kidney and guide access into the collecting system with an 18&#x2009;g percutaneous needle. Once access is obtained, a small 0.5&#x2009;cm skin incision is made and the percutaneous tract is dilated over a wire. A 16.5F metallic or self-dilating suctioning access sheath is positioned with fluoroscopic guidance. A 12F rigid mini-PCNL nephroscope is used to evaluate the collecting system. Once a calculus is observed, options for stone fragmentation include a lithotripter with ultrasonic and ballistic energy, or laser lithotripsy using holmium or thulium laser fibers. Flexible ureteroscopy can be considered to ensure clearance of the collecting system. A 6F ureteral stent can be placed in either a retrograde or antegrade approach for drainage. The tract is sealed using Surgiflo hemostatic matrix with thrombin. Guidelines for postoperative care and troubleshooting techniques for mini-PCNL are reviewed along with the surgical steps in the accompanying video (Supplementary Video S1). There are few randomized trials comparing mini-PCNL with standard PCNL and ureteroscopy. There is some evidence to suggest a difference in transfusion rates comparing mini- and standard PCNL, as well as differences in stone-free rates when comparing mini-PCNL with ureteroscopy for the treatment of lower pole stones.

### PMID 34002682 (2021) — The Journal of laryngology and otology
TITLE: Coronavirus disease 2019: changing the future of emergency epistaxis management.
DOI: 10.1017/S0022215121001456 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Acute epistaxis can be a life-threatening airway emergency, requiring in-patient admission. The coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic placed significant strain on hospital resources, and management has shifted towards an out-patient-centred approach.
METHODS: A five-month single-centre retrospective study was undertaken of all epistaxis patients managed by the ENT department. A pre-coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic group was managed with pre-existing guidelines, compared to new guidelines for the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic group. A telephone survey was performed on out-patients with non-dissolvable packs to assess patient comfort and satisfaction.
RESULTS: A total of 142 patients were seen. The coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic group had significantly more patients aged over 65 years (p = 0.004), an increased use of absorbable dressings and local haemostatic agents (Nasopore and Surgiflo), and fewer admissions (all p &lt; 0.0005). Rates of re-presentation and morbidity, and length of hospital stay were similar. The telephone survey revealed out-patient management to be efficacious and feasible.
CONCLUSION: The coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic has shifted epistaxis management towards local haemostatic agents and out-patient management; this approach is as safe and effective as previously well-established regimens.

### PMID 33453137 (2021) — Clinical otolaryngology : official journal of ENT-UK ; official journal of Netherlands Society for Oto-Rhino-Laryngology &amp; Cervico-Facial Surgery
TITLE: Dissolvable intranasal haemostatic agents for acute epistaxis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1111/coa.13717 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Nasal packing is the mainstay of epistaxis management; however, packs cause patient discomfort and can lead to hospital admission. Absorbable haemostats provide clotting factors or act as a substrate to stimulate clotting and represent a potential treatment alternative. A systematic review was performed to evaluate the efficacy of topical haemostats in the management of epistaxis.
METHODS: A systematic literature search of 7 databases was performed. Only eligible randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies were included. The primary outcome was short-term haemostatic success (&lt;7&#xa0;days). Secondary outcomes included long-term haemostatic control (no rebleeding 7-30&#xa0;days), patient discomfort and adverse effects. Meta-analysis was performed where possible.
RESULTS: Of 2249 records identified, 12 were included in the qualitative synthesis and 4 RCTs were included in meta-analysis. The following haemostats were reported: gelatin-thrombin matrix (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;8), aerosolised/gel tranexamic acid (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;1), cellulose agents (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;2) and fibrin sealants (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;1). Studies involving tranexamic acid on removable delivery devices (eg, pledgets) were excluded. There was heterogeneity in outcome measures and inclusion criteria (coagulopathies/anticoagulants were excluded in 3 RCTs and 2 observational studies). The short-term haemostatic success varied between studies (13.9% to 100%). No significant post-procedural complications were reported. The meta-analysis favoured absorbable haemostatic agent versus packing (risk ratio 1.20; 95% confidence interval 1.05 to 1.37; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;.007). The risk of bias across all studies was moderate to high.
CONCLUSIONS: The evidence suggests haemostatic agents are effective at managing acute epistaxis when compared with nasal packing. More data are required before recommendations can be made regarding management in patients on anticoagulants.

### PMID 33880934 (2021) — Journal of comparative effectiveness research
TITLE: Letter to the Editor: critical appraisal to optimize clinical and economic impact of oxidized regenerated cellulose in surgical practice.
DOI: 10.2217/cer-2021-0007 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016422">Letter, Comment
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 34119260 (2021) — Journal of clinical neuroscience : official journal of the Neurosurgical Society of Australasia
TITLE: The role of hemostatic devices in neurosurgery. A systematic review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2021.05.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: Hemostasis represents a fundamental step in every surgical procedure. During neurosurgical procedures, proper and robust hemostasis into confined spaces can significantly reduce the odds of perioperative complications. Over the decades, multiple methods have been applied, and several medical devices have been developed to promote and guarantee proper hemostasis. This study presents a systematic review of the most used intraoperative hemostatic methods and devices in neurosurgery. Insightful research was performed on the PubMed database according to the PRISMA guidelines. This comprehensive review of scientific literature represents a synoptic panel where the most used intraoperative hemostatic methods and devices available today in neurosurgery are classified and described.

### PMID 34104007 (2021) — Medical devices (Auckland, N.Z.)
TITLE: Avitene&#x2122; Microfibrillar Collagen Hemostat for Adjunctive Hemostasis in Surgical Procedures: A Systematic Literature Review.
DOI: 10.2147/MDER.S298207 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Adequate hemostasis during surgical procedures is essential for successful patient outcomes and reduced healthcare resource utilization. Topical hemostatic agents can act as catalysts for the clotting cascade or as a scaffold to promote platelet activation or aggregation. Although an ever-increasing number of topical absorbable hemostatic agents are now available for perioperative use, health care providers are disadvantaged by the lack of comparative data on feasibility, clinical effectiveness, advantages, and limitations of each in specific surgical settings. This knowledge is important for appropriate product choice when patient characteristics, type of surgical procedure, type of bleeding, and product availability may differ widely. This manuscript provides the first comprehensive overview of Avitene&#x2122; Microfibrillar Collagen Hemostat (MCH), a bovine collagen-based absorbable hemostat that has been widely used for over four decades in the United States and abroad. MCH is indicated as an adjunct to hemostasis across a broad spectrum of surgical specialties and has been shown to achieve hemostasis with positive patient outcomes and a favorable safety profile in many applications, including hepatic, orthopedic, splenic, oral, and otolaryngologic surgery. Although published clinical data regarding the use of MCH in cardiovascular surgery is limited, evidence suggests moderate use in this specialty. The information contained in this systematic review will help health care providers understand the clinical use and effectiveness of the product to determine appropriate use in differing bleeding scenarios across multiple surgical specialties. Future studies may include comparative functional and cost analyses to explore the economic advantages of using absorbable hemostatic agents compared with each other or with conventional techniques of hemostasis, when appropriate.

### PMID 34322783 (2021) — Updates in surgery
TITLE: An international multidisciplinary peer-driven consensus on the optimal use of hemostatic powders in surgical practice.
DOI: 10.1007/s13304-021-01136-x | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016446">Consensus Statement, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Bleeding is a consequence of insufficient hemostasis and excessive bleeding at a surgical site is associated with an increased risk of post-operative infection, transfusion and re-operation, in addition to increased hospital length of stay and costs. Surgeons employ a range of methods to achieve hemostasis, including topical hemostatic agents of differing composition and properties. Hemostatic powders are a sub-group of topical hemostats, which can be used in helping as adjuncts to manage troublesome bleeding in a variety of situations. As this technology is relatively new and potentially not well known by the broad surgical community, no specific guidelines or recommendations for the optimal use of hemostatic powders in surgery currently exist. A steering group throughout Europe of multidisciplinary surgeons, expert in hemostasis and hemostatics, identified from literature and from personal experience, five key topics. When to use hemostatic powder, the evidence for use, benefits of use, safety remarks and considerations in various surgical specialties. Thirty-seven statements were subsequently drawn from these five key topics. An online survey was sent to 128 high-volume surgeons working in breast surgery, gynaecological and obstetric surgery, general and emergency surgery, thoracic surgery and urological surgery in Europe to assess agreement (consensus) with these statements. Consensus was defined as high if&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;75% and very high if&#x2009;&#x2265;&#x2009;90% of respondents agreed with a statement. A total of 79 responses were received and consensus among the surgical experts was very high in 27 (73%) statements, high in 8 (22%) statements and was not achieved in 2 (5%) statements. Based on the consensus scores, the steering group produced 16 key recommendations which they considered could improve patient outcomes by reducing post-operative bleeding and its associated complications using hemostatic powder.

### PMID 33761670 (2021) — Medicine
TITLE: Comparative efficacy and safety of topical hemostatic agents in primary total knee arthroplasty: A network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000025087 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Network Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical hemostatic agents are commonly used for reducing perioperative blood loss and transfusion requirement in primary total knee arthroplasty (TKA), although the optimal option has yet to be defined. This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of topical hemostatic agents and rank the best intervention using the network meta-analysis (NMA) method.
METHODS: We searched Web of science, PubMed, and Cochrane Library database up to April 2020, for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) on topical hemostatic agents in primary TKA. The quality of included studies was assessed using the Cochrane "risk of bias" tool. Direct and indirect comparisons were performed for the result of network meta-analysis followed by consistency test.
RESULTS: Thirty seven RCTs with 3792 patients were included in this NMA and the pooled results indicated that tranexamic acid plus diluted epinephrine (TXA+DEP) displayed the highest efficacy in reducing total blood loss, hemoglobin drop and transfusion requirement. None of the included treatments was found to increase risk of thromboembolic events compared to placebo. According to the results of ranking probabilities, TXA+DEP had the highest possibility to be the best topical hemostatic agent with regard to the greatest comparative efficacy and a relatively high safety level.
CONCLUSION: Current evidence supports that administration of TXA+DEP may be the optimal topical hemostatic agent to decrease blood loss and transfusion requirement in primary TKA. More direct studies that focused on the topical application of TXA+DEP versus other treatments are needed in the future.

### PMID 33567467 (2021) — Endoscopy
TITLE: Endoscopic diagnosis and management of nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage (NVUGIH): European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline - Update 2021.
DOI: 10.1055/a-1369-5274 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Practice Guideline
ABSTRACT: 1: ESGE recommends in patients with acute upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage (UGIH) the use of the Glasgow-Blatchford Score (GBS) for pre-endoscopy risk stratification. Patients with GBS&#x200a;&#x2264;&#x200a;1 are at very low risk of rebleeding, mortality within 30 days, or needing hospital-based intervention and can be safely managed as outpatients with outpatient endoscopy.Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence. 2: ESGE recommends that in patients with acute UGIH who are taking low-dose aspirin as monotherapy for secondary cardiovascular prophylaxis, aspirin should not be interrupted. If for any reason it is interrupted, aspirin should be re-started as soon as possible, preferably within 3-5 days.Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence. 3: ESGE recommends that following hemodynamic resuscitation, early (&#x2264;&#x200a;24 hours) upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy should be performed. Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 4: ESGE does not recommend urgent (&#x2264;&#x200a;12 hours) upper GI endoscopy since as compared to early endoscopy, patient outcomes are not improved. Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 5: ESGE recommends for patients with actively bleeding ulcers (FIa, FIb), combination therapy using epinephrine injection plus a second hemostasis modality (contact thermal or mechanical therapy). Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 6: ESGE recommends for patients with an ulcer with a nonbleeding visible vessel (FIIa), contact or noncontact thermal therapy, mechanical therapy, or injection of a sclerosing agent, each as monotherapy or in combination with epinephrine injection. Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 7 : ESGE suggests that in patients with persistent bleeding refractory to standard hemostasis modalities, the use of a topical hemostatic spray/powder or cap-mounted clip should be considered. Weak recommendation, low quality evidence. 8: ESGE recommends that for patients with clinical evidence of recurrent peptic ulcer hemorrhage, use of a cap-mounted clip should be considered. In the case of failure of this second attempt at endoscopic hemostasis, transcatheter angiographic embolization (TAE) should be considered. Surgery is indicated when TAE is not locally available or after failed TAE. Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence. 9: ESGE recommends high dose proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy for patients who receive endoscopic hemostasis and for patients with FIIb ulcer stigmata (adherent clot) not treated endoscopically. (A): PPI therapy should be administered as an intravenous bolus followed by continuous infusion (e.&#x200a;g., 80&#x200a;mg then 8&#x200a;mg/hour) for 72 hours post endoscopy. (B): High dose PPI therapies given as intravenous bolus dosing (twice-daily) or in oral formulation (twice-daily) can be considered as alternative regimens.Strong recommendation, high quality evidence. 10: ESGE recommends that in patients who require ongoing anticoagulation therapy following acute NVUGIH (e.&#x200a;g., peptic ulcer hemorrhage), anticoagulation should be resumed as soon as the bleeding has been controlled, preferably within or soon after 7 days of the bleeding event, based on thromboembolic risk. The rapid onset of action of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACS), as compared to vitamin K antagonists (VKAs), must be considered in this context.Strong recommendation, low quality evidence.

### PMID 32435571 (2020) — Global spine journal
TITLE: Cyanoacrylate Dermal Closure in Spine Surgery: Systematic Review and Pooled Analysis.
DOI: 10.1177/2192568219861619 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Systematic review.
OBJECTIVES: Cyanoacrylate glue closure has been utilized for dermal closure in surgical incisions. Its safety and efficacy in spine surgery are not established. The authors perform a systematic review to determine the rate of surgical site infection (SSI), wound dehiscence, and wound erythema with cyanoacrylate dermal closure in spine surgery.
METHODS: A systematic review adhering to PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines was performed utilizing the PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane databases on patients undergoing spine surgery with cyanoacrylate dermal closure. Pooled analysis was performed with stratification of patients according to spinal level and the presence/absence of instrumentation. Risk-of-bias and methodological quality was appraised using 17 prespecified criteria.
RESULTS: Five articles (1 retrospective cohort study, 4 cases series) with a total of 1282 patients were included. A total of 967 patients, all diagnosed with degenerative spine disease, were suitable for pooled analysis. In 290 patients who underwent anterior cervical discectomy and fusion, and in 23 patients with posterior cervical decompression (without instrumentation), there was 0% rate of SSI, wound dehiscence, and erythema. In 489 patients who underwent lumbar microdiscectomy, there was 0.41% rate of SSI, 0.20% rate of wound dehiscence, and 0.20% rate of wound erythema. In 165 lumbar laminectomy patients, there was a 1.82% rate of SSI, 0.61% rate of wound dehiscence, and 0% rate of wound erythema.
CONCLUSION: Cyanoacrylate dermal closure for the aforementioned procedures is associated with low rates of wound complications (SSI, dehiscence, and erythema). Further studies should be performed, especially in nondegenerative surgery, instrumented thoracic and lumbar spine surgery.

### PMID 32620348 (2020) — European journal of vascular and endovascular surgery : the official journal of the European Society for Vascular Surgery
TITLE: Fibrin and Thrombin Sealants in Vascular and Cardiac Surgery: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejvs.2020.05.016 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: In vascular and cardiac surgery, the ability to maintain haemostasis and seal haemorrhagic tissues is key. Fibrin and thrombin based sealants were introduced as a means to prevent or halt bleeding during surgery. Whether fibrin and thrombin sealants affect surgical outcomes is poorly established. A systematic review and meta-analysis was performed to examine the impact of fibrin or thrombin sealants on patient outcomes in vascular and cardiac surgery.
DATA SOURCES: Cochrane CENTRAL, Embase, and MEDLINE, as well as trial registries, conference abstracts, and reference lists of included articles were searched from inception to December 2019.
REVIEW METHODS: Studies comparing the use of fibrin or thrombin sealant with either an active (other haemostatic methods) or standard surgical haemostatic control in vascular and cardiac surgery were searched for. The Cochrane risk of bias tool and the ROBINS-I tool (Risk Of Bias In Non-randomised Studies - of Interventions) were used to assess the risk of bias of the included randomised and non-randomised studies; quality of evidence was assessed by the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) framework. Two reviewers screened studies, assessed risk of bias, and extracted data independently and in duplicate. Data from included trials were pooled using a random effects model.
RESULTS: Twenty-one studies (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;7 622 patients) were included: 13 randomised controlled trials (RCTs), five retrospective, and three prospective cohort studies. Meta-analysis of the RCTs showed a statistically significant decrease in the volume of&#xa0;blood lost (mean difference 120.7&#xa0;mL, in favour of sealant use [95% confidence interval {CI}&#xa0;-150.6 -&#xa0;-90.7; p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.001], moderate quality). Time to haemostasis was also shown to be reduced in patients receiving sealant (mean difference&#xa0;-2.5&#xa0;minutes [95% CI -4.0 -&#xa0;-1.1; p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;.001], low quality). Post-operative blood transfusions, re-operation due to bleeding, and 30 day mortality were not significantly different for either RCTs or observational data.
CONCLUSION: The use of fibrin and thrombin sealants confers a statistically significant but clinically small reduction in blood loss and time to haemostasis; it does not reduce blood transfusion. These Results may support selective rather than routine use of fibrin and thrombin sealants in vascular and cardiac surgery.

### PMID 32021515 (2020) — Risk management and healthcare policy
TITLE: Costs Analysis of Fibrin Sealant for Prevention of Anastomotic Leakage in Lower Colorectal Surgery.
DOI: 10.2147/RMHP.S221008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Postoperative anastomotic leaks remain a common and serious complication of colorectal surgeries and are a major cause of mortality and morbidity of these procedures. Anastomotic leaks (AL) have been extensively studied; however, there has been no significant reduction in their prevalence over time. In addition, there is a significant economic burden from AL attributed to the need for repeat surgery, radiologic intervention and lengthened hospital stay. We conducted a comparative cost analysis of patients undergoing colorectal surgery with anastomosis, with the application of fibrin sealant (FS) to the sutured anastomosis versus not treating the sutured anastomosis with FS.
METHODS: The deterministic decision-tree model was populated with clinical data including operating room time, hospitalization days, occurrence of AL, need for revision surgery, blood products and radiologic interventions to treat the AL in lower colorectal surgery. A systematic literature review was conducted to identify appropriate studies with these variables.
RESULTS: The average cost per case treated lower colorectal surgery with fibrin sealant glue 10 mL Tisseel&#xae; and those not treated with a fibrin sealant after suturing the anastomoses was &#x20ac;3233 and &#x20ac;4130, respectively, for resource expenses paid by the healthcare system. This would suggest potential savings of &#x20ac;897 per surgery, achieved through the application of FS to the sutured anastomosis for preventing AL following colorectal surgery.
CONCLUSION: Application of FS to the sutured anastomosis in lower colorectal surgery resulted in a decrease in post-operative AL, and cost savings based on a reduction in hospitalization days, a reduction needing: revision surgery, radiologic intervention and blood products to treat AL.

### PMID 32711151 (2020) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Management of Incidental Durotomy: Results from a Nationwide Survey Conducted by the French Society of Spine Surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.07.121 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To obtain real-life data on the most common practices used for management of incidental durotomy (ID) in France.
METHODS: Data were collected from spinal surgeons using a practice-based online questionnaire. The survey comprised 31 questions on the current management of ID in France. The primary outcome was the identification of areas of consensus and uncertainty on ID follow-up.
RESULTS: A total of 217 surgeons (mainly orthopaedic surgeons and neurosurgeons) completed the questionnaire and were included in the analysis. There was a consensus on ID repair with 94.5% of the surgeons considering that an ID should always be repaired, if repairable, and 97.2% performing a repair if an ID occurred. The most popular techniques were simple suture or locked continuous suture (48.3% vs. 57.8% of surgeons). Nonrepairable IDs were more likely to be treated with surgical sealants than with an endogenous graft (84.9% vs. 75.5%). Almost two thirds of surgeons (71.6%) who adapted their standard postoperative protocol after an ID recommended bed rest in the supine position. Among these, 48.8% recommended 24 hours of bed rest, while 53.5% recommended 48 hours of bed rest. The surgeons considered that the main risk factors for ID were revision surgery (98.6%), patient's age (46.8%), surgeon's exhaustion (46.3%), and patient's weight (21.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: This nationwide survey reflects the lack of a standardized management protocol for ID. Practices among surgeons remain very heterogeneous. Further consensus studies are required to develop a standard management protocol for ID.

### PMID 36627955 (2020) — Global &amp; regional health technology assessment
TITLE: [Not Available].
DOI: 10.33393/grhta.2020.695 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION:: Achieving haemostasis is critical in surgical procedures. Surgical bleeding is associated with an increased risk of mortality and morbidity with consequences at both clinical and organizational level, and with significant economic implications. In addition to conventional methods for controlling intraoperative bleeding, many topical adjunctive hemostatic products are available; among them Floseal&#xae; (Baxter Healthcare Corporation), a gelatin-based hemostatic matrix. The aim of this study is to provide an updated systematic literature review of Floseal&#xae; in cardiac surgery and estimate its associated economic impact in an Italian hospital.
METHODS:: A literature search was conducted in MEDLINE and the Cochrane Library over the period 2013-2016 to identify new publications related to Floseal&#xae; in cardiac surgery, in addition to those already included in the systematic review of Echave et al. Furthermore, we investigated the economic impact of the use of Floseal&#xae; adapting the model elaborated by Tackett et al. to the Italian NHS. Four new studies were selected.
RESULTS:: High variability in surgical procedures, choice of hemostatic products compared to Floseal&#xae; and outcome definition is confirmed. Clinical, organizational, and economics endpoints were investigated. A cost-consequence analysis estimated relevant savings. A scenario analysis, despite showing a high variability in patient level savings (&#x20ac; 441-2.831), confirmed economic advantages associated with Floseal&#xae;.
DISCUSSION:: Results support prior research both in terms of heterogeneity of evidence on the effectiveness of Floseal&#xae; in cardiac surgery and cost implications. The use of Floseal&#xae; achieves substantial cost savings in a hypothetical Italian hospital with a cardiac surgery unit.

### PMID 27456032 (2020) — Journal of neurosurgical sciences
TITLE: Gelatin-thrombin hemostatic matrix in neurosurgical procedures: hemostatic effectiveness and economic value of clinical and surgical procedure-related benefits.
DOI: 10.23736/S0390-5616.16.03771-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Gelatin-thrombin hemostatic matrix (FloSeal&#xae;) use is associated with shorter surgical times and less blood loss, parameters that are highly valued in neurosurgical procedures. We aimed to assess the effectiveness of gelatin-thrombin in neurosurgical procedures and estimate its economic value.
METHODS: In a 6-month retrospective evaluation at 2 hospitals, intraoperative and postoperative information were collected from patients undergoing neurosurgical procedures where bleeding was controlled with gelatin-thrombin matrix or according to local bleeding control guidelines (control group). Study endpoints were: length of surgery, estimated blood loss, hospitalization duration, blood units utilized, intensive care unit days, postoperative complications, and time to recovery. Statistical methods compared endpoints between the gelatin-thrombin and control groups and resource utilization costs were estimated.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight patients (38 gelatin-thrombin; 40 control) were included. Gelatin-thrombin was associated with a shorter surgery duration than control (166&#xb1;40 versus 185&#xb1;55 minutes, P=0.0839); a lower estimated blood loss (185&#xb1;80 versus 250&#xb1;95 mL; P=0.0017); a shorter hospital stay (10&#xb1;3 versus 13&#xb1;3 days; P&lt;0.001); fewer intensive care unit days (10 days/3 patients and 20 days/4 patients); and shorter time to recovery (3&#xb1;2.2 versus 4&#xb1;2.8 weeks; P=0.0861). Fewer gelatin-thrombin patients experienced postoperative complications (3 minor) than the control group (5 minor; 3 major). No gelatin-thrombin patient required blood transfusion; 5 units were administered in the control group. The cost of gelatin-thrombin (&#x20ac; 268.40/unit) was offset by the shorter surgery duration (difference of 19 minutes at &#x20ac; 858/hour) and the economic value of improved the other endpoint outcomes (i.e., shorter hospital stay, lesser blood loss/lack of need for transfusion, fewer intensive care unit days, and complications).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of gelatin-thrombin hemostatic matrix in patients undergoing neurosurgical procedures was associated with better intra- and postoperative parameters than conventional hemostasis methods, with these parameters having substantial economic benefits.

### PMID 32577613 (2020) — Materials today. Bio
TITLE: Porcine mesothelium matrix as a biomaterial for wound healing applications.
DOI: 10.1016/j.mtbio.2020.100057 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The increasing economic burden of wound healing in healthcare systems requires the development of functional therapies. Xenografts with preserved extracellular matrix (ECM) structure and biofunctional components overcome major limitations of autografts and allografts (e.g. availability) and artificial biomaterials (e.g. foreign body response). Although porcine mesothelium is extensively used in clinical practice, it is under-investigated for wound healing applications. Herein, we compared the biochemical and biological properties of the only two commercially available porcine mesothelium grafts (Meso Biomatrix&#xae; and Puracol&#xae; Ultra ECM) to traditionally used wound healing grafts (Endoform&#x2122;, ovine forestomach and MatriStem&#xae;, porcine urinary bladder) and biomaterials (Promogran&#x2122;, collagen/oxidized regenerated cellulose). The Endoform&#x2122; and the Puracol&#xae; Ultra ECM showed the highest (p&lt;0.05) soluble collagen and elastin content. The MatriStem&#xae; had the highest (p&lt;0.05) basic fibroblast growth factor (FGFb) content, whereas the Meso Biomatrix&#xae; had the highest (p&lt;0.05) transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-&#x3b2;1) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) content. All materials showed tissue-specific structure and composition. The Endoform&#x2122; and the Meso Biomatrix&#xae; had some nuclei residual matter. All tissue grafts showed similar (p&gt;0.05) response to enzymatic degradation, whereas the Promogran&#x2122; was not completely degraded by matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-8 and was completely degraded by elastase. The Promogran&#x2122; showed the highest (p&lt;0.05) permeability to bacterial infiltration. The Promogran&#x2122; showed by far the lowest dermal fibroblast and THP-1 attachment and growth. All tested materials showed significantly lower (p&lt;0.05) tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-&#x3b1;) expression than the lipopolysaccharides group. The MatriStem&#xae; and the Puracol&#xae; Ultra ECM promoted the highest (p&lt;0.05) number of micro-vessel formation, whereas the Promogran&#x2122; the lowest (p&lt;0.05). Collectively, these data confer that porcine mesothelium has the potential to be used as a wound healing material, considering its composition, resistance to enzymatic degradation, cytocompatibility, and angiogenic potential.

### PMID 31891893 (2020) — European journal of obstetrics, gynecology, and reproductive biology
TITLE: Cellulose absorbable barrier for prevention of de-novo adhesion formation at the time of laparoscopic myomectomy: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejogrb.2019.12.033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Myomectomy is the standard surgical treatment for symptomatic uterine leiomyomas, especially for patients wishing to preserve their fertility. However, this procedure is associated with adhesion formation. Several strategies have been proposed to reduce them. Cellulose absorbable barrier is widely used. We aimed to assess its effectiveness in the prevention of de-novo adhesion formation after laparoscopic myomectomy.
STUDY DESIGN: A systematic review and meta-analysis was performed by searching electronic databases (i.e. MEDLINE, Scopus, ClinicalTrials.gov, EMBASE, Sciencedirect, the Cochrane Library at the CENTRAL Register of Controlled Trials, Scielo) from their inception until May 2019. We included all randomized clinical trials (RCT) comparing use of cellulose absorbable barrier (i.e. intervention group) with either placebo or no treatment (i.e. control group) in the prevention of de-novo adhesion formation at the time of laparoscopic myomectomy. Primary and secondary outcomes were defined before data extraction. The primary outcome was the incidence of adhesions at second-look laparoscopy. The secondary outcome was the operative time.
RESULTS: Three RCT, including 366 participants, were included. All trials evaluated women undergoing laparoscopic myomectomy who were randomized to intervention (either oxidized regenerated cellulose or carboxymethylcellulose powder adhesion barrier) or no treatment (control group). Women who received treatment had significantly lower incidence of adhesions at the second look laparoscopy (RR 0.63, 95 % CI 0.40-0.99). Interventions with use of cellulose absorbable barrier were 4&#x202f;min longer (MD 4&#x202f;min, 95 % CI 2.82-5.18).
CONCLUSION: Use of cellulose absorbable barrier at the time of laparoscopic myomectomy reduces the risk of postoperative adhesions.

### PMID 32904242 (2020) — Heliyon
TITLE: The effect of hawthorn flower and leaf extract (Crataegus Spp.) on cardiac hemostasis and oxidative parameters in Sprague Dawley rats.
DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04617 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Cardiovascular diseases are described as disorders of heart and vessels that involve stroke and coronary heart diseases. People in the Middle East converged to complementary medicine as an economic alternative to expensive healthcare services. Crataegus monogyna Jacq. (Lindm.) Rosacea is among the most commonly used herb for the treatment of declining cardiac performance, hypertension, and arrhythmias. Previously, we had shown that Crataegus Spp. (Hawthorn) extract increased the tendency of bleeding among patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting. Herein, the effects of Crataegus Spp. extract on oxidative stress, cardiac and hematological parameters were evaluated in Sprague Dawley rats. Male rats were randomly assigned into four groups. Group 1 served as control while groups 2-4 served as the experimental groups and were administered extract at doses of 100, 200, and 500 mg/kg. All the doses were given orally once/day and the treatment was continued for three weeks. Hawthorn treatment resulted in a significant decrease in the liver thiobarbituric acid reactive substances level in a dose-dependent manner compared to the control (1.258 (3, 24); P &lt; 0.0001). We found a significant increase in the cardiac antithrombin III among hawthorn treated group compared to the control (4.18 (3, 24); P &lt; 0.0001). On the other hand, hawthorn treatment decreased significantly the liver factor-X level (0.1341 (3, 22); P &lt; 0.0001), while no significant changes were seen in soluble-platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (P-value = 0.0599). In conclusions, hawthorn extract possesses an antioxidant effect and blood-thinning properties. Hence, we recommend attention when using this herbal extract with other anticoagulation and/or antiplatelet drugs or undergoing major cardiac surgery.

### PMID 32449469 (2020) — Therapeutic advances in cardiovascular disease
TITLE: Antithrombotic and hemostatic stewardship: evaluation of clinical outcomes and adverse events of recombinant factor VIIa (Novoseven&#xae;) utilization at a large academic medical center.
DOI: 10.1177/1753944720924255 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) (Novoseven&#xae;) is utilized for the reversal of anticoagulation-associated bleeding and refractory bleeding in cardiac surgery. In August 2015, rFVIIa was transferred from the blood bank to the pharmacy at New York University (NYU) Langone Health. Concordantly, an off-label dosing guideline was developed. The objective of this study was to describe utilization and cost of rFVIIa and assess compliance to our dosing guideline.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective, observational review of rFVIIa administrations post-implementation of an off-label dosing guideline. All patients who received rFVIIa between September 2015 and June 2017 were evaluated. For each rFVIIa administration, anticoagulation and laboratory values, indications for use, dosing, ordering and administration times, concomitant blood products, and adverse events were collected. Adverse events included venous thromboembolism, stroke, myocardial infarction, and death due to systemic embolism and mortality. The primary endpoint was the utilization of rFVIIa in accordance with the off-label dosing guideline. Secondary endpoints included hemostatic efficacy of rFVIIa, adverse events, blood products administered, and cost-effectiveness of rFVIIa transition to pharmacy.
RESULTS: A total of 63 patients [pediatric (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6), adult (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;57)] received rFVIIa, with the majority of use for refractory bleeding after cardiac surgery. The utilization of rVIIa decreased after development of the off-label dosing guideline and transition from blood bank to pharmacy. The total incidence of thromboembolic events within 30 days was 19.6%; 17.6% arterial and 2% venous; 70% of patients with an adverse event were over 70 years of age. Use of rFVIIa reduced the median number of units of blood products administered.
CONCLUSION: Administration of rFVIIa for cardiac surgery appears to be effective for hemostasis. Transitioning rFVIIa from the blood bank to pharmacy and implementation of a dosing guideline appears to have reduced utilization. Patients receiving rFVIIa should be monitored for thromboembolic events. Elderly patients may be at higher risk for thromboembolic events.

### PMID 31934525 (2020) — Global spine journal
TITLE: Minimizing Blood Loss in Spine Surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/2192568219868475 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: STUDY DESIGN: Broad narrative review.
OBJECTIVE: To review and summarize the current literature on guidelines, outcomes, techniques and indications surrounding multiple modalities of minimizing blood loss in spine surgery.
METHODS: A thorough review of peer-reviewed literature was performed on the guidelines, outcomes, techniques, and indications for multiple modalities of minimizing blood loss in spine surgery.
RESULTS: There is a large body of literature that provides a consensus on guidelines regarding the appropriate timing of discontinuation of anticoagulation, aspirin, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and herbal supplements prior to surgery. Additionally, there is a more heterogenous discussion the utility of preoperative autologous blood donation facilitated by erythropoietin and iron supplementation for healthy patients slated for procedures with high anticipated blood loss and for whom allogeneic transfusion is likely. Intraoperative maneuvers available to minimize blood loss include positioning and maintaining normothermia. Tranexamic acid (TXA), bipolar sealer electrocautery, and topical hemostatic agents, and hypotensive anesthesia (mean arterial pressure (MAP) &lt;65 mm Hg) should be strongly considered in cases with larger exposures and higher anticipated blood loss. There is strong level 1 evidence for the use of TXA in spine surgery as it reduces the overall blood loss and transfusion requirements.
CONCLUSION: As the volume and complexity of spinal procedures rise, intraoperative blood loss management has become a pivotal topic of research within the field. There are many tools for minimizing blood loss in patients undergoing spine surgery. The current literature supports combining techniques to use a cost- effective multimodal approach to minimize blood loss in the perioperative period.

### PMID 31626024 (2020) — The journal of trauma and acute care surgery
TITLE: A comprehensive review of topical hemostatic agents: The good, the bad, and the novel.
DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000002508 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Uncontrolled exsanguination remains the leading cause of death for trauma patients, many of whom die in the pre-hospital setting. Without expedient intervention, trauma-associated hemorrhage induces a host of systemic responses and acute coagulopathy of trauma. For this reason, health care providers and prehospital personal face the challenge of swift and effective hemorrhage control. The utilization of adjuncts to facilitate hemostasis was first recorded in 1886. Commercially available products haves since expanded to include topical hemostats, surgical sealants, and adhesives. The ideal product balances efficacy, with safety practicality and cost-effectiveness. This review of hemostasis provides a guide for successful implementation and simultaneously highlights future opportunities.

### PMID 31525826 (2019) — Lymphology
TITLE: Percutaneous fluoroscopically-guided transcervical retrograde access facilitates successful thoracic duct embolization after failed antegrade transabdominal access.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The purpose of this study was to demonstrate the feasibility of percutaneous fluoroscopically-guided transcervical retrograde access into the thoracic duct following unsuccessful transabdominal cisterna chyli cannulation to perform thoracic duct embolization for the treatment of chylothorax. Five patients, including three (60%) women and two (40%) men, with median age of 62 years, underwent percutaneous transcervical thoracic duct access and embolization after failed transabdominal cisterna chyli cannulation for the treatment of chylothorax. In all patients, fluoroscopically-guided percutaneous transcervical retrograde access into the distal thoracic duct was achieved using a 21-gauge needle and an 0.018-inch wire. Following advancement of a microcatheter, retrograde lymphangiography was performed to identify the location of thoracic duct injury. A combination of 2:1 ethiodized oil to cyanoacrylate mixtures, platinum microcoils, or stent-grafts were used to treat the chylous leaks. Technical successes, procedure durations, fluoroscopy times, blood losses, immediate adverse events, clinical successes, and follow-up durations were recorded. Technical success was defined as cannulation of the distal thoracic duct using a transcervical approach followed by treatment of the thoracic duct injury. Adverse events were classified according to the Society of Interventional Radiology guidelines. Clinical success was defined as resolution of the presenting chylothorax. Percutaneous transcervical retrograde thoracic duct access and treatment was technically successful in all patients (n=5). Median procedure duration was 173 minutes (range: 136-347 minutes) with a median fluoroscopy time of 94.7 minutes (range: 47-125 minutes). Median blood loss was 10 mL (range: 5-20 mL). No minor or major adverse occurred. Clinical success was achieved in all patients (n=5). Median follow-up was 372 days (range: 67-661 days). Percutaneous fluoroscopically- guided transcervical retrograde thoracic duct access is an effective and safe method to perform thoracic duct embolization following unsuccessful transabdominal cisterna chyli cannulation for the treatment of chylothorax.

### PMID 31439182 (2019) — The Indian journal of tuberculosis
TITLE: Endo-bronchial application of glue in the management of hemoptysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijtb.2019.01.005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hemoptysis from varied etiologies, often fails to respond to conservative therapy. The conventional managements of such a situation are Bronchial Artery Embolization (BAE) or thoracic surgery which is often not possible. Endoscopic application of glue may stand as a method of therapy in these circumstances.
METHODS: 202 patients of hemoptysis were treated by video-bronchoscopy assisted endobronchial application of glue (n-butyl cyanoacrylate) with the help of polyethylene catheter being placed through the working channel. The details of the procedure and their 6 month follow up are presented.
RESULTS: Immediate control of hemoptysis was achieved in 183 i.e. 90.59% of patients. 19 patients had a partial response, i.e., hemoptysis stopped and then recurred, endobronchial application of glue was repeated in them out of which 14 (6.9%) responded to the second procedure whereas 5 (2.47%) failed to show any response in spite of the repeated procedure. The complication rate was 0.49% in the form of glue migrating into the trachea. There was no mortality.
CONCLUSION: Endobronchial application of glue for hemoptysis can be an effective, economic and alternative therapy for mild to moderate hemoptysis.

### PMID 31484004 (2019) — Il Giornale di chirurgia
TITLE: Routinary use of fibrin sealants to prevent prolonged air leak in thoracic surgery: our experience.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Prolonged air leak (PAL) is one of the most common postoperative complications after lung surgery. It is associated with increased significant morbidity, lower quality of life, longer hospital stay and higher hospital costs. Since its great clinical and economic burden, it is important to establish the feasibility and the effectiveness of the routinary preventive use of a fibrin sealant in order to reduce the incidence of prolonged air leaks.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a randomized study on 189 adult patients - 118 men (62.4%) and 71 women (37.6%) aged from 39 to 87 y.o. (mean age 68.3 y.o.) - who underwent lung surgery (lobectomy or bilobectomy) with intraoperatory detection of air leakage, from January 2013 to December 2017, at Department of Thoracic Surgery in "Ospedale Maggiore Carlo Alberto Pizzardi" (Bologna, Italy) and Department of Thoracic Surgery in "Paolo Giaccone" Teaching Hospital (Palermo, Italy). Patients were randomly assigned to the "Glue" arm (90 patients) or the "Control" group (99 patients). We only used stapler or manual suture to achieve aerostasis. In addition, we used a fibrin sealant ("glue") to cover the suture line on patients in the "Glue" arm. The primary endpoints were incidence of prolonged air leaks, days with chest tube and mean hospital stay.
RESULTS: In the "Glue" arm we experienced only 1 prolonged air leak (1.1%), while in the "Control" group there were 8 leaks (8.1%). Patients kept chest tube for average 4.15 days in the "Glue" arm and 4.45 days in the "Control" group. The mean hospital stay was average 7.4 days for the "Glue" arm, while 9.1 days in the "Control" group.
CONCLUSIONS: According to our experience it seems that the routinary preventive use of a fibrin sealant results in a lower incidence of prolonged air leaks, a shorter hospital stay with lower hospital costs, representing a cost-effective, feasible and effective system to decrease morbility and mortality among surgical patients.

### PMID 30660344 (2019) — Gynecologic oncology
TITLE: The application of fibrin sealant for the prevention of lymphocele after lymphadenectomy in patients with gynecological malignancies: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2019.01.011 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: The aim of the present study was to evaluate the correlation between the use of fibrin-collagen sealants on lymph node dissection areas and formation of lymphocele after lymphadenectomy in patients with gynecological malignancies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A systematic search of 5 electronic databases for articles published up to November 2018 was performed. All randomized controlled clinical trials (RCTs) which reported outcomes after application of fibrin collagen agents in patients who underwent lymphadenectomy for gynecological malignancies, were finally included in the present meta-analysis. Statistical meta-analysis was performed using the RevMan 5.3 software.
RESULTS: A total of 6 RCTs which recruited 481 patients were included in the present study. Meta-analysis revealed significantly decreased total amount of drained fluid and of mean duration of drainage in fibrin sealant group when compared to control, (187 patients MD -86.40&#x202f;ml 95% CI -100.2 to -72.60 p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.00001 and 113 patients MD -1.00&#x202f;days 95% CI -1.13 to -0,87 p&#x202f;&lt;&#x202f;0.00001, respectively). No difference in overall incidence of lymphocele and in the incidence of symptomatic ones among the two groups was observed (592 cases OR 0.61 95% CI 0.36 to 1.05 p&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.08, and 444 cases OR 0.59 95% CI 0.26 to 1.35 p&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.22, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The present meta-analysis supports the safety of the use of fibrin sealants in women undergoing pelvic and/or para-aortic lymphadenectomy due to gynecologic cancer but its benefit remains uncertain. It was found effective in reducing the duration and volume of drainage, but it was not associated with difference in the incidence of lymphocele. Further studies are required to confirm our conclusion and broaden our knowledge about its impact on other parameters.

### PMID 30671601 (2019) — International orthopaedics
TITLE: Use of a fibrin sealant within a blood-saving protocol in patients undergoing revision hip arthroplasty: effects on post-operative blood transfusion and healthcare-related cost analysis.
DOI: 10.1007/s00264-019-04291-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Observational Study
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Blood transfusion and blood management are important aspects in orthopaedic surgery. Strategies include intra-operative and post-operative blood salvage and even the use of fibrin sealant in selected case. Objectives of the study were (1) to compare the total number of transfusions and the length of hospital stay in patients undergoing complete revision hip arthroplasty (RHA) with and without the use of a fibrin sealant (EVICEL&#xae;) and (2) to evaluate the possible role in cost savings of EVICEL&#xae; in association with the blood-saving protocol.
METHODS: Retrospective observational study evaluating patients undergoing complete RHA (stem&#x2009;+&#x2009;cup) with a blood-saving protocol with (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;50) and without EVICEL&#xae; (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;60). The outcome measures were: number of patients transfused (allogeneic red blood cells-RBC-and plasma), amount of blood/plasma transfusions, quantity of re-infused recycled blood, and length of hospital stay. An economic model was developed to assess the differences in costs between the two groups.
RESULTS: EVICEL&#xae; reduced the number of transfused red blood cells and plasma (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.001), and the hospital stay (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01) compared to control group. EVICEL&#xae; can induce a reduction in resource consumption with an average cost-savings of &#x20ac;1.676 per patient.
CONCLUSION: EVICEL&#xae; may be effective in reducing red blood cells and plasma transfusion as well as hospital stay. The inclusion of EVICEL&#xae; in a blood-saving protocol seems to produce clinical efficacy and cost savings.

### PMID 31540882 (2019) — Sexual medicine
TITLE: Surgical Management of Peyronie's Disease With Co-Existent Erectile Dysfunction.
DOI: 10.1016/j.esxm.2019.08.009 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Surgical intervention in Peyronie's disease (PD) should ideally be delayed until the resolution of acute inflammatory phase.
AIM: The objective of this review was to highlight the results of penile prosthesis to correct refractory erectile dysfunction (ED) in patients with PD, and the secondary procedures that may be required to correct the penile curvature.
METHODS: A systematic search on PubMed online database using Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses recommendations was done using the MeSH terms "Peyronie's disease" and "erectile dysfunction."
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Success and satisfaction rates of various procedures.
RESULTS: The search yielded 324 language-specific (English and Spanish language) articles and 58 articles were retained for final review. The following variables were assessed in different studies: number of patients, types of secondary procedure to correct the curvature, satisfaction rates, and follow-up period.
CONCLUSION: The aim of the surgery in PD should be to achieve a functionally straight penis (&lt;20 degree curvature) with good erection. Patients with refractory ED in PD are candidates for penile prosthesis. Secondary procedures, like manual modeling, plication, plaque incision, or excision grafting, may be required depending on the degree of penile curvature and penile length. In quest for the best graft, TachoSil graft seems to have gained popularity in Europe. Krishnappa P, Fernandez-Pascual E, Carballido J, et&#xa0;al. Surgical Management of Peyronie's Disease With Co-Existent Erectile Dysfunction. Sex Med 2019;7:361-370.

### PMID 31135918 (2019) — Japanese journal of clinical oncology
TITLE: Efficiency and safety of TachoSil&#xae; in the treatment of postoperative air leakage following pulmonary surgery: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyz076 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: There has been still no consensus whether to apply TachoSil&#xae; to reduce the incidence of air leakage after pulmonary surgery. We conducted this meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to identify the efficiency and safety of TachoSil&#xae; applied in the prevention of postoperative air leakage following pulmonary surgery.
METHODS: We performed a systematic electronic search through EMABSE, PubMed and Web of Science up to March 2018. Summary risk ratio (RR) and weight mean difference (WMD) with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated to analyze the outcomes. Fixed effect or random effect model was used to pool the estimates. Two independent reviewers assessed the quality of included studies using Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for RCTs.
RESULTS: We included six RCTs with a total of 921 patients. Compared with standard treatment (suturing, stapling techniques or electrocautery), TachoSil&#xae; was associated with the decreased air leak duration (WMD: -3.32 days; 95% CI: -5.34--1.31; P = 0.001), chest tube duration (WMD: -1.99 days; 95% CI: -3.14--0.84; P = 0.0007), hospital stay (WMD: -1.89 days; 95% CI: -2.42--1.35; P &lt; 0.0001), and incidence of prolonged air leak (RR: 0.57; 95% CI: 0.35-0.92; P = 0.02). No significant difference was found between the two groups regarding the incidence of postoperative complications (RR: 0.86; 95% CI: 0.69-1.06; P = 0.16).
CONCLUSIONS: TachoSil&#xae; was safe, cost-effective and superior over standard treatment for patients who underwent pulmonary surgery in decreasing incidence of postoperative air leak, air leak duration, chest tube duration and the length of hospital stay.

### PMID 30994619 (2019) — Angiologiia i sosudistaia khirurgiia = Angiology and vascular surgery
TITLE: [Use of topical haemostatic agents in cardiovascular surgery].
DOI: 10.33529/angio2019118 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The problem of haemostasis in cardiovascular surgery is of current concern. Recent trends are towards increased use of topical haemostatic agents. Tachocomb has been used for more than 30 years in abdominal surgery and oncology. The purpose of the present publication is to analyse the literature data and formulate the indications for the use of Tachocomb in cardiovascular surgery. Multicenter randomized and local studies have demonstrated efficacy of Tachocomb in treatment of surgical haemorrhage in operations on the heart, thoracic aorta, carotid arteries and lower-limb arteries, resulting in significantly decreased time to achieve haemostasis, decreased volume of blood loss and haemotrasfusion, as well as reduced frequency of complications. Also shown was economic efficacy, including a shortened length of patients' hospital stay. This is followed by describing a wide spectrum of examples of alternative use of Tachocomb, including its use for seamless closure of defects of cardiac chamber walls, aero- and lymphostasis, prevention of formation of commissures. Convincing experimental and clinical results make it possible to formulate a series of indications for the use of Tachocomb in cardiovascular surgery. &#x412; &#x43d;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x44f;&#x449;&#x435;&#x435; &#x432;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x44f; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x440;&#x43e; &#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x438;&#x442; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x431;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x430; &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430; &#x432; &#x441;&#x435;&#x440;&#x434;&#x435;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;-&#x441;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x443;&#x434;&#x438;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x438;. &#x412; &#x44d;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x441;&#x432;&#x44f;&#x437;&#x438; &#x432; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x434;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x433;&#x43e;&#x434;&#x44b; &#x448;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x43e; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x44f;&#x44e;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x43c;&#x435;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x435; &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x442;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x435; &#x441;&#x440;&#x435;&#x434;&#x441;&#x442;&#x432;&#x430;. &#x41f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x440;&#x430;&#x442; &#x422;&#x430;&#x445;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x431; &#x438;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x437;&#x443;&#x435;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x431;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x435; &#x442;&#x440;&#x438;&#x434;&#x446;&#x430;&#x442;&#x438; &#x43b;&#x435;&#x442; &#x432; &#x430;&#x431;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x438; &#x438; &#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x438;&#x438;. &#x426;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x44e; &#x43d;&#x430;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x44f;&#x449;&#x435;&#x439; &#x43f;&#x443;&#x431;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x438; &#x44f;&#x432;&#x43b;&#x44f;&#x435;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x430;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x437; &#x43b;&#x438;&#x442;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x442;&#x443;&#x440;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x434;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x438; &#x444;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x43c;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x435; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439; &#x43a; &#x438;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44e; &#x422;&#x430;&#x445;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x431;&#x430; &#x432; &#x441;&#x435;&#x440;&#x434;&#x435;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;-&#x441;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x443;&#x434;&#x438;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x438;. &#x41c;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e;&#x446;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x44b;&#x435; &#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x438;&#x437;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x435; &#x438; &#x43b;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x435; &#x438;&#x441;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x434;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x441;&#x442;&#x440;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x438; &#x44d;&#x444;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x422;&#x430;&#x445;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x431;&#x430; &#x432; &#x43b;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x438; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x445; &#x43a;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x435;&#x447;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438; &#x43e;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x44f;&#x445; &#x43d;&#x430; &#x441;&#x435;&#x440;&#x434;&#x446;&#x435;, &#x433;&#x440;&#x443;&#x434;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x430;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x442;&#x435;, &#x441;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x445; &#x430;&#x440;&#x442;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x44f;&#x445; &#x438; &#x430;&#x440;&#x442;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x44f;&#x445; &#x43d;&#x438;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x445; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x435;&#x439;. &#x414;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x435;&#x440;&#x43d;&#x43e; &#x437;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x447;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x43e; &#x443;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x44c;&#x448;&#x430;&#x435;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x432;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x44f; &#x434;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x438;&#x436;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;, &#x43e;&#x431;&#x44a;&#x435;&#x43c; &#x43a;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;, &#x433;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x440;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x441;&#x444;&#x443;&#x437;&#x438;&#x438; &#x438; &#x441;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x436;&#x430;&#x435;&#x442;&#x441;&#x44f; &#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x442;&#x432;&#x43e; &#x43e;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x43e;&#x436;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439;. &#x422;&#x430;&#x43a;&#x436;&#x435; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x430; &#x44d;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x44f; &#x44d;&#x444;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x44c;, &#x432; &#x442;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x447;&#x438;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435; &#x432; &#x432;&#x438;&#x434;&#x435; &#x443;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x44c;&#x448;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x432;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x431;&#x44b;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x43f;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x430; &#x432; &#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x446;&#x438;&#x43e;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x440;&#x435;. &#x422;&#x430;&#x43a;&#x436;&#x435; &#x43e;&#x43f;&#x438;&#x441;&#x430;&#x43d; &#x448;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x439; &#x441;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x440; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x442;&#x435;&#x440;&#x43d;&#x430;&#x442;&#x438;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x438;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x440;&#x430;&#x442;&#x430; &#x422;&#x430;&#x445;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x431;, &#x432; &#x442;&#x43e;&#x43c; &#x447;&#x438;&#x441;&#x43b;&#x435; &#x441; &#x446;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x44e; &#x431;&#x435;&#x441;&#x448;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x433;&#x43e; &#x437;&#x430;&#x43a;&#x440;&#x44b;&#x442;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x434;&#x435;&#x444;&#x435;&#x43a;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x432; &#x441;&#x442;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x43e;&#x43a; &#x43a;&#x430;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x440; &#x441;&#x435;&#x440;&#x434;&#x446;&#x430;, &#x430;&#x44d;&#x440;&#x43e;- &#x438; &#x43b;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x444;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x442;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;, &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x434;&#x43e;&#x442;&#x432;&#x440;&#x430;&#x449;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x43e;&#x431;&#x440;&#x430;&#x437;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44f; &#x441;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x435;&#x43a;. &#x423;&#x431;&#x435;&#x434;&#x438;&#x442;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x435; &#x44d;&#x43a;&#x441;&#x43f;&#x435;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x442;&#x430;&#x43b;&#x44c;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x435; &#x438; &#x43a;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x447;&#x435;&#x441;&#x43a;&#x438;&#x435; &#x434;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x43d;&#x44b;&#x435; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x437;&#x432;&#x43e;&#x43b;&#x44f;&#x44e;&#x442; &#x441;&#x444;&#x43e;&#x440;&#x43c;&#x443;&#x43b;&#x438;&#x440;&#x43e;&#x432;&#x430;&#x442;&#x44c; &#x446;&#x435;&#x43b;&#x44b;&#x439; &#x440;&#x44f;&#x434; &#x43f;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x430;&#x437;&#x430;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x439; &#x43a; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x438;&#x43c;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x435;&#x43d;&#x438;&#x44e; &#x43f;&#x440;&#x435;&#x43f;&#x430;&#x440;&#x430;&#x442;&#x430; &#x422;&#x430;&#x445;&#x43e;&#x43a;&#x43e;&#x43c;&#x431; &#x432; &#x441;&#x435;&#x440;&#x434;&#x435;&#x447;&#x43d;&#x43e;-&#x441;&#x43e;&#x441;&#x443;&#x434;&#x438;&#x441;&#x442;&#x43e;&#x439; &#x445;&#x438;&#x440;&#x443;&#x440;&#x433;&#x438;&#x438;.

### PMID 31695521 (2019) — Orthopedic research and reviews
TITLE: Spinal Aneurysmal Bone Cysts (ABCs): Optimal Management.
DOI: 10.2147/ORR.S211834 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: AIM: To review the published literature on the treatment of aneurysmal bone cysts (ABCs).
METHOD: A systematic review of the English literature to April 2019 for all articles, with a minimum of three patients and 2-year follow-up, reporting on the treatment of spinal ABCs. The various treatment options were compared for the rates of recurrence, complications and mortality.
RESULTS: Twenty-one articles and 272 patients (mean age 16.9 years, range 3-67) were included in this review. The overall recurrence rate for ABCs following all treatments is 12.8%. This is highest in those lesions described as being treated with isolated surgiflo injection into the lesion (100%), decompression/laminectomy (42.3%), partial excision/resection (35.7%) and curettage alone (25.0%). Radiotherapy alone or in conjunction with operative intervention offers excellent cure rates. Adjuncts to operative intervention, including cryotherapy or phenol reduce the recurrence rates, whereas embolization does not. The most common complications are persistent neurological deficits, spinal deformity, and continued pain. The overall mortality rates are low (1.5%). The reoperation rates are higher in surgical than non-surgical treatments and most are performed for progressive deformity.
DISCUSSION: ABCs are highly radiosensitive. However, with the unknown longer-term risk of radiotherapy, surgical treatments, ideally with complete resection, and the use of adjunctive therapies such as cryotherapy or phenol, offer the best chance of cure. SAE is a useful adjunct to reduce intraoperative bleeding, but this study suggests that it only modestly improves recurrence rates. Newer techniques including bisphosphonate and doxycycline administration offer potential benefits, but their efficacy requires further investigation.

### PMID 31401022 (2019) — Digestive and liver disease : official journal of the Italian Society of Gastroenterology and the Italian Association for the Study of the Liver
TITLE: Efficacy of hemostatic powders in upper gastrointestinal bleeding: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.dld.2019.07.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: There is limited evidence on the efficacy of hemostatic powders in the management of upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
AIMS: Provide a pooled estimate of the efficacy and safety profile of hemostatic powders in digestive endoscopy.
METHODS: A computerized bibliographic search on the main databases was performed through December 2018. Pooled effects were calculated using a random-effects model. The primary outcome was immediate hemostasis rate. Secondary outcomes were rebleeding rate (either at 7 and 30 days), bleeding-related mortality, and all-cause mortality rate.
RESULTS: A total of 24 studies, of which three were randomized-controlled trials, with 1063 patients were included in the meta-analysis. Immediate hemostasis was achieved in 95.3% (93.3%-97.3%) of patients, with no difference based on treatment strategy, hemostatic agent used, bleeding etiology. Success rate was slightly lower in spurting bleeding (91.9%). Hemostatic powders showed similar efficacy as compared to conventional endoscopic therapy (odds ratio: 0.84, 0.06-11.47; p&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.9). Thirty-day rebleeding rate was 16.9% (9.8%-24%) with no difference in comparison to other endoscopic treatments (odds ratio 1.59, 0.35-7.21; p&#x202f;=&#x202f;0.55). All-cause and bleeding-related mortality rates were 7.6% (4%-10.8%) and 1.4% (0.5%-2.4%), respectively.
CONCLUSION: Novel hemostatic powders represent a user-friendly and effective tool in the management of upper gastrointestinal bleeding.

### PMID 31694845 (2019) — BMJ open
TITLE: Cost-effectiveness of point-of-care viscoelastic haemostatic assays in the management of bleeding during cardiac surgery: protocol for a prospective multicentre pragmatic study with stepped-wedge cluster randomised controlled design and 1-year follow-up (the IMOTEC study).
DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-029751 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D000078325">Clinical Trial Protocol, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: During cardiac surgery-associated bleeding, the early detection of coagulopathy is crucial. However, owing to time constraints or lack of suitable laboratory tests, transfusion of haemostatic products is often inappropriately triggered, either too late (exposing to prolonged bleeding and thus to avoidable administration of blood products) or blindly to the coagulation status (exposing to unnecessary haemostatic products administration in patients with no coagulopathy). Undue exposition to transfusion risks and additional healthcare costs may arise. With the perspective of secondary care-related costs, the IMOTEC study (Int&#xe9;r&#xea;t M&#xe9;dicO-&#xe9;conomique de la Thrombo-Elastographie, dans le management transfusionnel des h&#xe9;morragies p&#xe9;ri-op&#xe9;ratoires de chirurgies Cardiaques sous circulation extracorporelle) aims at assessing the cost-effectiveness of a point-of-care viscoelastic haemostatic assay (VHA: RoTem or TEG)-guided management of bleeding. Among several outcome measures, particular emphasis will be put on quality of life with a 1-year follow-up.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This is a multicentre, prospective, pragmatic study with stepped-wedge cluster randomised controlled design. Over a 36-month period (24 months of enrolment and 12 months of follow-up), 1000 adult patients undergoing cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass will be included if a periprocedural significant bleeding occurs. The primary outcome is the cost-effectiveness of a VHA-guided algorithm over a 1-year follow-up, including patients' quality of life. Secondary outcomes are the cost-effectiveness of the VHA-guided algorithm with regard to the rate of surgical reexploration and 1-year mortality, its cost per-patient, its effectiveness with regard to haemorrhagic, infectious, renal, neurological, cardiac, circulatory, thrombotic, embolic complications, transfusion requirements, mechanical ventilation free-days, duration of intensive care unit and in-hospital stay and mortality.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study was registered at Clinicaltrials.gov and was approved by the Committee for the Protection of Persons of Nantes University Hospital, The French Advisory Board on Medical Research Data Processing and the French Personal Data Protection Authority. A publication of the results in a peer-reviewed journal is planned.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT02972684; Pre-results.

### PMID 31586574 (2019) — Neuro-Chirurgie
TITLE: Reducing blood loss in pediatric craniosynostosis surgery by use of tranexamic acid.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuchi.2019.09.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Craniosysnostosis surgical corrections are routine procedures in the pediatric neurosurgical field. However, these procedures result in significant blood loss. Tranexamic acid (TXA) is an antifibrinolytic drug, which has demonstrated a significant reduction in perioperative blood loss in many pediatric surgical procedures such as cardiac surgery and scoliosis surgery. We conducted a systematic review to evaluate protocols of TXA use in pediatric craniosynostosis procedures and its effect on intraoperative blood loss and transfusions.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A comprehensive literature review of the National Library of Medicine (PubMed) database was performed to identify relevant studies. We included any clinical study reporting on blood loss or blood transfusion for pediatric craniosynostosis surgery with intraoperative use of tranexamic acid, with the following limits: publication date from inception to May 2019; reports in English.
RESULTS: Thirteen studies were eligible for our review. Of the 13 studies, 4 were prospective, randomised, double-blind controlled trials, 9 were retrospective studies, tailored as a "before-after" studies, comparing blood loss and transfusion without/with TXA. TXA significantly decreases the number and volume of packed red blood cell transfusions and the rate of transfusion in children undergoing craniosynostosis surgery. Significantly fewer fresh frozen plasma transfusions were required in the TXA groups in 2 randomised studies. Length of stay in hospital was significantly lower with the use of TXA in three studies. Advantages of TXA administration also include an excellent patient tolerance of side effects, ease of administration and low cost.
CONCLUSION: TXA significantly reduces blood loss and the need for transfusions in children undergoing craniosynostosis surgery. TXA administration should be a routine part of strategy to reduce blood loss and limit transfusions in these procedures.

### PMID 30496905 (2019) — Annals of vascular surgery
TITLE: Intentional Targeted False Lumen Occlusion after Aortic Dissection: A Systematic Review of the Literature.
DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2018.08.086 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Residual patent false lumen (FL) after chronic type B aortic dissection (cTBAD) or type A aortic dissection (TAAD) treatment is independently associated with poor long-term outcomes. The aim of our study was to present endovascular techniques and the existing experience with targeted FL thrombosis after cTBAD or TAAD treatment.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A systematic review was performed (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses) searching in MEDLINE, CENTRAL, and Cochrane databases for studies reporting on targeted FL occlusion after cTBAD or TAAD treatment.
RESULTS: One hundred one patients either after open repair of a TAAD (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;40; 3 case reports and 3 retrospective studies) or after cTBAD (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;61; 13 case reports and 6 retrospective studies) underwent an endovascular procedure for intentional FL occlusion (2 studies reported on both procedures). Among TAAD patients, 27 of 40 (68%) had previous open repair, whereas 48 of 61 (79%) with cTBAD had a previous endovascular repair. Thirty-one (78%) patients with TAAD and fifty-one (83%) with cTBAD were treated electively. Four main techniques were used: (1) the candy-plug (19/101), (2) the knickerbocker (3/91), (3) the "cork in the bottle neck" technique (2/101), and (4) FL embolization with combined use of coils, onyx, plugs, and glue (77/101). The technical success rate was 100%, with a 30-day mortality rate of 2.5% (1/40) in TAAD and 0% in cTBAD patients. During follow-up (ranging: 2 to 63&#xa0;months), the mortality rate was 0% (0/31) and 7.1% (4/61) in TAAD and cTBAD patients, respectively. The FL remained completely thrombosed in 78% (31/40) of TAAD and 62% (38/61) of cTBAD patients, whereas it was partially thrombosed in 3 and 2 patients, respectively (no report for 22 patients).
CONCLUSIONS: Intentional FL occlusion seems to be a feasible less invasive approach after cTBAD or TAAD treatment, which is not broadly used. Future larger studies with longer follow-up duration may demonstrate the apparent benefit in terms of aortic remodeling or stabilization of the disease progression.

### PMID 29289627 (2018) — Journal of minimally invasive gynecology
TITLE: Management, Prevention, and Sequelae of Adhesions in Women Undergoing Laparoscopic Gynecologic Surgery: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2017.12.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: Surgical adhesions can lead to significant consequences including abdominopelvic pain, bowel obstruction, subfertility, and subsequent surgery. Although laparoscopic surgery is associated with a decreased risk of adhesion formation, methods to further decrease adhesions are warranted. We systematically reviewed literature addressing the management, prevention, and sequelae of adhesions in women undergoing laparoscopic gynecologic surgery. We searched PubMed, EMBASE, EBSCOhost, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and found 6566 records. The primary outcome was adhesion formation. The secondary outcomes were abdominopelvic pain, quality of life, subfertility, pregnancy, bowel obstruction, urinary symptoms, and subsequent surgery. After applying inclusion and exclusion criteria, 52 studies remained for qualitative synthesis. Risk of bias assessments were applied independently by 2 authors. There was evidence that Hyalobarrier Gel (Anika Therapeutics, Bedford, MA), HyaRegen NCH Gel (Bilar Medikal, Istanbul, Turkey), Oxiplex/AP Gel (Fziomed, Inc., San Luis Obispo, CA), SprayGel (Confluent Surgical Inc., Waltham, MA), and Beriplast (CSL Behring, LLCm King of Prussia, PA) all decrease the incidence of adhesions. Adept (Baxter, Deerfield, IL) significantly decreased de novo adhesion scores of the posterior uterus. Using an integrated treatment approach to pelvic pain significantly improved pain and quality of life compared with standard laparoscopic treatment. Lastly, Hyalobarrier Gel Endo (Anika Therapeutics, Bedford, MA) placement led to a higher pregnancy rate than no barrier usage. Our findings underscore the need for high-quality trials to evaluate the efficacy of surgical techniques, adhesion barriers, and other treatment modalities on the management and prevention of adhesions and their clinical sequelae. This review was registered on PROSPERO (ID&#x2009;=&#x2009;CRD42017068053).

### PMID 30001669 (2018) — Hospital practice (1995)
TITLE: Cost comparison of fibrin sealant versus tack screws for mesh fixation in laparoscopic repair of inguinal hernia.
DOI: 10.1080/21548331.2018.1500369 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Inguinal hernias of the abdominal wall are common accounting for 75% of all hernia defects. They can be treated with laparoscopic surgery using a transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) approach. However, in surgery there is some contention on how to conclude the hernia repair, as there are alternatives of using fibrin sealant (FS) or tack screws for fixation of a mesh implant over the defect in the abdominal wall. In this study, we evaluate the economic consequences of using FS vs. tacks for mesh fixation in TAPP inguinal hernia repair for the UK from a hospital perspective.
METHODS: The model was populated with clinical inputs (theater time, hospitalization days, occurrence of seroma, and neuralgia) from a previously conducted study comparing FS and tack screws in patients who had undergone TAPP hernia repair, and cost inputs from official government sources. One-way sensitivity analyses were also conducted to evaluate key drivers of cost analyses.
RESULTS: The average cost per case treated with FS 2&#xa0;mL Tisseel&#xae; and tack screws (ProTackTM) was &#xa3;1,098 and &#xa3;1,348, respectively, for resource expenses paid by the healthcare system. This would suggest a potential savings achieved of &#xa3;249 per surgery using FS for mesh fixation. The sensitivity analysis showed that the key drivers for the cost difference were a variation in time to complete the surgery, followed by hospitalization days, and lower adverse outcomes such as seroma and neuralgia in the two cohorts.
CONCLUSION: Using FS resulted in cost savings in hospitals based on reduced time to complete surgery, hospitalization time post-op, and lower adverse outcomes. Indirect cost savings were also found in favor of FS when comparing the two alternatives from a societal perspective, as patients were able to return to work more promptly in the FS group versus the tack screws group.

### PMID 30119663 (2018) — BMC cancer
TITLE: A multi-center, double blind randomized controlled trial evaluating flap fixation after mastectomy using sutures or tissue glue versus conventional closure: protocol for the Seroma reduction After Mastectomy (SAM) trial.
DOI: 10.1186/s12885-018-4740-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D017429">Clinical Trial, Phase IV, Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Seroma formation is a common complication after mastectomy and is associated with delayed wound healing, infection, skin flap necrosis, patient discomfort and repeated visits to the out patient clinic to deal with seroma and its sequelae. Closing the dead space after mastectomy seems to be key in reducing seroma and its complications. Various methods have been described to reduce the dead space after mastectomy: closed suction drainage, quilting of the skin flaps and application of adhesive tissue glues. The aim of this trial is to compare seroma formation and its sequelae in the various methods of flap fixation.
METHODS: This is a multicenter, double-blind, randomized controlled trial in female breast cancer patients undergoing mastectomy, with or without axillary clearance. Exclusion criteria consist of breast conserving therapy, direct breast reconstruction and incapacity to comprehend implications and extent of study and unable to sign for informed consent. A total of 336 patients will be randomized. Patients will be randomly allocated to one of three treatment arms consisting of flap fixation using ARTISS tissue glue with a low suction drain, flap fixation using sutures and a low suction drain or conventional wound closure (without flap fixation) and low suction drainage. Follow up will be conducted up to twelve months post surgery. The primary outcome is the number of seroma aspirations and secondary outcomes consist of number of out patient clinic visits, surgical skin infection rate, shoulder function, cosmesis, health-related quality of life and costs and cost-effectiveness (cost/QALY).
DISCUSSION: This is the first study of its kind to evaluate the effect of flap fixation and its sequelae (ie seroma aspirations, number of out patient clinic visits, infection, shoulder function, patient assessed cosmesis, quality of life and cost-effectiveness) in a double blind randomized controlled trial.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial was approved by the hospitals' joint medical ethical committee (14-T-21, 2 June 2014). The SAM Trial is registered in ClinicalTrials.gov since October 2017, Identifier: NCT03305757 .

### PMID 29986148 (2018) — Hospital practice (1995)
TITLE: Floseal only versus in combination in spine surgery: a comparative, retrospective hospital database evaluation of clinical and healthcare resource outcomes.
DOI: 10.1080/21548331.2018.1498279 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Flowable agents such as Floseal&#xae; (F) are often reserved as adjuncts to non-flowable agents (i.e. gelatin (G) sponges and thrombin (T)) when bleeding is not sufficiently controlled. Based on their perceived positive impact, it is postulated that flowable agents alone may result in better clinical and resource utilization outcomes. Clinical and health-care utilization outcomes were compared in this retrospective analysis of spine surgery cases with charges for Floseal only (FO) and F&#xa0;+&#xa0;G/T.
METHODS: The United States Premier Hospital Database was searched for adult spine surgeries performed between October 2010 and September 2015 with FO or F and G/T charges. To obtain an unbiased treatment estimate, 1:1 propensity-score matching was used to identify FO and F&#xa0;+&#xa0;G/T cohorts. The cohorts were compared for rates of intraoperative, perioperative, postoperative and transfusion; blood loss-related, serious and other complications; hospital length-of-stay (LOS), surgical time, and volume of hemostat charged.
RESULTS: Among 40,335 spine surgeries, 15,105&#xa0;FO and F&#xa0;+&#xa0;G/T matched pairs were compared. Significantly (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.0001) lower percentages of FO than F&#xa0;+&#xa0;G/T cases received intraoperative (1.4% vs. 2.5%), perioperative (1.6% vs. 2.8%), postoperative (1.6% vs 3.0%), and any transfusion (2.3% vs. 4.3%). FO cases had significantly less blood loss complications than F&#xa0;+&#xa0;G/T cases (0.5% vs. 0.8%, p&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.0022) and significantly (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.0001) shorter hospital LOS (-0.45&#xa0;days), surgical time (-39.0&#xa0;min), and used less hemostat (-12.5&#xa0;mL).
CONCLUSIONS: Results from this observational hospital database analyses indicate that FO use in spine surgery is associated with lower blood transfusion use and blood loss complications compared to its use with adjunct non-flowable hemostatic agents. The shorter hospital stay, reduced surgical time, and less hemostat volume health-care utilization outcomes that favored FO versus combination use may translate to health system cost savings. Further validation of these findings using controlled clinical trials and cost-consequence studies is warranted.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The use of flowable hemostatic agents alone may result in better clinical and possibly economic outcomes in spine surgery.

### PMID 29314035 (2018) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Economic evaluation of floseal compared to nasal packing for the management of anterior epistaxis.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.27081 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: To evaluate the cost-effectiveness of Floseal, a topically applied hemostatic agent, and nasal packing for the management of epistaxis in Canada.
STUDY DESIGN: Outcomes research, a cost-utility analysis.
METHODS: We developed a Markov model to compare the costs and health outcomes of Floseal with nasal packing over a lifetime horizon from the perspective of a publicly funded healthcare system. A cycle length of 1 year was used. Efficacy of Floseal and packing was sought from the published literature. Unit costs were gathered from a hospital case costing system, whereas physician fees were extracted from the Ontario Schedule of Benefits for Physician Services. Results were expressed as an incremental cost per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) gained. A series of one-way sensitivity and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were performed.
RESULTS: From the perspective of a publicly funded health are system, the Floseal treatment strategy was associated with higher costs ($2,067) and greater QALYs (0.27) than nasal packing. Our findings were highly sensitive to discount rates, the cost of Floseal, and the cost of nasal packing. The probabilistic sensitivity analysis suggested that the probability that Floseal treatment is cost-effective reached 99% if the willingness-to-pay threshold was greater than $120,000 per QALY gained.
CONCLUSIONS: Prior studies have demonstrated Floseal to be an effective treatment for anterior epistaxis. In the Canadian healthcare system, Floseal treatment appears to be a cost-effective treatment option compared to nasal packing for anterior epistaxis.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 2c Laryngoscope, 1778-1782, 2018.

### PMID 29310703 (2018) — Journal of otolaryngology - head &amp; neck surgery = Le Journal d'oto-rhino-laryngologie et de chirurgie cervico-faciale
TITLE: Management of Persistent Epistaxis Using Floseal Hemostatic Matrix vs. traditional nasal packing: a prospective randomized control trial.
DOI: 10.1186/s40463-017-0248-5 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Epistaxis is the most common emergent consultation to otolaryngology-head &amp; neck surgery (OHNS) and with 60% of the population having experienced an episode and 1.6 in 10,000 requiring hospitalization in their lifetime. In preliminary studies Floseal&#xae; (Baxter, USA) Hemostatic Matrix has shown efficacy in up to 80% of persistent anterior epistaxis. We sought to evaluate the clinical efficacy and cost-effectiveness of Floseal&#xae; (Baxter, USA) compared to traditional nasal packing for persistent epistaxis.
METHODS: A prospective, randomized controlled trial was conducted on all adult patients consulted to the OHNS service at the tertiary referral centers of the University of Alberta Hospital and Royal Alexandra Hospital for persistent epistaxis. Patients were randomized to the Floseal&#xae; (Baxter, USA) or traditional packing study arms. Our main clinical outcome measures were: 1) Hemostasis directly following treatment and at 48&#xa0;h post-treatment, and 2) self-reported patient comfort at 48&#xa0;h post-treatment. Further, trial data was used for a formal cost-effectiveness analysis to determine incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER). Univariate sensitivity analysis and uncertainty analysis were performed.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between groups for initial hemostasis (76.9% vs. 84.6%, p&#xa0;=&#x2009;1.000) or, hemostasis at 48&#xa0;h (76.9% vs. 69.2%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;1.000), requirement for admission (15.4% vs. 46.1%, p&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.2016) or 30-day re-presentation rates (15.4% vs. 46.1%, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.2016). Floseal&#xae; (Baxter, USA) was superior for decreased pain during placement (2.42 vs. 7.77, p&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.0022), treatment (0.50 vs. 4.46, p&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.0007) and removal (0 vs. 3.85, p&#xa0;=&#x2009;0.0021). Floseal&#xae; (Baxter, USA) provides an average $1567.61 per patient savings from the single-payer system point of view and has an ICER of - $11,891 per re-bleed prevented (95% CI: -$37,658 to +$473). Uncertainty analysis shows that Floseal&#xae; has &gt;90% chance of not only being cost-effective, but the dominant (preferred) treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Floseal&#xae; (Baxter, USA) was demonstrated to be an effective, comfortable and cost-effective alternative treatment of persistent epistaxis when compared to traditional packing methods for patients referred to OHNS with a normal coagulation profile.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Trial registration number: NCT02488135 . Date registered: June 26, 2015.

### PMID 29096598 (2018) — Journal of medical economics
TITLE: Cost-effectiveness analysis of a sealing hemostat patch (HEMOPATCH) vs standard of care in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2017.1400977 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A recent randomized controlled trial showed that patients undergoing ascending aorta surgery treated with HEMOPATCH to control bleeding had a significantly better hemostasis success rate than with dry or wet gauze compression or similar standard of care (SOC).
OBJECTIVE: To compare the cost-effectiveness using two different agents for hemostasis (HEMOPATCH vs dry or wet gauze compression or similar SOC) in cardiac surgery from the European hospital perspective.
METHODS: A literature-based cost-effectiveness model estimating average cost per successful hemostasis event was developed based on the hemostasis efficacy difference (HEMOPATCH&#x2009;=&#x2009;97.6%, SOC&#x2009;=&#x2009;65.8%, p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.001). Additional clinically significant end-points studied in the trial (blood transfusions and surgical revisions) were also analyzed. It was assumed that each surgery utilized two units of HEMOPATCH (dimensions of 4.5&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;9&#x2009;cm) and two units of SOC. Product acquisition costs for HEMOPATCH and SOC were included along with outcome-related costs derived from the literature and inflation-adjusted to 2017 EUR and GBP. Results are presented for an average hospital with an annual case load of 574 cardiac surgeries. One-way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Considering only product acquisition cost, HEMOPATCH had an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of &#x20ac;1,659, &#x20ac;1,519, &#x20ac;1,623, and &#xa3;1,725 per hemostasis success when compared to SOC for Italy, Spain, France, and the UK, respectively. However, when considering the cost and potential difference in the frequency of transfusions and revisions compared to SOC, the use of HEMOPATCH was associated with an annual reduction of six revisions and 60 transfusions, improving the ICER to &#x20ac;1,440, &#x20ac;1,222, &#x20ac;1,461, and &#xa3;1,592, respectively. Sensitivity analysis demonstrated model robustness.
CONCLUSIONS: This analysis supports the use of HEMOPATCH over SOC in cardiac surgery in European hospitals to improve hemostasis success rates and potential cost offsets from reduced transfusions, complications, and surgical revisions.

### PMID 30187219 (2018) — Acta neurochirurgica
TITLE: Intracranial foreign material granulomas after cranial surgery.
DOI: 10.1007/s00701-018-3663-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Various synthetic materials are used in neurosurgery and left in place intentionally during surgery for several purposes such as hemostasis, dural closure, or cranioplasty. Although leaving such substances in surgical sites is considered safe, in general, foreign body granuloma may occur months or years after intracranial surgery. Thus, far relatively little is known about treatment and outcome of such lesions.
METHODS: A systematic review of 3466 histopathological examinations after cranial surgeries achieved over a 13-year period was performed. After excluding patients with Teflon granulomas or infection, a total of 12 patients with foreign body granulomas induced by synthetic material used in a prior surgery were identified. Patient records, imaging studies, and histopathological data were analyzed. Furthermore, postoperative outcome was assessed.
RESULTS: Mean age at the second surgery was 51&#xa0;years (range, 11-68&#xa0;years). The median time between the primary and the secondary surgery was 13&#xa0;months (range, 1-545&#xa0;months). Eight patients (75%) presented with signs and symptoms related to the foreign body granulomas. Total resection of the foreign body granulomas was performed in all patients. The granulomas were induced by oxidized cellulose polymer (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6), suture material (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3), Gelfoam (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1), methylmethacrylate (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1), and bone wax (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;1). The mean postoperative follow-up time was 54&#xa0;months (range 1-137&#xa0;months). There was symptomatic improvement in all instances. Imaging studies did not demonstrate any recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Despite its rarity, foreign body granuloma should be taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis of intracranial mass lesions especially in cases of suspected tumor recurrence after prior surgery. The pathogenesis of foreign body granuloma still needs further clarification. Our study demonstrates that they have good prognosis after surgical removal.

### PMID 30571781 (2018) — PloS one
TITLE: Next generation viscoelasticity assays in cardiothoracic surgery: Feasibility of the TEG6s system.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0209360 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Viscoelastic near-patient assays of global hemostasis have been found useful and cost-effective in perioperative settings. Shortcomings of current systems include substantial laboratory intensity, user-dependent reproducibility, relatively large sample volumes, sensitivity to ambient vibration and limited comparability between techniques and devices. The aim of this study was to assess feasibility of a new, resonance-based viscoelastic whole blood methodology (TEG6s) in cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and to compare the parameters this system produces with the ROTEM delta system and standard coagulation tests.
METHODS: In a prospective evaluation study, twenty-three consecutive cardiac surgery patients underwent hemostasis management according to current guidelines, using the ROTEM delta system and standard coagulation tests. Blood samples were collected prior to CPB before anesthetic induction (pre-CPB), during CPB on rewarming (CPB), and 10 minutes after heparin reversal with protamine (post-CPB). ROTEM and standard coagulation test results were compared with TEG6s parameters, which were concurrently determined using its multi-channel microfluidic cartridge system.
RESULTS: TEG6s provided quantifiable results pre-CPB and post-CPB, but only R (clotting time) of CKH (kaolin with heparinase) was measurable during CPB (full heparinization). Spearman's correlation coefficient (rs) was 0.78 for fibrinogen levels and MA CFF (functional fibrinogen). Correlation of several TEG6s parameters was good (0.77 to 0.91) with MCF FIBTEM, and poor (&lt;0.56) with prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time (&lt;0.44). Rs with platelet count was moderate (0.70, MA CK; 0.73, MA CRT). Accuracy of MA CFF for detection of fibrinogen deficiency &lt; 1.5 g/L was high (ROC-AUC 0.93).
CONCLUSIONS: The TEG6s system, which is based on resonance viscoelastic methodology, appears to be feasible for POC hemostasis assessment in cardiac surgery. Its correlations with standard coagulation parameters are quite similar to those of ROTEM and there is good diagnostic accuracy for fibrinogen levels lower than 1.5 g/L. During full heparinization, TEG6s testing is limited to R measurement. Larger studies are needed to assess superiority over other POC systems.

### PMID 29863608 (2018) — Anesthesia and analgesia
TITLE: Fibrinogen Concentrate in Cardiovascular Surgery: A Meta-analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.
DOI: 10.1213/ANE.0000000000003508 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Postoperative bleeding remains a frequent complication after cardiovascular surgery and may contribute to serious morbidity and mortality. Observational studies have suggested a relationship between low endogenous plasma fibrinogen concentration and increased risk of postoperative blood loss in cardiac surgery. Although the transfusion of fibrinogen concentrate has been increasing, potential benefits and risks associated with perioperative fibrinogen supplementation in cardiovascular surgery are not fully understood.
METHODS: PubMed, Cochrane Library, Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, Web of Science, and China National Knowledge Infrastructure were searched on January 15, 2017, with automated updates searched until February 15, 2018, to identify all randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of fibrinogen concentrate, whether for prophylaxis or treatment of bleeding, in adults undergoing cardiovascular surgery. All RCTs comparing fibrinogen infusion versus any other comparator (placebo/standard of care or another active comparator) in adult cardiovascular surgery and reporting at least 1 predefined clinical outcome were included. The random-effects model was used to calculate risk ratios and weighted mean differences (95% confidence interval [CI]) for dichotomous and continuous variables, respectively. Subgroup analyses by fibrinogen dose and by baseline risk for bleeding were preplanned.
RESULTS: A total of 8 RCTs of fibrinogen concentrate in adults (n = 597) of mixed risk or high risk undergoing cardiovascular surgery were included. Compared to placebo or inactive control, perioperative fibrinogen concentrate did not significantly impact risk of all-cause mortality (risk ratio, 0.41; 95% CI, 0.12-1.38; I = 10%; P = .15). Fibrinogen significantly reduced incidence of allogeneic red blood cell transfusion (risk ratio, 0.64; 95% CI, 0.49-0.83; I = 0%; P = .001). No significant differences were found for other clinical outcomes. Subgroup analyses were unremarkable when analyzed according to fibrinogen dose, time of infusion initiation, mean cardiopulmonary bypass time, and rotational thromboelastometry/fibrinogen temogram use (all P values for subgroup interaction were nonsignificant).
CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence remains insufficient to support or refute routine perioperative administration of fibrinogen concentrate in patients undergoing cardiovascular surgery. Fibrinogen concentrate may reduce the need for additional allogeneic blood product transfusion in cardiovascular surgery patients at high risk or with evidence of bleeding. However, no definitive advantage was found for reduction in risk of mortality or other clinically relevant outcomes. The small number of clinical events within existing randomized trials suggests that further well-designed studies of adequate power and duration to measure all-cause mortality, stroke, myocardial infarction, reoperation, and thromboembolic events should be conducted. Future studies should also address cost-effectiveness relative to standard of care.

### PMID 29512618 (2018) — Turk Kardiyoloji Dernegi arsivi : Turk Kardiyoloji Derneginin yayin organidir
TITLE: The hemostatic power of fat: An effective, inexpensive, and biocompatible method to achieve hemostasis in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.5543/tkda.2017.89803 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Postoperative bleeding with its important socioeconomic cost is associated with an increased morbidity and mortality. It causes hemodynamic instability, increases blood loss, and multiplies the number of transfusions required. Especially in vascular or aortic surgery, postoperative bleeding can become a life-threatening complication due to anticoagulant or antiaggregation preoperative status or postoperative coagulation dysfunction after a high level of heparinization. Presently described is the case of a patient who underwent an aortic valve and ascending aorta replacement. A simple but effective method to achieve hemostasis, designed particularly for aortic surgery and the use of Dacron grafts, is presented. No residual adherence or contraindications exist, and it can potentially be applied to any kind of surgical process. This method offers a cheap, biocompatible, and highly effective means to achieve complete hemostasis without the use of extra sutures, or expensive synthetic or allogeneic hemostatic agents or sealants.

### PMID 32082789 (2018) — Turk gogus kalp damar cerrahisi dergisi
TITLE: Minimally invasive management of esophageal perforation.
DOI: 10.5606/tgkdc.dergisi.2018.15354 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Esophageal perforation is a medical emergency associated with high morbidity and mortality. There is no consensus on the optimal treatment of this life-threatening condition. Conventional treatment of esophageal perforation is surgical. However, more recently, endoscopic treatment has become the treatment of choice given its less invasive nature compared to surgical treatment. This includes endoscopic clip administration, endoscopic stent placement, endoscopic suturing, endoscopic vacuum therapy and tissue sealants which are all administered via the endoluminal route. Whilst small defects (&lt;2 cm) may be closed with endoscopic clips, larger defects require stent placement or suturing. Removable esophageal stent is an effective method of treatment in cases with esophageal perforation as they allow minimal invasive repair of perforation and rapid nutrition. Endoscopic suturing can be used both to fix the stent to prevent migration and to primarily close the perforation. If perforation is associated with a mediastinal collection, drainage is mandatory and this procedure can be performed by computed tomography guided percutaneous drainage, thoracoscopy or endoscopic vacuum therapy. In some cases, a combination of these minimally invasive methods is required. Since endoscopic methods provide better quality of life and outcomes and shorten length of hospitalization, such methods have become the treatment of choice for esophageal perforation.

### PMID 30662251 (2018) — JSLS : Journal of the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons
TITLE: Systematic Review of Topical Hemostatic Agent Use in Minimally Invasive Gynecologic Surgery.
DOI: 10.4293/JSLS.2018.00070 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: To perform a systematic review of articles evaluating hemostatic effectiveness and peri-operative outcomes when topical hemostatic agents (HA) are used in minimally invasive gynecologic surgeries (MIGS) for benign conditions.
METHODS: Studies published through March 31, 2017 were retrieved through PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane, and ClinicalTrials.gov to identify all eligible studies. No studies were excluded based on publish date. All comparative studies or case series with &gt;10 participants reporting use of at least one topical HA in MIGS for benign conditions were included as long as full-text articles were available and written in English. Studies were excluded if surgery was done for malignancy or completed via an open approach. Articles that included multiple surgical subspecialties were excluded if data related to MIGS was unable to be isolated. Evaluation for eligibility and data extraction was performed by three independent reviewers. Quality of evidence was also assessed by each reviewer.
RESULTS: From 132 articles, a total of 8 studies were included in this systematic review. We found that use of fibrin sealant decreased time to hemostasis, postoperative hemoglobin drop, and estimated blood loss (EBL) compared with bipolar energy and reduced the overall operative time in laparoscopic myomectomy. When fibrin sealant use at time of myomectomy was compared to bipolar energy there was no significant difference in the rate of postoperative complications. Furthermore, there was less of a decrease in anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) level when a thrombin-gelatin matrix was used compared to bipolar energy on ovarian tissue.
CONCLUSION: Application of topical HA in MIGS can reduce operative time, blood loss, and ameliorate damage to ovarian function. However, more data needs to be gathered for use of HA during different types of gynecologic procedures (adnexal surgery, myomectomy, and hysterectomy) to provide better quality evidence to guide their use.

### PMID 29854573 (2018) — Cureus
TITLE: Efficacy of Hemocoagulase as a Topical Hemostatic Agent After Dental Extractions: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.2398 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Extraction is one of the more common oral surgical procedures carried out in routine dental practice, and postextraction bleeding is a recognized, frequently encountered complication. It causes distress, agony, and discomfort to the patient. The aim of this systematic review was to analyze the existing literature and determine the efficacy of topical hemocoagulase as a hemostatic agent and its ability to reduce postoperative complications in comparison to routine saline pressure pack after the extraction of teeth. Information was collected from an electronic database (PubMed), and a manual search was also done in Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology, Oral Radiology; International Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery; and the British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. Only those articles which met the inclusion criteria were selected. All studies and articles that compared topical hemocoagulase with saline pressure pack in patients requiring extraction of teeth were selected for review. Literature abstracts and full-text articles were analysed in this review. A total of four articles were included in this systematic review. All were randomized clinical trials that evaluated the clinical outcomes of topical hemocoagulase compared with saline pressure packs in extraction socket sites. A significant difference was present between the hemocoagulase group and control group (saline pressure pack) in relation to bleeding stoppage time, pain, swelling, wound healing, and other postoperative complications. Topical hemocoagulase is significantly effective in reducing bleeding, pain, and swelling after extraction of tooth when compared to saline pressure packs. It also acts as a promoter of wound healing.

### PMID 28449464 (2017) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: The role of BioGlue in thoracic surgery: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2017.02.57 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: BioGlue is a commonly used sealant in thoracic surgery. Prolonged air leak and presence of bronchopleural fistulae (BPF) are often encountered in clinical practice. We therefore, investigated the role and the efficacy of BioGlue in these scenarios.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted by searching Medline [1966-2016] and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) [1999-2016] along with reference lists of the included studies. Included studies reported on thoracic surgery operations and use of BioGlue in thoracic surgical procedures, whereas excluded studies met at least one of the following criteria: non-English language studies, non-human population, studies on surgical specialties other than Thoracic surgery, reviews and meta-analyses and sealants other than BioGlue.
RESULTS: Twelve studies with a total number of 194 patients were included. Amongst them, 178 were treated for alveolar air leaks (AAL), 14 for BPF and 2 for lymphatic leaks. BioGlue was utilized at the time of initial operation in 172 (96.7%) patients for AAL, while at secondary intervention in 13 (92.9%) for BPF and 1 (50%) for lymphatic leak. In terms of AAL, only 2 out of 4 studies showed statistically significant reduction in duration of air leak, duration of intercostal drainage and length of stay (LOS) when BioGlue was applied. No complications were encountered after using BioGlue in sealing BPF, apart from the re-application of BioGlue in 3 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Although BioGlue has been shown to be efficient in treating AAL, it should be used with caution against BPF, despite encouraging preliminary results. Potential adverse effects must always be taken into consideration. Future randomized controlled trials are warranted in an attempt to establish its benefit in current clinical practice.

### PMID 29312730 (2017) — Journal of thoracic disease
TITLE: Cost-effectiveness analysis of sealant impact in management of moderate intraoperative alveolar air leaks during video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery lobectomy: a multicentre randomised controlled trial.
DOI: 10.21037/jtd.2017.11.109 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intraoperative alveolar air leak (IOAAL) is one of most common complications after video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) lobectomy. The study aimed to evaluate if, in moderate IOAAL, intraoperative polymeric biodegradable sealant (ProgelTM) reduced postoperative air leak (PAL) and consequently was cost-effective.
METHODS: Patients with moderate IOAAL were randomised in a multicentre trial to intraoperative use of a sealant (Sealant group) or standard management of air leaks (Control group). Primary endpoint was the postoperative duration of air leakage. Secondary outcomes included: time to drainage removal, length of hospital stay, postoperative complications within 2 months, and cost analysis.
RESULTS: Between January 2015 and January 2017, 255 VATS lobectomies were performed in four centres. Fifty-five met inclusion criteria and were randomly assigned to Sealant group [28] and Control group [27]. The mean air leakage duration was statistically different between groups (Sealant group =1.60 days, Control group =5.04 days; P&lt;0.001). The average length of drainage was significantly (P=0.008) shorter in Sealant group (4.1 days) than in Controls (6.74 days). The mean time of hospital stay was statistically shorter in sealant group (Sealant =5.75 days, Control =7.85 days; P=0.026). Sealant group observed a statistically significant reduction of costs.
CONCLUSIONS: In moderate IOAAL after VATS lobectomy, polymeric biodegradable sealants are safe and efficient. Compared with standard treatments, sealant significantly reduces PAL, time to drain removal and length of hospital stay resulting in significant costs benefits.

### PMID 29302455 (2017) — Journal of visualized surgery
TITLE: Can a standardised Ventilation Mechanical Test for quantitative intraoperative air leak grading reduce the length of hospital stay after video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery lobectomy?
DOI: 10.21037/jovs.2017.11.02 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: We standardised a Ventilation Mechanical Test (VMT) after video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) lobectomy that classifies intraoperative alveolar air leaks (IOAALs) in mild, moderate and severe. We assumed that mild IOAALs (&lt;100 mL/min) are self-limiting, whereas severe IOAALs (&gt;400 mL/min) must be treated. An IOAAL between 100 and 400 mL/min was defined moderate and constituted the study population of a prospective multicentre randomised trial on the use of a polymeric biodegradable sealant (ProgelTM Pleural Air Leak Sealant, Bard Davol, USA) in case of moderate IOAAL compared with no treatment. We assumed that the standardised VMT allows to accurately selected patients needing treatment, thus limiting unnecessary sealant use. We analysed data of the randomised trial to assess the cost-effectiveness of Progel treatment in VMT selected patients. This is a multicenter randomised controlled trial. Patients with moderate IOAAL were randomised to Progel (group A) or "no treatment" (group B).The primary efficacy endpoint of the study was the postoperative duration of air leakage. The secondary outcome measures included: mean time to chest drain removal, mean length of hospitalisation, the percentage of postoperative complications occurring within two months, and cost of treatment. Between January 2015 and January 2017, 255 VATS lobectomies were performed in 4 centres, 55 met the inclusion criteria, and they were randomly assigned to 2 different groups (28 in the Progel and 27 in the control group). The mean air leakage duration was statistically different between the two groups: in the group A was 1.60 vs. 5.04 days in group B (P&lt;0.001). The average duration of chest drainage was statistically shorter in group A than in the control group (4.1 vs. 6.74 days; P=0.008). The mean time to hospital discharge was also statistically shorter in group A than in group B (5.75 vs. 7.85 days, P=0.026). In the Progel group, a statistically significant reduction of hospitalisation costs compared with the control group was observed (Progel group =12,905&#x20a4;, Control group =39,690&#x20a4;; P&lt;0.001). Our standardised VMT helps in reducing the length of hospital stay after VATS lobectomy because in case of IOAALs between 100 and 400 mL/min the use of ProgelTM significantly reduces postoperative air leak, time to drain removal and length of hospitalisation compared with no treatment. This shorter hospital stays results in significant cost saving benefits. Selection of patients with standardised VMT is essential to limit unnecessary intraoperative sealant treatments, thus contributing to limit the costs.

### PMID 28320573 (2017) — Journal of cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Bleeding-Related Complications and Readmission Rates Associated With Fibrin Sealant Use in Patients Undergoing Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery in the United States.
DOI: 10.1053/j.jvca.2016.11.015 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To compare the clinical and economic outcomes of EVICEL (Ethicon, Inc., Somerville, NJ) and TISSEEL (Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Westlake Village, CA) use in patients undergoing primary coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery.
DESIGN: Retrospective database analysis.
SETTING: Premier prospective hospital database (June 2009 through March 2014) covering approximately 20% of hospital discharges in the United States.
PARTICIPANTS: Adults undergoing primary CABG surgery who received either EVICEL or TISSEEL on the day of surgery (index date).
INTERVENTIONS: Two intervention groups were formed, EVICEL and TISSEEL. Clinical outcomes compared included postoperative bleeding complications (International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification code: 998.1) and number of blood transfusions received on the index day. Economic outcomes compared included hospital length of stay, hospital costs, and 30-day readmission rates. Propensity-score matching was used to control for patient and hospital characteristics.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A total of 129,014 primary CABG surgery patients were identified; 986 patients (mean age: 64 years, 73% male) received EVICEL and 6,340 patients (mean age: 65 years, 75% male) received TISSEEL on the index day. After propensity-score matching, patients who received EVICEL compared with TISSEEL had significantly fewer postoperative bleeding complications (3.0% v 5.0%, p = 0.0197), index-day blood transfusion rates (19% v 34%, p&lt;0.0001), readmission rates (18% v 32%, p&lt;0.0001), and costs ($40,736 [standard deviation $19,465] v $46,005 [standard deviation $24,049], p&lt;0.0001). Results from a sensitivity analysis using a generalized linear model to control for other hemostatic agent use also favored EVICEL over TISSEEL.
CONCLUSION: Results from this real-world retrospective database analysis showed fewer bleeding complications and lower costs in patients undergoing primary CABG surgery who received EVICEL compared with TISSEEL.

### PMID 28640177 (2017) — International journal of gynecological cancer : official journal of the International Gynecological Cancer Society
TITLE: The Efficacy of Fibrin Sealant Patches in Reducing the Incidence of Lymphatic Morbidity After Radical Lymphadenectomy: A Meta-Analysis.
DOI: 10.1097/IGC.0000000000001051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Although pivotal in the oncological management of most tumors, radical lymphadenectomy is associated with a significant number of lymphatic complications. The aim of this meta-analysis is to evaluate the efficacy of fibrinogen sealant patches in reducing lymphadenectomy-related postoperative complications.
METHODS/MATERIALS: The electronic databases PubMed, Medline, and Scopus were searched using the terms "lymphadenectomy" or "lymph node dissection" and "TachoSil," "TachoComb," or "fibrin sealant patch." Series evaluating the efficacy of fibrin-thrombin collagen sealant patches were included in the meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Overall, 26 studies were retrieved through the literature search. Ten studies including 720 patients met selection criteria. The use of fibrin-thrombin sealant patches to the sole scope of reducing lymphadenectomy-related complications significantly reduced the incidence of lymphocele, symptomatic lymphocele, the need of percutaneous drainage procedures, the volume of lymph drained, and the duration of the drainage. No effect on wound and/or lymphocele infection was noted.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis demonstrates that the use of fibrin-thrombin sealant patches significantly reduces the total volume of lymph drained, the duration of the drainage, the incidence of lymphocele and symptomatic lymphocele, and the need for postoperative percutaneous drainage procedures. Its use does not affect the incidence of wound or lymphocele infections.

### PMID 28526037 (2017) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Off-pump sutureless repair for ischemic left ventricular free wall rupture: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-017-0603-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Clinical results of ischemic left ventricular free-wall rupture show high mortality rates.
METHODS: We reviewed studies published after 1993 on PubMed.
RESULTS: A sutureless technique using fibrin glue sheets or patches with/without fibrin glue might contribute to improved clinical results. However, some technique limitations remain for blowout-type ruptures, and the possibility of a pseudoaneurysm formation at the repair site after surgery should be considered.
CONCLUSIONS: The sutureless technique can be a promising strategy for the treatment of ischemic rupture, but serial echocardiographic studies should be mandatory for diagnosing a left ventricular pseudoaneurysm formation thereafter.

### PMID 29280695 (2017) — The Journal of laryngology and otology
TITLE: Intranasal packs and haemostatic agents for the management of adult epistaxis: systematic review.
DOI: 10.1017/S0022215117002055 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The mainstay of management of epistaxis refractory to first aid and cautery is intranasal packing. This review aimed to identify evidence surrounding nasal pack use.
METHOD: A systematic review of the literature was performed using standardised methodology.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven eligible articles were identified relating to non-dissolvable packs and nine to dissolvable packs. Nasal packing appears to be more effective when applied by trained professionals. For non-dissolvable packs, the re-bleed rates for Rapid Rhino and Merocel were similar, but were higher with bismuth iodoform paraffin paste packing. Rapid Rhino packs were the most tolerated non-dissolvable packs. Evidence indicates that 96 per cent of re-bleeding occurs within the first 4 hours after nasal pack removal. Limited evidence suggests that dissolvable packs are effective and well tolerated by patients. There was a lack of evidence relating to: the duration of pack use, the economic effects of pack choice and the appropriate care setting for non-dissolvable packs.
CONCLUSION: Rapid Rhino packs are the best tolerated, with efficacy equivalent to nasal tampons. FloSeal is easy to use, causes less discomfort and may be superior to Merocel in anterior epistaxis cases. There is no strong evidence to support prophylactic antibiotic use.

### PMID 29187216 (2017) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Use of a flowable haemostat versus an oxidised regenerated cellulose agent in primary elective cardiac surgery: economic impact from a UK healthcare perspective.
DOI: 10.1186/s13019-017-0660-y | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Flowable haemostatic agents have been shown to be superior to non-flowable agents in terms of haemostatic control and need for transfusion products in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. We investigated the economic impact of the use of a flowable haemostatic agent (Floseal) compared with non-flowable oxidised regenerated cellulose (ORC) agent in primary elective cardiac surgery from the perspective of the UK National Health Service (NHS).
METHODS: A cost-consequence framework based upon clinical data from a prospective trial and an observational trial and NHS-specific actual reference costs (2016) was developed to compare the economic impact of Floseal with that of ORC. The individual domains of care investigated comprised complications (major and minor) avoided, operating room time savings, surgical revisions for bleeding avoided and transfusions avoided. The cost impact of Floseal versus ORC on ICU days and extended bed days avoided was modelled separately.
RESULTS: Compared with ORC, the use of Floseal would be associated with overall net savings to the NHS of &#xa3;178,283 per 100 cardiac surgery patients who experience intraoperative bleeding requiring haemostatic therapy. Cost savings were apparent in all individual domains of care (complications avoided: &#xa3;83,536; operating room time saved: &#xa3;63,969; surgical revisions avoided: &#xa3;34,038; and blood transfusions avoided: &#xa3;22,317). Cost savings per 100 patients with Floseal over ORC in terms of ICU days avoided (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;30) and extended bed days avoided (n&#xa0;=&#xa0;51.7) were &#xa3;57,960 and &#xa3;21,965, respectively. A sensitivity analysis indicated that these findings remained robust when the model parameters representing the clinical benefit of Floseal over ORC were reduced by up to 20%.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite higher initial acquisition costs, the use of flowable haemostatic agents achieves substantial cost savings over non-flowable agents in cardiac surgery. These cost savings commence during the operating theatre and appear to continue to be realised throughout the postoperative period.

### PMID 28287015 (2017) — Journal of medical economics
TITLE: Cost-consequence analysis of two different active flowable hemostatic matrices in spine surgery patients.
DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2017.1292916 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: A recently published retrospective analysis comparing two different active flowable hemostatic matrices (FLOSEAL and SURGIFLO Kit with Thrombin) showed significantly increased resource use and complications (surgery time, risk of blood product transfusion, and amount of matrix used) with SURGIFLO use compared to FLOSEAL in major spine surgery, and also significantly increased surgical time with SURGIFLO use in severe spine surgery. This analysis was developed as a follow-up to this prior analysis, to evaluate the cost-consequence of using FLOSEAL vs SURGIFLO in major and severe spine surgery.
METHODS: A cost consequence model was constructed from a US hospital provider perspective. Model parameters combined clinical inputs from the published retrospective analysis with supplemental analyses on annual spine surgery volume using the 2012 National Inpatient Sample (NIS) database. Cost of hemostatic matrices, blood product transfusion, and operating room time were identified from published literature. Various one-way and probabilistic sensitivity analyses were performed.
RESULTS: The base case for a medium volume hospital showed that, compared to SURGIFLO, patients receiving FLOSEAL required three fewer blood product transfusions and saved 27&#x2009;h of OR time, resulting in annual savings of $151 per major and $574 per severe spine surgery. Additional scenarios for high and low volume hospitals supported cost savings in the base case. Probabilistic sensitivity analysis revealed FLOSEAL was cost-saving in 76% of simulations in major spine and 97% of iterations in severe spine surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: This economic analysis indicates that use of FLOSEAL instead of SURGIFLO hemostatic matrices to induce hemostasis in both major and severe spine surgery could potentially lead to sizable cost savings in US hospitals, regardless of spinal surgery case-mix.

### PMID 28097913 (2017) — Journal of medical economics
TITLE: Cost-consequence analysis of different active flowable hemostatic matrices in cardiac surgical procedures.
DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2017.1284079 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: A recent retrospective comparative effectiveness study found that use of the FLOSEAL Hemostatic Matrix in cardiac surgery was associated with significantly lower risks of complications, blood transfusions, surgical revisions, and shorter length of surgery than use of SURGIFLO Hemostatic Matrix. These outcome improvements in cardiac surgery procedures may translate to economic savings for hospitals and payers.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to estimate the cost-consequence of two flowable hemostatic matrices (FLOSEAL or SURGIFLO) in cardiac surgeries for US hospitals.
METHODS: A cost-consequence model was constructed using clinical outcomes from a previously published retrospective comparative effectiveness study of FLOSEAL vs SURGIFLO in adult cardiac surgeries. The model accounted for the reported differences between these products in length of surgery, rates of major and minor complications, surgical revisions, and blood product transfusions. Costs were derived from Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project's National Inpatient Sample (NIS) 2012 database and converted to 2015&#x2009;US dollars. Savings were modeled for a hospital performing 245 cardiac surgeries annually, as identified as the average for hospitals in the NIS dataset. One-way sensitivity analysis and probabilistic sensitivity analysis were performed to test model robustness.
RESULTS: The results suggest that if FLOSEAL is utilized in a hospital that performs 245 mixed cardiac surgery procedures annually, 11 major complications, 31 minor complications, nine surgical revisions, 79 blood product transfusions, and 260.3&#x2009;h of cumulative operating time could be avoided. These improved outcomes correspond to a net annualized saving of $1,532,896. Cost savings remained consistent between $1.3m and $1.8m and between $911k and $2.4m, even after accounting for the uncertainty around clinical and cost inputs, in a one-way and probabilistic sensitivity analysis, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Outcome differences associated with FLOSEAL vs SURGIFLO that were previously reported in a comparative effectiveness study may result in substantial cost savings for US hospitals.

### PMID 27088363 (2017) — The journal of knee surgery
TITLE: Thrombin-Based Hemostatic Agent in Primary Total Knee Arthroplasty.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0036-1582137 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: The present meta-analysis pooled the results from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) to identify and assess the efficacy and safety of thrombin-based hemostatic agent in primary total knee arthroplasty (TKA). Potential academic articles were identified from the Cochrane Library, Medline (1966-2015.5), PubMed (1966-2015.5), Embase (1980-2015.5), and ScienceDirect (1966-2015.5). Relevant journals and the recommendations of expert panels were also searched by using Google search engine. RCTs assessing the efficacy and safety of thrombin-based hemostatic agent in primary TKA were included. Pooling of data was analyzed by RevMan 5.1 (The Cochrane Collaboration, Oxford, UK). A total of four RCTs met the inclusion criteria. The meta-analysis revealed significant differences in postoperative hemoglobin decline (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.00001), total blood loss (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.00001), drainage volume (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01), and allogenic blood transfusion (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01) between the treatment group and the control group. No significant differences were found regarding incidence of infection (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.45) and deep vein thrombosis (DVT; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.80) between the groups. Meta-analysis indicated that the application of thrombin-based hemostatic agent before wound closure decreased postoperative hemoglobin decline, drainage volume, total blood loss, and transfusion rate and did not increase the risk of infection, DVT, or other complications. Therefore, the reviewers believe that thrombin-based hemostatic agent is effective and safe in primary TKA.

### PMID 28162204 (2017) — Zhonghua wai ke za zhi [Chinese journal of surgery]
TITLE: [Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of dural tears and the consequent cerebrospinal fluid leak during spine surgery].
DOI: 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5815.2017.02.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Dural tears (DT) and the consequent cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) leak are not rare in spine surgeries. CSF leak can be troublesome, leading to pseudomeningocele, cutaneous CSF fistula, and meningitis. Revision surgery is unavoidable in some cases. The reported incidences of DT and CSF leak are different according to the various pathologies. Ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament, revision spine surgery and multi-segment laminectomy have higher risks for DT. Various techniques have been described to manage this complication, such as bed rest, repair with dural substitutes, fibrin glue, gelatin sponge, lumbar drain, muscle flap, etc.Through objective evaluation of the evidence and transparency in the process of making recommendations, it is Chinese Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons' goal to develop evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for the treatment of incidental DT and the consequent CSF leak during spine surgery. The current clinical guidelines focus on 9 clinical questions and the strength of recommendations were made based on the quality of the literature. The work group considers that this guideline recommendations aim to assist in delivering optimum, efficacious treatment and functional recovery from this complication. &#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x5916;&#x79d1;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x53d1;&#x751f;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x53ca;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x5e76;&#x4e0d;&#x7f55;&#x89c1;&#x3002;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x4f1a;&#x5e26;&#x6765;&#x591a;&#x79cd;&#x5e76;&#x53d1;&#x75c7;&#xff0c;&#x5982;&#x5047;&#x6027;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x81a8;&#x51fa;&#x3001;&#x76ae;&#x4e0b;&#x7aa6;&#x9053;&#x53ca;&#x86db;&#x7f51;&#x819c;&#x708e;&#x7b49;&#xff0c;&#x5c11;&#x6570;&#x60a3;&#x8005;&#x751a;&#x81f3;&#x9700;&#x8981;&#x63a5;&#x53d7;&#x7ffb;&#x4fee;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x3002;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x75be;&#x75c5;&#x7684;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x548c;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x53d1;&#x751f;&#x7387;&#x4e5f;&#x6709;&#x6240;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x3002;&#x540e;&#x7eb5;&#x97e7;&#x5e26;&#x9aa8;&#x5316;&#x3001;&#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x7ffb;&#x4fee;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x3001;&#x591a;&#x8282;&#x6bb5;&#x690e;&#x677f;&#x5207;&#x9664;&#x672f;&#x4e2d;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x7684;&#x98ce;&#x9669;&#x66f4;&#x9ad8;&#x3002;&#x9488;&#x5bf9;&#x8fd9;&#x4e00;&#x95ee;&#x9898;&#xff0c;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x91c7;&#x53d6;&#x4e86;&#x591a;&#x79cd;&#x63aa;&#x65bd;&#x8fdb;&#x884c;&#x5904;&#x7406;&#xff0c;&#x5305;&#x62ec;&#x5e73;&#x5367;&#x5236;&#x52a8;&#xff0c;&#x4f7f;&#x7528;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x8865;&#x7247;&#x3001;&#x7ea4;&#x7ef4;&#x86cb;&#x767d;&#x80f6;&#x3001;&#x660e;&#x80f6;&#x6d77;&#x7ef5;&#x4fee;&#x590d;&#x3001;&#x8170;&#x690e;&#x5f15;&#x6d41;&#x3001;&#x808c;&#x74e3;&#x586b;&#x585e;&#x7b49;&#x3002;&#x4e2d;&#x56fd;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x534f;&#x4f1a;&#x9aa8;&#x79d1;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x5206;&#x4f1a;&#x6307;&#x5357;&#x7f16;&#x5199;&#x5de5;&#x4f5c;&#x7ec4;&#x4f9d;&#x636e;&#x5faa;&#x8bc1;&#x533b;&#x5b66;&#x65b9;&#x6cd5;&#xff0c;&#x9488;&#x5bf9;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x4e0d;&#x540c;&#x60c5;&#x51b5;&#x5236;&#x5b9a;&#x4e86;&#x300a;&#x810a;&#x67f1;&#x624b;&#x672f;&#x786c;&#x810a;&#x819c;&#x7834;&#x88c2;&#x53ca;&#x672f;&#x540e;&#x8111;&#x810a;&#x6db2;&#x6e17;&#x6f0f;&#x7684;&#x5faa;&#x8bc1;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x8bca;&#x7597;&#x6307;&#x5357;&#x300b;&#xff0c;&#x7740;&#x91cd;&#x5173;&#x6ce8;9&#x4e2a;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x95ee;&#x9898;&#xff0c;&#x5e76;&#x4f9d;&#x636e;&#x6587;&#x732e;&#x8bc1;&#x636e;&#x7b49;&#x7ea7;&#x7ed9;&#x51fa;&#x76f8;&#x5e94;&#x7684;&#x63a8;&#x8350;&#x7b49;&#x7ea7;&#x3002;&#x5de5;&#x4f5c;&#x7ec4;&#x5e0c;&#x671b;&#x672c;&#x6307;&#x5357;&#x80fd;&#x591f;&#x4e3a;&#x533b;&#x5e08;&#x7684;&#x4e34;&#x5e8a;&#x8bca;&#x7597;&#x63d0;&#x4f9b;&#x6700;&#x4f73;&#x7684;&#x3001;&#x6709;&#x6548;&#x7684;&#x6cbb;&#x7597;&#x65b9;&#x6848;&#xff0c;&#x4ece;&#x800c;&#x8ba9;&#x60a3;&#x8005;&#x83b7;&#x5f97;&#x6700;&#x4f73;&#x7684;&#x5eb7;&#x590d;&#x6548;&#x679c;&#x3002;.

### PMID 28082214 (2017) — American journal of obstetrics and gynecology
TITLE: Are perioperative bundles associated with reduced postoperative morbidity in women undergoing benign hysterectomy? Retrospective cohort analysis of 16,286 cases in Michigan.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajog.2016.12.173 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Healthcare teams that frequently follow a bundle of evidence-based processes provide care with lower rates of morbidity. Few process bundles to improve surgical outcomes in hysterectomy have been identified.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to investigate whether a bundle of 4 perioperative care processes is associated with fewer postoperative complications and readmissions for hysterectomies in the Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative.
STUDY DESIGN: A bundle of perioperative care process goals was developed retrospectively with 30-day peri- and postoperative outcome data from the Hysterectomy Initiative in Michigan Surgical Quality Collaborative. All benign hysterectomies that had been performed between January 2013 and January 2015 were included. Based on evidence of lower complication rates after benign hysterectomy, the following processes were considered to be the "bundle": use of guideline-appropriate preoperative antibiotics, a minimally invasive surgical approach, operative duration &lt;120 minutes, and avoidance of intraoperative hemostatic agent use. Each process was considered present or absent, and the number of processes was summed for a bundle score that ranged from 0-4. Cases with a score of zero were excluded. Outcomes measured were rates of complications (any and major) and hospital readmissions, all within 30&#xa0;days of surgery. Postoperative events that were considered a "major complication" included acute renal failure, cardiac arrest that required cardiopulmonary resuscitation, central line infection, cerebral vascular accident, death, deep vein thrombosis, intestinal obstruction, myocardial infarction, pelvic abscess, pulmonary embolism, rectovaginal fistula, sepsis, surgical site infection (deep and organ-space), unplanned intubation, ureteral obstruction, and ureterovaginal and vesicovaginal fistula. The outcome "any complication" included all those events already described in addition to blood transfusion within 72 hours of surgery, urinary tract infection, and superficial surgical site infection. Outcomes were adjusted for patient demographics, surgical factors, and hospital-level clustering effects.
RESULTS: There were 16,286 benign hysterectomies available for analysis. Among all hysterectomies that were reviewed, 33.6% met criteria for all bundle processes; however, there was wide variation in the rate among the 56 hospitals in the study sample with 9.1% of cases at the lowest quartile and 60.4% at the highest quartile of hospitals that met criteria for all bundle processes. Overall, the rate of any complication was 6.8% and of any major complication was 2.3%. The rate of hospital readmissions was 3.6%. After adjustment for confounders, in cases in which all bundle criterion were met compared with cases in which all bundle criterion were not met, the rate of any complications increased from 4.3-7.8% (P&lt;.001); major complications increased from 1.7-2.6% (P&lt;.001), and readmissions increased from 2.6-4.1% (P&lt;.001). After adjustment for confounders, hospitals with greater rates of meeting all 4 criteria were associated significantly with lower hospital-level rates of postoperative complications (P&lt;.001) and readmissions (P&lt;.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This multiinstitutional evaluation reveals that reduced morbidity and readmission are associated with rates of bundle compliance. The proposed bundle is a surgical goal, which is not possible in every case, and there is significant variation in the proportion of cases meeting all 4 bundle processes in Michigan hospitals. Implementation of evidence-based process bundles at a healthcare system level are worthy of prospective study to determine whether improvements in patient outcomes are possible.

### PMID 27840121 (2017) — Journal of cranio-maxillo-facial surgery : official publication of the European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery
TITLE: Topical application of tranexamic acid in anticoagulated patients undergoing minor oral surgery: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2016.10.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To perform a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials (RCTs) investigating the efficacy and safety of topical tranexamic acid (TXA) to prevent postoperative bleeding in anticoagulated patients undergoing minor oral surgery.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We analyzed RCTs comparing the use of topical TXA versus other topical hemostatic agents or placebo solutions for minor oral surgeries. We assessed the risk of bias and strength of evidence according to the Cochrane guidelines and GRADE rating system, respectively. The pooled relative risk (RR) was calculated for the effect of topical application of TXA on postsurgical bleeding.
RESULTS: Five RCTs were included in the study. The combined RR for the number of patients receiving TXA in comparison to the control group was 0.13 (95% CI 0.05-0.36; P&#xa0;=&#xa0;0.01), indicating a protective effect of topical TXA on bleeding after minor oral surgeries. Subgroup analysis revealed that topical TXA was effective in preventing postsurgical bleeding compared to placebo and epsilon-aminocaproic acid. No cases of thromboembolic events were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Currently available evidence suggests that surgical site irrigation with TXA followed by mouthwash during the first postoperative week is safe and may reduce the risk of bleeding after minor oral surgeries in anticoagulated patients.

### PMID 26316363 (2016) — American journal of surgery
TITLE: Meta-analysis of randomized trials comparing nonpenetrating vs mechanical mesh fixation in laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair.
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2015.06.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Evidence for open groin hernia repair demonstrates less pain with bioglue mesh fixation compared with invasive methods. This study aimed to assess the short- and long-term effects of laparoscopic groin hernia repair with noninvasive and invasive mesh fixation.
DATA SOURCES: A systematic review of MEDLINE, CENTRAL, and OpenGrey was undertaken. Randomized trials assessing the outcome of laparoscopic groin hernia repair with invasive and noninvasive fixation methods were considered for data synthesis. Nine trials encompassing 1,454 patients subjected to laparoscopic hernia repair with mesh fixation using biologic or biosynthetic glue were identified. Short-term data were inadequate for data synthesis. Chronic pain was less frequently reported by patients subjected to repair with biologic glue fixation than with penetrating methods (odds ratio .46, 95% confidence interval .22 to .93). Duration of surgery, incidence of seroma/hematoma, morbidity, and recurrence were similar.
CONCLUSIONS: Laparoscopic groin hernia repair with bioglue mesh fixation was associated with a reduced incidence of chronic pain compared with mechanical fixation, without increasing morbidity or recurrence. Longer term data on recurrence are necessary.

### PMID 27113404 (2016) — World neurosurgery
TITLE: Successful Treatment of Spontaneous Intracranial Hypotension by Plugging the Cerebrospinal Fluid Leak with Percutaneous Cyanoacrylate Injection: A Report of 2 Cases.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2016.04.051 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Spontaneous intracranial hypotension (SIH) is a well-known, but under- or misdiagnosed, condition caused by cerebrospinal fluid leak resulting from idiopathic dural breach. Blind lumbar epidural blood patch is an effective treatment in most cases, but occasionally, even targeted epidural blood patch fails to lead to improvement. In these cases, the cerebrospinal fluid leak is usually repaired surgically, especially for large dural breaches (&gt;5 mm), once the site has been identified by imaging techniques (magnetic resonance myelography/computed tomography [CT] myelography/isotopic transit). We describe a less invasive percutaneous technique consisting of direct puncture into the epidural space with a 25-G needle to access the injection site under CT control. We report 2 cases with good technical and clinical outcome after 1 and 8 years of follow-up (clinical evaluation and brain imaging control by CT). The technique we describe here is of high interest in refractory SIH or for the serious form of the disease, before considering surgical repair. Further prospective studies are required to provide general guidelines in treatment options for patients with SIH.

### PMID 26866524 (2016) — European journal of gastroenterology &amp; hepatology
TITLE: Management of gastric varices: a French national survey.
DOI: 10.1097/MEG.0000000000000560 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Multicenter Study
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Bleeding from gastric varices is more severe than that from esophageal varices, but its management remains debated. We aimed to determine how French hepatogastroenterologists manage cirrhotic patients with gastric varices.
METHODS: Hepatogastroenterologists (n=1163) working in general or university hospitals received a self-administered questionnaire.
RESULTS: Overall, 155 hepatogastroenterologists (13.3%) from 112 centers (33.3%; 39/40 university hospitals, 73/296 general hospitals) answered. Primary prophylaxis was used by 98.1% of hepatogastroenterologists as follows: &#x3b2;-blockers 96.1% (93.8 vs. 97.0%; university vs. general hospitals respectively; P=0.57), glue obliteration 16.9% (17.2 vs. 16.3%; P=0.88), and transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) 8.0% (12.7 vs. 4.6%; P=0.12). To manage bleeding, university hospitals had greater local access to glue obliteration (95.4 vs. 68.2%; P&lt;0.001) and TIPS (78.5 vs. 3.5%; P&lt;0.001). Early TIPS was proposed by 53.6% (72.1 vs. 39.2%; P&lt;0.001). Glue obliteration was performed under general anesthesia (86.1%) using Glubran (43.1%) or Histoacryl (52.9%), and lipiodol (78.8%) with varying degrees of dilution (1&#x2009;:&#x2009;10 to 3&#x2009;:&#x2009;4). The injected volume per varix varied widely (1-20&#x2009;ml). Glue obliteration, band ligation, or both were used by, respectively, 64.2, 18.2, and 17.5% of practitioners. Almost all hepatogastroenterologists (98%) performed secondary prophylaxis: &#x3b2;-blockers 74.7% (75.0 vs. 74.4%, university vs. general hospitals; P=0.93), glue obliteration 66.0% (76.9 vs. 57.6%; P=0.013), and TIPS 30.0% (39.1 vs. 23.3%; P=0.037).
CONCLUSION: The management of gastric varices in France is heterogeneous across centers. University hospitals have better access to techniques such as glue obliteration and TIPS. As bleeding from gastric varices has a poor outcome, guidelines should be established to standardize clinical practices and design further studies.

### PMID 28051764 (2016) — Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)
TITLE: The use of fibrin sealant during non-emergency surgery: a systematic review of evidence of benefits and harms.
DOI: 10.3310/hta20940 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants are used in different types of surgery to prevent the accumulation of post-operative fluid (seroma) or blood (haematoma) or to arrest haemorrhage (bleeding). However, there is uncertainty around the benefits and harms of fibrin sealant use.
OBJECTIVES: To systematically review the evidence on the benefits and harms of fibrin sealants in non-emergency surgery in adults.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic databases [MEDLINE, EMBASE and The Cochrane Library (including the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects, the Health Technology Assessment database and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials)] were searched from inception to May 2015. The websites of regulatory bodies (the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, the European Medicines Agency and the Food and Drug Administration) were also searched to identify evidence of harms.
REVIEW METHODS: This review included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies using any type of fibrin sealant compared with standard care in non-emergency surgery in adults. The primary outcome was risk of developing seroma and haematoma. Only RCTs were used to inform clinical effectiveness and both RCTs and observational studies were used for the assessment of harms related to the use of fibrin sealant. Two reviewers independently screened all titles and abstracts to identify potentially relevant studies. Data extraction was undertaken by one reviewer and validated by a second. The quality of included studies was assessed independently by two reviewers using the Cochrane Collaboration risk-of-bias tool for RCTs and the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination guidance for adverse events for observational studies. A fixed-effects model was used for meta-analysis.
RESULTS: We included 186 RCTs and eight observational studies across 14 surgical specialties and five reports from the regulatory bodies. Most RCTs were judged to be at an unclear risk of bias. Adverse events were inappropriately reported in observational studies. Meta-analysis across non-emergency surgical specialties did not show a statistically significant difference in the risk of seroma for fibrin sealants versus standard care in 32 RCTs analysed [n&#x2009;=&#x2009;3472, odds ratio (OR) 0.84, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.68 to 1.04; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.13; I2&#x2009;=&#x2009;12.7%], but a statistically significant benefit was found on haematoma development in 24 RCTs (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;2403, OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.44 to 0.86; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.01; I2&#x2009;=&#x2009;0%). Adverse events related to fibrin sealant use were reported in 10 RCTs and eight observational studies across surgical specialties, and 22 RCTs explicitly stated that there were no adverse events. One RCT reported a single death but no other study reported mortality or any serious adverse events. Five regulatory body reports noted death from air emboli associated with fibrin sprays.
LIMITATIONS: It was not possible to provide a detailed evaluation of individual RCTs in their specific contexts because of the limited resources that were available for this research. In addition, the number of RCTs that were identified made it impractical to conduct independent data extraction by two reviewers in the time available.
CONCLUSIONS: The effectiveness of fibrin sealants does not appear to vary according to surgical procedures with regard to reducing the risk of seroma or haematoma. Surgeons should note the potential risk of gas embolism if spray application of fibrin sealants is used and not to exceed the recommended pressure and spraying distance. Future research should be carried out in surgery specialties for which only limited data were found, including neurological, gynaecological, oral and maxillofacial, urology, colorectal and orthopaedics surgery (for any outcome); breast surgery and upper gastrointestinal (development of haematoma); and cardiothoracic heart or lung surgery (reoperation rates). In addition, studies need to use adequate sample sizes, to blind participants and outcome assessors, and to follow reporting guidelines.
STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42015020710.
FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.

### PMID 24902686 (2015) — Surgical innovation
TITLE: Systematic review of cyanoacrylate embolization for refractory gastrointestinal fistulae: a promising therapy.
DOI: 10.1177/1553350614535860 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Surgical management of gastrointestinal fistulae has been reported to carry a 30-day morbidity rate up to 82% and a mortality rate ranging from 2% to 4.8%; thus nonoperative alternatives are required. The aim of the present study was to assess the current experience on the use of cyanoacrylates in the management of these fistulae.
METHODS: A systematic review was carried out on Medline, Embase, The Cochrane database, Academic Search Complete, MedicLatina, and SciELO for English, Spanish, and Portuguese articles dealing with refractory fistulae by means of cyanoacrylate embolization therapy. Publication dates were restricted from 1969 to present. Outcome parameters were study design, number of participants, etiology of the fistula, approach, material used, success rate, complications, and mortality.
RESULTS: Electronic search yielded a total of 377 articles. After a meticulous screening, only 14 studies dealing with foregut/midgut fistulae and 6 addressing hindgut fistulae were included. All the included articles were prospective and retrospective case series. Cumulative success rate was 81% (range 0% to 100%) and 3 out of 203 patients (1%) developed minor complications.
CONCLUSION: Cyanoacrylate embolization of nearly all types of refractory gastrointestinal fistulae is a feasible and harmless technique. Prospective controlled studies are required to support the available evidence.

### PMID 26265447 (2015) — The British journal of surgery
TITLE: Multicentre randomized clinical trial to investigate the cost-effectiveness of an allogeneic single-donor fibrin sealant after coronary artery bypass grafting (FIBER Study).
DOI: 10.1002/bjs.9877 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Reduction of blood transfusion in cardiac surgery is an important target. The aim of this study was to investigate the cost-effectiveness of the use of CryoSeal&#xae;, an allogeneic single-donor fibrin sealant, in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
METHODS: This randomized clinical study involved seven cardiac surgery centres in the Netherlands. Patients undergoing elective isolated CABG with the use of at least one internal thoracic artery (ITA) graft were assigned randomly to receive either CryoSeal&#xae; (5&#x2009;ml per ITA bed) or no CryoSeal&#xae;. Primary efficacy endpoints were units of transfused red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma and platelet concentrates, and duration of intensive care unit stay. Secondary efficacy endpoints were 48-h blood loss, reoperation for bleeding, mediastinitis, 30-day mortality and duration of hospital stay.
RESULTS: Between March 2009 and January 2012, 1445 patients were randomized. The intention-to-treat (ITT) population comprised 1436 patients; the per-protocol (PP) population 1292. In both the ITT and the PP analysis, no significant difference between the treatment groups was observed for any of the primary and secondary efficacy endpoints. In addition, no significant difference between the groups was seen in the proportion of transfused patients. Estimated CryoSeal&#xae; costs were &#x20ac;822 (95 per cent c.i. &#x20ac;808 to &#x20ac;836) per patient, which translated to &#x20ac;72,000 per avoided transfusion (unbounded 95 per cent c.i.).
CONCLUSION: The use of the fibrin sealant CryoSeal&#xae; did not result in health benefits. Combined with the high cost per avoided transfusion, this study does not support the implementation of routine CryoSeal&#xae; use in elective isolated CABG.
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NTR1386 ( http://www.trialregister.nl).

### PMID 25807171 (2015) — Innovations (Philadelphia, Pa.)
TITLE: Implantation of the eSVS Mesh: modification of recommended technique.
DOI: 10.1097/IMI.0000000000000130 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The eSVS Mesh is a knitted wire lattice manufactured in cylindrical sheaths of various diameters, designed to be placed around the outer surface of a saphenous vein graft before use in coronary surgery. The goal is to improve long-term vein graft patency by preventing expansive endothelial injury obviating neointimal hyperplasia and subsequent graft atherosclerosis. Since the First-In-Man feasibility trial of the eSVS Mesh, postmarket studies in Europe and a feasibility trial in the United States are ongoing. Consensus from the principal investigators indicated the trials had confounding variables that may impact results other than evaluation of the eSVS Mesh alone. With input from these investigators, the recommended operative technique has been modified for future trials by removing the mesh from proximal and distal anastomoses and eliminating the use of fibrin sealant. These changes allow for use of an implant technique closer to standard vein bypass grafting and a more focused evaluation of the eSVS Mesh.

### PMID 26037982 (2015) — European journal of trauma and emergency surgery : official publication of the European Trauma Society
TITLE: Use of local pro-coagulant haemostatic agents for intra-cavity control of haemorrhage after trauma.
DOI: 10.1007/s00068-014-0441-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: Uncontrolled haemorrhage as a result of trauma remains a significant surgical challenge, accounting for approximately 25-40% of trauma-related mortality. A wide range of local internal haemostatic agents have been developed to help achieve intra-cavity control of bleeding, with choice of agent influenced by the circumstances and nature of the haemorrhage. Trauma patients are frequently coagulopathic, so products that incorporate pro-coagulant technology and thereby act independently of the clotting cascade may be more effective in these settings. A range of products that utilise thrombin and fibrinogen to promote local haemostasis at intra-cavity bleeding points are available or in development, including fibrin glues (e.g. Tisseel&#xae;/Tissucol&#xae; and Evicel&#xae;/Crosseal&#xae;/Quixil&#xae;), fibrin sealant patches (e.g. TachoSil&#xae;) and products based on a gelatin-thrombin haemostatic matrix (e.g. FloSeal&#xae;).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This systematic review was performed to assess all peer-reviewed evidence of product efficacy.
RESULTS: Fibrin sealant patches have shown haemostatic efficacy in a variety of surgical procedures and appear to offer practical advantages over liquid fibrin glues. Existing evidence suggests that patch products enable delivery of pro-coagulants to defined areas with less chance of dilution and/or displacement by blood flow, but they require a pressure buttress for a suitable amount of time to achieve good results after trauma.
CONCLUSIONS: Our experience, supported by other reports in the literature, suggests the use of such fibrin patches may provide an effective option in helping to control haemorrhage after trauma. However, there is a general paucity of clinical data for intra-cavity haemostatic agent use, with the majority of data being based on animal models and case reports. Further clinical evidence, ideally including comparative studies between different agents, would be beneficial in helping guide surgeon choice to the most appropriate products to use in trauma settings.

### PMID 25684620 (2015) — Transfusion clinique et biologique : journal de la Societe francaise de transfusion sanguine
TITLE: [Medical and economic impact of a haemostatic sealant on the rate of transfusion after total knee arthroplasty].
DOI: 10.1016/j.tracli.2015.01.001 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: Blood loss reduction in total knee arthroplasty (TKA) contributes to the prevention of morbidity and mortality and in the management of health care costs. Fibrin haemostatic sealant have controversial effectiveness in reducing postoperative blood loss and transfusion requirements. Our study evaluated the medical and economic benefits of this treatment with the assumption that it decreases the frequency of blood transfusion after TKA.
METHODS AND PATIENTS: Our single-center and randomized study included 60 patients pose unilateral primary TKA for osteoarthritis. Distribution was done in 2 groups of 30 patients each. Group 1 patients treated with a dose of 5 mL Evicel&#xae;, compared to untreated group 2. Were collected the number of patients transfused. The treatment cost was compared to the sealant cost.
RESULTS: Results are not statistically significant. Two patients were transfused in group 1 and 3 in group 2 (P=0.64). The treatment cost for 30 patients is 13,500 &#x20ac;, for a savings of cells packed at 187 &#x20ac;, an additional cost of 13,313 &#x20ac; in group 1.
CONCLUSION: The use of fibrin haemostatic sealant in TKA did not induce a significant difference in terms of blood or transfusion savings, with a significant cost. We do not recommend its routine use in TKA.

### PMID 26680379 (2015) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: An In Vivo Comparison of Hemostatic Gelatin Matrix Products in a Porcine Spleen Biopsy-punch Model.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Flowable gelatin matrix products have established themselves as effective, easy-to-use hemostatic agents useful in a variety of surgical situations. A recently reformulated gelatin matrix, Surgiflo&#xae; (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ), can be prepared quickly and provides consistent flow over an 8-hr. period. No in vivo studies have yet been reported comparing hemostasis with the new Surgiflo to other currently marketed flowable gelatin matrix products. This study was conducted to determine whether Surgiflo in actual use has hemostatic qualities different from another commercial gelatin matrix. An in vivo model based on porcine spleen biopsy punch-induced bleeding was used to compare Surgiflo and Floseal&#x2122; (Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Hayward, CA), both with thrombin. Time required to achieve hemostasis and proportion of sites achieving hemostasis within 30 s were determined for both hemostatic agents and a control of saline-soaked gauze. Results were stratified by the degree of initial bleeding (mild, moderate, severe). Hemostasis was achieved within 3 minutes at all sites for both test products regardless of level of initial bleeding, and control sites continued bleeding past 10 minutes. There were no statistically significant differences between Surgiflo and Floseal for either mean time to hemostasis or proportion of sites hemostatic within 30 s. In this realistic in vivo model both gelatin matrix products were effective, and there were no significant differences observed in hemostatic efficacy between Surgiflo and Floseal. Other factors, such as ease of preparation and application, in-use stability, and economic considerations may affect a surgeon's decision in selection of a desirable hemostatic product.

### PMID 25573183 (2015) — Journal of minimally invasive gynecology
TITLE: Effect of hemostatic method on ovarian reserve following laparoscopic endometrioma excision; comparison of suture, hemostatic sealant, and bipolar dessication. A systematic review and meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2014.12.168 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: We reviewed the literature to determine whether different hemostatic methods used following laparoscopic endometrioma excision have differing effects on ovarian reserve. We performed a systematic literature search using the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, Embase, and Ovid MEDLINE In-Process &amp; Other Non-Indexed Citations databases to identify studies comparing the rate of change in levels of serum anti-M&#xfc;llerian hormone (AMH) at 3&#xa0;months after laparoscopic endometrioma excision using bipolar dessication (BD) or suturing/application of a hemostatic sealant (HS) for hemostasis. Abstracts of the annual meetings of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine, the European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology, and the American Association of Gynecological Laparoscopists were searched as well. A total of 712 articles were identified, of which 6 were included in the qualitative analysis. Four studies involving 213 women were included in the meta-analysis. Our qualitative analysis suggested that BD is more detrimental to ovarian reserve than alternative hemostatic methods. There is moderate-quality evidence favoring HS and low-quality evidence favoring sutures over BD. The meta-analysis also showed that alternative hemostatic methods are associated with significantly less decline in ovarian reserve compared with BD. The mean decline in serum AMH levels was 6.95% less with alternative hemostatic methods than with BD (95% CI, -13.0% to -0.9%; p&#xa0;=&#xa0;.02) at 3&#xa0;months after surgery. According to the best available evidence, the use of BD should be cautiously limited, even avoided when possible, during endometrioma excision in women who desire to have children.

### PMID 25767949 (2015) — Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology Canada : JOGC = Journal d'obstetrique et gynecologie du Canada : JOGC
TITLE: The management of uterine leiomyomas.
DOI: 10.1016/S1701-2163(15)30338-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Practice Guideline
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: The aim of this guideline is to provide clinicians with an understanding of the pathophysiology, prevalence, and clinical significance of myomata and the best evidence available on treatment modalities.
OPTIONS: The areas of clinical practice considered in formulating this guideline were assessment, medical treatments, conservative treatments of myolysis, selective uterine artery occlusion, and surgical alternatives including myomectomy and hysterectomy. The risk-to-benefit ratio must be examined individually by the woman and her health care provider.
OUTCOMES: Implementation of this guideline should optimize the decision-making process of women and their health care providers in proceeding with further investigation or therapy for uterine leiomyomas, having considered the disease process and available treatment options, and reviewed the risks and anticipated benefits.
EVIDENCE: Published literature was retrieved through searches of PubMed, CINAHL, and Cochrane Systematic Reviews in February 2013, using appropriate controlled vocabulary (uterine fibroids, myoma, leiomyoma, myomectomy, myolysis, heavy menstrual bleeding, and menorrhagia) and key words (myoma, leiomyoma, fibroid, myomectomy, uterine artery embolization, hysterectomy, heavy menstrual bleeding, menorrhagia). The reference lists of articles identified were also searched for other relevant publications. Results were restricted to systematic reviews, randomized control trials/controlled clinical trials, and observational studies. There were no date limits but results were limited to English or French language materials. Searches were updated on a regular basis and incorporated in the guideline to January 2014. Grey (unpublished) literature was identified through searching the websites of health technology assessment and health technology-related agencies, clinical practice guideline collections, and national and international medical specialty societies.
BENEFITS, HARMS, AND COSTS: The majority of fibroids are asymptomatic and require no intervention or further investigations. For symptomatic fibroids such as those causing menstrual abnormalities (e.g. heavy, irregular, and prolonged uterine bleeding), iron defficiency anemia, or bulk symptoms (e.g., pelvic pressure/pain, obstructive symptoms), hysterectomy is a definitive solution. However, it is not the preferred solution for women who wish to preserve fertility and/or their uterus. The selected treatment should be directed towards an improvement in symptomatology and quality of life. The cost of the therapy to the health care system and to women with fibroids must be interpreted in the context of the cost of untreated disease conditions and the cost of ongoing or repeat investigative or treatment modalities.
VALUES: The quality of evidence in this document was rated using the criteria described in the Report of the Caadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care (Table 1). Summary Statements 1. Uterine fibroids are common, appearing in 70% of women by age 50; the 20% to 50% that are symptomatic have considerable social and economic impact in Canada. (II-3) 2. The presence of uterine fibroids can lead to a variety of clinical challenges. (III) 3. Concern about possible complications related to fibroids in pregnancy is not an indication for myomectomy except in women who have had a previous pregnancy with complications related to these fibroids. (III) 4. Women who have fibroids detected in pregnancy may require additional maternal and fetal surveillance. (II-2) 5. Effective medical treatments for women with abnormal uterine bleeding associated with uterine fibroids include the levonorgestrel intrauterine system, (I) gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues, (I) selective progesterone receptor modulators, (I) oral contraceptives, (II-2) progestins, (II-2) and danazol. (II-2) 6. Effective medical treatments for women with bulk symptoms associated with fibroids include selective progesterone receptor modulators and gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues. (I) 7. Hysterectomy is the most effective treatment for symptomatic uterine fibroids. (III) 8. Myomectomy is an option for women who wish to preserve their uterus or enhance fertility, but carries the potential for further intervention. (II-2) 9. Of the conservative interventional treatments currently available, uterine artery embolization has the longest track record and has been shown to be effective in properly selected patients. (II-3) 10. Newer focused energy delivery methods are promising but lack long-term data. (III) Recommendations 1. Women with asymptomatic fibroids should be reassured that there is no evidence to substantiate major concern about malignancy and that hysterectomy is not indicated. (III-D) 2. Treatment of women with uterine leiomyomas must be individualized based on symptomatology, size and location of fibroids, age, need and desire of the patient to preserve fertility or the uterus, the availability of therapy, and the experience of the therapist. (III-B) 3. In women who do not wish to preserve fertility and/or their uterus and who have been counselled regarding the alternatives and risks, hysterectomy by the least invasive approach possible may be offered as the definitive treatment for symptomatic uterine fibroids and is associated with a high level of satisfaction. (II-2A) 4. Hysteroscopic myomectomy should be considered first-line conservative surgical therapy for the management of symptomatic intracavitary fibroids. (II-3A) 5. Surgical planning for myomectomy should be based on mapping the location, size, and number of fibroids with the help of appropriate imaging. (III-A) 6. When morcellation is necessary to remove the specimen, the patient should be informed about possible risks and complications, including the fact that in rare cases fibroid(s) may contain unexpected malignancy and that laparoscopic power morcellation may spread the cancer, potentially worsening their prognosis. (III-B) 7. Anemia should be corrected prior to proceeding with elective surgery. (II-2A) Selective progesterone receptor modulators and gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogues are effective at correcting anemia and should be considered preoperatively in anemic patients. (I-A) 8. Use of vasopressin, bupivacaine and epinephrine, misoprostol, peri-cervical tourniquet, or gelatin-thrombin matrix reduce blood loss at myomectomy and should be considered. (I-A) 9. Uterine artery occlusion by embolization or surgical methods may be offered to selected women with symptomatic uterine fibroids who wish to preserve their uterus. Women choosing uterine artery occlusion for the treatment of fibroids should be counselled regarding possible risks, including the likelihood that fecundity and pregnancy may be impacted. (II-3A) 10. In women who present with acute uterine bleeding associated with uterine fibroids, conservative management with estrogens, selective progesterone receptor modulators, antifibrinolytics, Foley catheter tamponade, and/or operative hysteroscopic intervention may be considered, but hysterectomy may become necessary in some cases. In centres where available, intervention by uterine artery embolization may be considered. (III-B).

### PMID 26333113 (2015) — Journal of thrombosis and haemostasis : JTH
TITLE: A critical appraisal of point-of-care coagulation testing in critically ill patients.
DOI: 10.1111/jth.13126 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Derangement of the coagulation system is a common phenomenon in critically ill patients, who may present with severe bleeding and/or conditions associated with a prothrombotic state. Monitoring of this coagulopathy can be performed with conventional coagulation assays; however, point-of-care tests have become increasingly attractive, because not only do they yield a more rapid result than clinical laboratory testing, but they may also provide a more complete picture of the condition of the hemostatic system. There are many potential areas of study and applications of point-of-care hemostatic testing in critical care, including patients who present with massive blood loss, patients with a hypercoagulable state (such as in disseminated intravascular coagulation), and monitoring of antiplatelet treatment for acute arterial thrombosis, mostly acute coronary syndromes. However, the limitations of near-patient hemostatic testing has not been fully appreciated, and are discussed here. The currently available evidence indicates that point-of-care tests may be applied to guide appropriate blood product transfusion and the use of hemostatic agents to correct the hemostatic defect or to ameliorate antithrombotic treatment. Disappointingly, however, only in cardiac surgery is there adequate evidence to show that application of near-patient thromboelastography leads to an improvement in clinically relevant outcomes, such as reductions in bleeding-related morbidity and mortality, and cost-effectiveness. More research is required to validate the utility and cost-effectiveness of near-patient hemostatic testing in other areas, especially in traumatic bleeding and postpartum hemorrhage.

### PMID 26215747 (2015) — Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)
TITLE: Viscoelastic point-of-care testing to assist with the diagnosis, management and monitoring of haemostasis: a systematic review and cost-effectiveness analysis.
DOI: 10.3310/hta19580 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Patients with substantive bleeding usually require transfusion and/or (re-)operation. Red blood cell (RBC) transfusion is independently associated with a greater risk of infection, morbidity, increased hospital stay and mortality. ROTEM (ROTEM&#xae; Delta, TEM International GmbH, Munich, Germany; www.rotem.de), TEG (TEG&#xae; 5000 analyser, Haemonetics Corporation, Niles, IL, USA; www.haemonetics.com) and Sonoclot (Sonoclot&#xae; coagulation and platelet function analyser, Sienco Inc., Arvada, CO) are point-of-care viscoelastic (VE) devices that use thromboelastometry to test for haemostasis in whole blood. They have a number of proposed advantages over standard laboratory tests (SLTs): they provide a result much quicker, are able to identify what part of the clotting process is disrupted, and provide information on clot formation over time and fibrinolysis.
OBJECTIVES: This assessment aimed to assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of VE devices to assist with the diagnosis, management and monitoring of haemostasis disorders during and after cardiac surgery, trauma-induced coagulopathy and post-partum haemorrhage (PPH).
METHODS: Sixteen databases were searched to December 2013: MEDLINE (OvidSP), MEDLINE In-Process and Other Non-Indexed Citations and Daily Update (OvidSP), EMBASE (OvidSP), BIOSIS Previews (Web of Knowledge), Science Citation Index (SCI) (Web of Science), Conference Proceedings Citation Index (CPCI-S) (Web of Science), Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (CDSR), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE), Health Technology Assessment (HTA) database, Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature (LILACS), International Network of Agencies for Health Technology Assessment (INAHTA), National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) HTA programme, Aggressive Research Intelligence Facility (ARIF), Medion, and the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO). Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were assessed for quality using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool. Prediction studies were assessed using QUADAS-2. For RCTs, summary relative risks (RRs) were estimated using random-effects models. Continuous data were summarised narratively. For prediction studies, the odds ratio (OR) was selected as the primary effect estimate. The health-economic analysis considered the costs and quality-adjusted life-years of ROTEM, TEG and Sonoclot compared with SLTs in cardiac surgery and trauma patients. A decision tree was used to take into account short-term complications and longer-term side effects from transfusion. The model assumed a 1-year time horizon.
RESULTS: Thirty-one studies (39 publications) were included in the clinical effectiveness review. Eleven RCTs (n=1089) assessed VE devices in patients undergoing cardiac surgery; six assessed thromboelastography (TEG) and five assessed ROTEM. There was a significant reduction in RBC transfusion [RR 0.88, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.80 to 0.96; six studies], platelet transfusion (RR 0.72, 95% CI 0.58 to 0.89; six studies) and fresh frozen plasma to transfusion (RR 0.47, 95% CI 0.35 to 0.65; five studies) in VE testing groups compared with control. There were no significant differences between groups in terms of other blood products transfused. Continuous data on blood product use supported these findings. Clinical outcomes did not differ significantly between groups. There were no apparent differences between ROTEM or TEG; none of the RCTs evaluated Sonoclot. There were no data on the clinical effectiveness of VE devices in trauma patients or women with PPH. VE testing was cost-saving and more effective than SLTs. For the cardiac surgery model, the cost-saving was &#xa3;43 for ROTEM, &#xa3;79 for TEG and &#xa3;132 for Sonoclot. For the trauma population, the cost-savings owing to VE testing were more substantial, amounting to per-patient savings of &#xa3;688 for ROTEM compared with SLTs, &#xa3;721 for TEG, and &#xa3;818 for Sonoclot. This finding was entirely dependent on material costs, which are slightly higher for ROTEM. VE testing remained cost-saving following various scenario analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: VE testing is cost-saving and more effective than SLTs, in both patients undergoing cardiac surgery and trauma patients. However, there were no data on the clinical effectiveness of Sonoclot or of VE devices in trauma patients.
STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42013005623.
FUNDING: The NIHR Health Technology Assessment programme.

### PMID 26142037 (2015) — Gastrointestinal endoscopy clinics of North America
TITLE: Hemostatic Powders in Gastrointestinal Bleeding: A Systematic Review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.giec.2015.02.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostatic agents and powders are an emerging modality in the endoscopic management of upper and lower gastrointestinal bleeding. This systematic review demonstrates the effectiveness and safety of these agents with special emphasis on TC-325 and Ankaferd Blood Stopper. The unique noncontact/nontraumatic application, ability to cover large areas of bleed, and ease of use make these hemostatic agents an attractive option in certain clinical situations, such as massive bleeding with poor visualization, salvage therapy, and diffuse bleeding from luminal malignancies.

### PMID 25870633 (2014) — The journal of Tehran Heart Center
TITLE: Biological glue application in repair of atrioventricular groove rupture: a case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Atrioventricular groove rupture is a rare, albeit mortal, complication following mitral valve surgery. Avoidance is the best strategy but it cannot fully prevent the occurrence of this complication. Several repair techniques have been described with varying success rates; however, the rarity of the complication precludes consensus about the safest technique. Here we report two cases of posterior atrioventricular groove rupture. Both cases were diagnosed immediately after the cessation of cardiopulmonary bypass. Repair was performed successfully with a technique involving the use of biological glue. The postoperative course was uneventful for both of them. Both cases are well with normally functioning mitral prostheses; one with a follow-up time of 5.5 years and the other 10 months. We believe that the glue provides additional hemostasis and support to the repaired area.

### PMID 23180147 (2014) — Hernia : the journal of hernias and abdominal wall surgery
TITLE: Beneficial effects of fibrin glue (Quixil) versus Lichtenstein conventional technique in inguinal hernia repair: a randomized clinical trial.
DOI: 10.1007/s10029-012-1020-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: In inguinal hernia repair, many complications are due to mesh fixation technique. Therefore, new types of atraumatic methods of fixation have been proposed. In this article, we present the results of a prospective multicentric parallel randomized controlled trial aiming to compare two mesh fixation techniques: fibrin sealant (QUIXIL(&#xae;), Omrix Biopharmaceuticals S.A., Belgium) and Lichtenstein technique.
METHOD: Adult patients with primary uncomplicated inguinal hernia were randomized in two groups: fibrin sealant group (FSG) and Lichtenstein group (LTG). The two groups underwent a follow-up of 15 months. Operative time is the primary outcome. Intraoperative and postoperative outcomes were analyzed. Moreover, a differential cost analysis was performed. Patients and evaluators (with exception of the surgeon who treated the patient) were blinded.
RESULTS: A total of 102 patients, 50 in FSG and 52 in LTG, were enrolled from January 2009 to June 2010, and two patients were lost to follow-up at the twelfth month. No significant differences in baseline and clinical characteristics were observed in the two groups. Operative time was longer in LTG (median/ interquartile range: 35 min/30-42.5 min vs. 31 min/28-35 min; effect size: 0.65/95% CI 0.50-0.91; p &lt; 0.05). No differences in intraoperative complications were observed. No significant differences were observed in early complication rate (RR = 0.62; p &gt; 0.05). Numbness rate was lower in the FSG at 1 week (RR = 0.43; p &lt; 0.01) and at 1 month (RR = 0.17; p &lt; 0.05). No significant differences were observed after 6 months. Postoperative pain was lower in the FSG at 1 week (0/0-1 vs. 1/0-2; p &lt; 0.05) and at 1 month (0/0-0 vs. 0/0-1; p &lt; 0.05). Pain disappeared in all patients after 6 months. Analgesic assumption rate was lower in the FSG (RR = 0.42; p &lt; 0.05). Twenty per cent of FSG and 9.62% of LTG patients were discharged within 12 h; 78% of FSG and 90.38% of LTG patients were discharged within 24 h. The only one recurrence we observed was in FSG group. About costs, although fibrin sealant needed for one mesh fixation is about 10 times more costly than the needed sutures, the total costs of the two procedures did not change significantly. This was mainly due to reduction in operative time.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of fibrin sealant determined a significant reduction in short-term numbness rate and postoperative pain. There was no relevant difference in total costs per patient between the two procedures.

### PMID 25316253 (2014) — Journal of orthopaedic surgery and research
TITLE: The efficacy of a thrombin-based hemostatic agent in primary total knee arthroplasty: a meta-analysis.
DOI: 10.1186/s13018-014-0090-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is a popular procedure in severe osteoarthritis. But perioperative bleeding remains a problem. Floseal&#xae; is a mixture of thrombin and bovine gelatin which can benefit a lot on reducing intraoperative and postoperative bleeding. However, there is no enough evidence judging its safety and efficiency. So a meta-analysis is conducted by us to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a thrombin-based hemostatic agent compared with conventional methods in TKA.
METHOD: Two independent reviewers selected literatures published before August 2014 from MEDLINE, Embase, and The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials. Other internet databases were also performed to identify trials according to the Cochrane Collaboration guidelines. High-quality randomized controlled trials (RCTs), prospective control trials (PCTs), and case controlled trials (CCTs) were selected. The meta-analysis was undertaken using RevMan 5.1 for Windows.
RESULTS: Three RCTs, one PCT, and one CCT met the inclusion criteria. There were significant differences in hemoglobin decline and calculated total blood loss between the Floseal&#xae; group and control group. There were no significant differences in postoperative drainage volume, rate of transfusion requirement, incidence of wound infection, deep vein thrombosis (DVT), and pulmonary embolism (PE) between treatment and control groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The present meta-analysis indicates that a thrombin-based hemostatic agent can reduce hemoglobin decline and calculated total blood loss after TKA and is not related to adverse reactions or complications such as wound infection, DVT, and PE.

### PMID 24927164 (2014) — Journal of medical economics
TITLE: Hospital economic impact from hemostatic matrix usage in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.3111/13696998.2014.928638 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Randomized Controlled Trial, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Improved health outcomes can result in economic savings for hospitals and payers. While effectiveness of topical hemostatic agents in cardiac surgery has been demonstrated, evaluations of their economic benefit are limited. This study quantifies the cost consequences to hospitals, based on clinical outcomes, from using a flowable hemostatic matrix vs non-flowable topical hemostatic agents in cardiac surgery.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Applying clinical outcomes from a prospective randomized clinical trial, a cost consequence framework was utilized to model the economic impact of comparator groups. From that study, clinical outcomes were obtained and analyzed for a flowable hemostatic matrix (FLOSEAL, Baxter Healthcare Corporation) vs non-flowable topical hemostats (SURGICEL Nu-Knit, Ethicon-Johnson &amp; Johnson; GELFOAM, Pfizer). Costing analyses focused on the following outcomes: complications, blood transfusions, surgical revisions, and operating room (OR) time. Cardiac surgery costs were analyzed and expressed in 2012 US dollars based on available literature searches and US data. Comparator group variability in cost consequences (i.e., cost savings) was calculated based on annualized impact and scenario testing.
RESULTS: RESULTS suggest that if a flowable hemostatic matrix (rather than a non-flowable hemostat) was utilized exclusively in 600 mixed cardiac surgeries annually, a hospital could improve patient outcomes by a reduction of 33 major complications, 76 minor complications, 54 surgical revisions, 194 transfusions, and 242 h of OR time. These outcomes correspond to a net annualized cost consequence savings of $5.38 million, with complication avoidance as the largest contributor.
CONCLUSIONS: This cost consequence framework and supportive modeling was used to evaluate the hospital economic impact of outcomes resulting from the usage of various hemostatic agents. These analyses support that cost savings can be achieved from routine use of a flowable hemostatic matrix, rather than a non-flowable topical hemostat, in cardiac surgery.

### PMID 25246797 (2014) — Vascular health and risk management
TITLE: Economic and outcomes consequences of TachoSil&#xae;: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.2147/VHRM.S63199 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: TachoSil(&#xae;) is a medicated sponge coated with human fibrinogen and human thrombin. It is indicated as a support treatment in adult surgery to improve hemostasis, promote tissue sealing, and support sutures when standard surgical techniques are insufficient. This review systematically analyses the international scientific literature relating to the use of TachoSil in hemostasis and as a surgical sealant, from the point of view of its economic impact.
METHODS: We carried out a systematic review of the PubMed literature up to November 2013. Based on the selection criteria, papers were grouped according to the following outcomes: reduction of time to hemostasis; decrease in length of hospital stay; and decrease in postoperative complications.
RESULTS: Twenty-four scientific papers were screened, 13 (54%) of which were randomized controlled trials and included a total of 2,116 patients, 1,055 of whom were treated with TachoSil. In the clinical studies carried out in patients undergoing hepatic, cardiac, or renal surgery, the time to hemostasis obtained with TachoSil was lower (1-4 minutes) than the time measured with other techniques and hemostatic drugs, with statistically significant differences. Moreover, in 13 of 15 studies, TachoSil showed a statistically significant reduction in postoperative complications in comparison with the standard surgical procedure. The range of the observed decrease in the length of hospital stay for TachoSil patients was 2.01-3.58 days versus standard techniques, with a statistically significant difference in favor of TachoSil in eight of 15 studies.
CONCLUSION: This analysis shows that TachoSil has a role as a supportive treatment in surgery to improve hemostasis and promote tissue sealing when standard techniques are insufficient, with a consequent decrease in postoperative complications and hospital costs.

### PMID 24755705 (2014) — The Journal of cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: The use fibrinogen/thrombin-coated equine collagen patch in children requiring reoperations for congenital heart disease. A single center clinical experience.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of fibrinogen/thrombin-coated collagen patch (FTCCP)(TachoSil&#xae;) during intraoperative hemostasis in patients with congenital heart disease, who required a reoperation during childhood.
METHODS: We reviewed data on the intraoperative blood product requirements and hospital costs of children (age &lt;16 years) who underwent a reoperation for treating their congenital heart disease between January 2009 and December 2011.
RESULTS: One-hundred and seventeen patients were included. Median age at surgery was 2.1 years (range 3 days-14.1 years). Main causes of intraoperative bleeding were: 1) reinforcement of suture lines (106 patients, 90.6%); 2) lung lesions (5 patients, 4.2%); 3) epicardial lesions (3 patients, 2.6%); and 4) chest wall lesions (3 patients, 2.6%). At logistic regression the amount of packed red blood cells (PRBC) requirement was significantly higher in patients with preoperative cyanosis (P=0.008, OR=3.85) and in patients who required the use of cardiopulmonary bypass (P=0.005, OR=21.19). The use of FTCCP (N.=90 patients) as first line treatment was significantly associated with a lower PRBC requirement (P=0.0003, OR=0.1) which in addition to the avoidance of other hemostatic/sealant agents, leads to lower hospital cost.
CONCLUSION: FTCCP is an effective hemostatic agent which can be safely used during the hemostasis of children requiring reoperations for their congenital heart malformations. When used as first line treatment, with specific indications, FTCCP limited the intraoperative PRBC requirement and the use of other hemostatic/sealant agents thus reducing hospital costs.

### PMID 25344707 (2014) — Journal of special operations medicine : a peer reviewed journal for SOF medical professionals
TITLE: Management of External Hemorrhage in Tactical Combat Casualty Care: Chitosan-Based Hemostatic Gauze Dressings--TCCC Guidelines-Change 13-05.
DOI: 10.55460/03VO-8FLO | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Hemorrhage remains the leading cause of combat death and a major cause of death from potentially survivable injuries. Great strides have been made in controlling extremity hemorrhage with tourniquets, but not all injuries are amenable to tourniquet application. Topical hemostatic agents and dressings have also contributed to success in controlling extremity and compressible junctional hemorrhage, and their efficacy continues to increase as enhanced products are developed. Since the addition of Combat Gauze&#x2122; (Z-Medica Corporation, Wallingford, CT, USA; http://www.z-medica.com/) in April 2008 to the Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TCCC) Guidelines, there are consistent data from animal studies of severe hemorrhage that chitosan-based hemostatic gauze dressings developed for battlefield application are, at least, equally efficacious as Combat Gauze. Successful outcomes are also reported using newer chitosan-based dressings in civilian hospital-based surgical case reports and prehospital (battlefield) case reports and series. Additionally, there have been no noted complications or safety concerns in these cases or across many years of chitosan-based hemostatic dressing use in both the military and civilian prehospital sectors. Consequently, after a decade of clinical use, there is added benefit and a good safety record for using chitosan-based gauze dressings. For these reasons, many specific US military Special Operations Forces, NATO militaries, and emergency medical services (EMS) and law enforcement agencies have already implemented the widespread use of these new recommended chitosan-based hemostatic dressings. Based on the past battlefield success, this report proposes to keep Combat Gauze as the hemostatic dressing of choice along with the new addition of Celox&#x2122; Gauze (Medtrade Products Ltd., Crewe, UK; http://www.celoxmedical.com/usa/products /celox-gauze/) and ChitoGauze&#xae; (HemCon Medical Technologies, Portland, OR, USA; http://www.hemcon.com/) to the TCCC Guidelines.

### PMID 23578196 (2013) — Journal of cardiac surgery
TITLE: Use of fibrin sealants in cardiovascular surgery: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1111/jocs.12099 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealants are used for hemostasis and tissue adherence.
AIM OF STUDY: This systematic review summarizes published clinical data for fibrin sealant use in cardiovascular surgery.
METHODS: A literature search for the following terms was conducted using PubMed and EMBASE: (TISSEEL or Tissucol or Beriplast P or Evicel or Quixil or Crosseal or Reliseal or Fibringluraas or Bolheal or Tachosil or Vivostat or Vitagel or Artiss or "fibrin glue" or "fibrin sealant" or "fibrin tissue adhesive") and (cardiac or cardiovascular or vascular or heart or coronary or surgery). Case reports and series were excluded; although reports of controlled trials were preferred, uncontrolled trial data were also considered.
RESULTS: Clinical trials and chart review analyses of fibrin sealants were identified and summarized. Although clinical trial data were available for other agents, the majority of published studies examined TISSEEL. Overall, TISSEEL and other fibrin sealants showed improvements over standard of care or control groups for a variety of predefined endpoints. Safety findings are also summarized.
CONCLUSIONS: Data from these studies showed that fibrin sealants were well tolerated and provided effective hemostasis in a range of cardiac and aortic surgeries.

### PMID 23700183 (2013) — Surgical technology international
TITLE: Gelatin-thrombin matrix for intraoperative hemostasis in abdomino-pelvic surgery: a systematic review.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: Different hemostatic methods are available for mild to moderate intraoperative bleeding during open and laparoscopic abdomino-pelvic surgery, but topical hemostats have gained popularity. We sought to review evidence on the use of a gelatin-thrombin matrix (FloSeal&#xae;) in elective abdominal and pelvic surgery. A systematic search of PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane databases was conducted. The primary endpoints were intraoperative bleeding and number of transfusions. Secondary endpoints included operative time, postoperative complications, re-operation for bleeding, mortality, and duration of hospitalization. Of five controlled trials, only three were prospective, randomized-controlled studies. The first, in open myomectomy, showed that hemostatic matrix dramatically reduced intraoperative bleeding and transfusion rates compared with conventional hemostatic measures. Hemostatic matrix also reduced postoperative stay. Similar results were obtained in a trial comparing FloSeal versus infrared-sapphire coagulator during open renal tumor enucleation. In the third, FloSeal was equally as effective as conventional suture methods in preventing staple-line bleeding after sleeve gastrectomy. Data were not pooled because of the heterogeneity in design. There is insufficient evidence that FloSeal provides better results than conventional hemostasis in abdominal and pelvic surgery, except for open myomectomy. Well-designed randomized trials are needed to evaluate the use of gelatin-thrombin matrix in elective abdomino-pelvic surgery outcomes.

### PMID 23924686 (2013) — Postgraduate medical journal
TITLE: Modern management of acute non-variceal upper gastrointestinal bleeding.
DOI: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2013-131842 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: An acute upper gastrointestinal bleed (AUGIB) often represents a life-threatening event and is recognised universally as a common cause of emergency hospitalisation. Large observational studies have improved our understanding of the disease characteristics and its impact on mortality but despite significant advancement in endoscopic management, mortality remains high, particularly in elderly patients and those with multiple comorbidities. Skilled assessment, risk stratification and prompt resuscitation are essential parts of patient care, with endoscopy playing a key role in the definitive management. A successful outcome partly relies on the clinician's familiarity with current guidelines and recommendations, including the National Institute for Clinical Excellence guidelines published in 2012. Validated risk stratification scores, such as the Blatchford and Rockall score, facilitate early discharge of low-risk patients as well as help in identifying those needing early endoscopic intervention. Major advances in therapeutic endoscopy, including more recently, the development of non-toxic proprietary powders (Hemospray and EndoClot), have resulted in the development of effective treatments of bleeding lesions, reduction in rebleeding rates and the need for emergency surgery. The role of proton-pump inhibitor therapy prior to endoscopy and the level of optimum red cell transfusion in the setting of AUGIB remain fields that require further research.

### PMID 23986527 (2013) — The Cochrane database of systematic reviews
TITLE: Fibrinogen concentrate in bleeding patients.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008864.pub2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Hypofibrinogenaemia is associated with increased morbidity and mortality, but the optimal treatment level, the use of preemptive treatment and the preferred source of fibrinogen remain disputed. Fibrinogen concentrate is increasingly used and recommended for bleeding with acquired haemostatic deficiencies in several countries, but evidence is lacking regarding indications, dosing, efficacy and safety.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the benefits and harms of fibrinogen concentrate compared with placebo or usual treatment for bleeding patients.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following electronic databases: the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) (The Cochrane Library 2013, Issue 8); MEDLINE (1950 to 9 August 2013); EMBASE (1980 to 9 August 2013); International Web of Science (1964 to 9 August 2013); CINAHL (1980 to 9 August 2013); LILACS (1982 to 9 August 2013); and the Chinese Biomedical Literature Database (up to 10 November 2011), together with databases of ongoing trials. We contacted trial authors, authors of previous reviews and manufacturers in the field.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included all randomized controlled trials (RCTs), irrespective of blinding or language, that compared fibrinogen concentrate with placebo/other treatment or no treatment in bleeding patients, excluding neonates and patients with hereditary bleeding disorders.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three review authors independently abstracted data; we resolved any disagreements by discussion. Our primary outcome measure was all-cause mortality. We performed subgroup and sensitivity analyses to assess the effects of fibrinogen concentrate in adults and children in terms of various clinical and physiological outcomes. We presented pooled estimates of the effects of intervention on dichotomous outcomes as risk ratios (RRs) and on continuous outcomes as mean differences, with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). We assessed the risk of bias through assessment of trial methodological components and the risk of random error through trial sequential analysis.
MAIN RESULTS: We included six RCTs with a total of 248 participants; none of the trials were determined to have overall low risk of bias. We found 12 ongoing trials, from which we were unable to retrieve any data. Only two trials provided data on mortality, and one was a zero event study; thus the meta-analysis showed no statistically significant effect on overall mortality (2.6% vs 9.5%, RR 0.28, 95% CI 0.03 to 2.33). Our analyses on blood transfusion data suggest a beneficial effect of fibrinogen concentrate in reducing the incidence of allogenic transfusions (RR 0.47, 95% CI 0.31 to 0.72) but show no effect on other predefined outcomes, including adverse events such as thrombotic episodes.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: In the six available RCTs of elective surgery, fibrinogen concentrate appears to reduce transfusion requirements, but the included trials are of low quality with high risk of bias and are underpowered to detect mortality, benefit or harm. Furthermore, data on mortality are lacking, heterogeneity is high and acute or severe bleeding in a non-elective surgical setting remains unexplored. Currently, weak evidence supports the use of fibrinogen concentrate in bleeding patients, as tested here in primarily elective cardiac surgery. More research is urgently needed.

### PMID 23561819 (2013) — Seminars in thoracic and cardiovascular surgery. Pediatric cardiac surgery annual
TITLE: Neonatal cardiopulmonary bypass.
DOI: 10.1053/j.pcsu.2013.01.010 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass is routinely used in neonates who require early repair of congenital heart diseases. However, the bypass temperature and use of deep hypothermic circulatory arrest, the composition of the priming and the acceptable degree of hemodilution, the prophylactic use of antifibrinolytic agents and steroids, the choice of myocardial protection, the best PaO2, and even the pump flow, are still subjects of debate, despite major improvements in neonatal bypass over the last decade. Nevertheless, there are some techniques that have reached a near-consensus and are highly recommended in neonates: the use of minaturized bypass circuits to reduce blood product transfusions and inflammation, ultrafiltration, and the continuous monitoring of mixed venous and regional oxygen saturations to assess adequacy of perfusion. Nevertheless, surprisingly many different techniques may lead to the same results and mortality rate. As operative mortality rates have declined, the comparison endpoints between techniques have moved and focus on morbidity rates, extubation delay, ICU and hospital length of stay; in other words, the cost and (of course) the late functional outcome are certainly the new goals of neonatal cardiopulmonary bypass.

### PMID 23582528 (2013) — Gastrointestinal endoscopy
TITLE: Topical hemostatic agents: a systematic review with particular emphasis on endoscopic application in GI bleeding.
DOI: 10.1016/j.gie.2013.01.020 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 23339601 (2013) — Current medical research and opinion
TITLE: Systematic review and meta-analysis of application of fibrin sealant after liver resection.
DOI: 10.1185/03007995.2013.768216 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Fibrin sealant (FS) has been increasingly used on the raw surface after liver resection but its clinical value has not been established to date. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the employment of FS after liver resection.
METHODS: PubMed, Cochrane Library, Embase, CNKI, CBM and VIP were searched for randomized trials comparing the effect of FS with no FS or any other intervention for patients undergoing liver resection. Primary outcomes included time to hemostasis, hemostatic success, amount of drainage and drainage duration.
RESULTS: Eleven randomized controlled trials were included. Meta-analysis suggested that the amount of drainage (standard mean difference -0.30; 95% confidence interval [CI] -0.82 to 0.23) and drainage duration (mean difference [MD] -0.46, 95% CI -0.61 to -1.53) were similar between FS group and no FS group. Compared with topical hemostatic agents, FS could significantly reduce time to hemostasis (MD -208.46, 95% CI -228.22 to -188.70) and increase hemostasis success rate (relative risk 1.35, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.57). Two trials compared FS with argon beam coagulation (ABC), which both suggested that FS could significantly decrease the time to hemostasis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated a modest benefit of FS over no FS, topical hemostatic agents and ABC in controlling intraoperative bleeding from the raw liver surface after liver resection. But there is no evidence that FS is beneficial to patients in reducing amount of drainage and drainage duration.

### PMID 23043723 (2012) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Assessment of the effect on blood loss and transfusion requirements when adding a polyethylene glycol sealant to the anastomotic closure of aortic procedures: a case-control analysis of 102 patients undergoing Bentall procedures.
DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-7-105 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The use of CoSeal(&#xae;), a polyethylene glycol sealant, in cardiac and vascular surgery for prevention of anastomotic bleeding has been subject to prior investigations. We analysed our perioperative data to determine the clinical benefit of using polyethylene glycol sealant to inhibit suture line bleeding in aortic surgery.
METHODS: From January 2004 to June 2006, 124 patients underwent aortic surgical procedures such as full root replacements, reconstruction and/or replacement of ascending aorta and aortic arch procedures. A Bentall procedure was employed in 102 of these patients. In 48 of these, a polyethylene glycol sealant was added to the anastomotic closure of the aortic procedure (sealant group) and the other 54 patients did not have this additive treatment to the suture line (control group).
RESULTS: There were no significant between-group differences in the demographic characteristics of the patients undergoing Bentall procedures. Mean EuroSCORES (European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation) were 13.7 &#xb1; 7.7 (sealant group) and 14.4 &#xb1; 6.2 (control group), p = NS. The polyethylene glycol sealant group had reduced intraoperative and postoperative transfusion requirements (red blood cells: 761 &#xb1; 863 versus 1248 &#xb1; 1206 ml, p = 0.02; fresh frozen plasma: 413 &#xb1; 532 versus 779 &#xb1; 834 ml, p = 0.009); and less postoperative drainage loss (985 &#xb1; 972 versus 1709 &#xb1; 1302 ml, p = 0.002). A trend towards a lower rate of rethoracotomy was observed in the sealant group (1/48 versus 6/54, p = 0.07) and there was significantly less time spent in the intensive care unit or hospital (both p = 0.03). Based on hypothesis-generating calculations, the resulting economic benefit conferred by shorter intensive care unit and hospital stays, reduced transfusion requirements and a potentially lower rethoracotomy rate is estimated at &#x20ac;1,943 per patient in this data analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of this polymeric surgical sealant demonstrated improved intraoperative and postoperative management of anastomotic bleeding in Bentall procedures, leading to reduced postoperative drainage loss, less transfusion requirements, and a trend towards a lower rate of rethoracotomy. Hypothesis-generating calculations indicate that the use of this sealant translates to cost savings. Further studies are warranted to investigate the clinical and economic benefits of CoSeal in a prospective manner.

### PMID 22657101 (2012) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: A novel approach to control air leaks in complex lung surgery: a retrospective review.
DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-7-49 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Intra-operative air leaks (IOAL) are common complications of pulmonary surgery. The post-operative management of air leaks requires a chest tube which may lead to longer hospitalization, further medical complications, and increased costs. Sealants have been shown to help control intra-operative air leaks and studies have demonstrated a reduction in chest tube duration and/or length of hospital stay. Nevertheless, systematic reviews have not presented sufficient evidence to recommend their general use in lung resection.
METHODS: One hundred and twenty-one consecutive patients who underwent pulmonary surgery with and without Progel&#xae; Pleural Air Leak Sealant were reviewed retrospectively. Intra-operative and 3-months postoperative data were assessed for the presence and persistence of air leaks, chest tube duration, the length of hospital stay, and complications.
RESULTS: Seventy patients (57.9%) had IOAL. Thirty-six were treated with Progel in addition to standard intra-operative technique (pleural-sealant group; PSG) and 34 patients were treated only with standard technique (control group; CG). The percentage of post-operative air leaks in the PSG was 11% (1.2% &gt;Grade 2 air leak) compared with 58.8% (6% &gt;Grade 2 air leak) in the CG (p &lt;0.0001, Leaks graded from 1 = small air leak to 7 = large air leak). The median chest tube duration was significantly shorter in the PSG compared with the controls (1.0 versus 2.5 days; p &lt; 0.0001). The median length of hospital stay was 50% lower in the PSG compared with the control group (1.5 versus 3.0 days; p = 0.047). There were no significant differences in complications between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this single-center, single surgeon, retrospective review demonstrate a significant reduction in IOAL, chest tube duration, and length of hospital stay in the in patients treated with Progel when compared with standard intra-operative closure management alone. They suggest that the use of a pleural sealant is more effective in reducing alveolar air leaks associated with lung resection compared with standard closure techniques alone and may result in both an improved surgical outcome and a reduction in costs associated with prolonged hospital stay.

### PMID 22278103 (2012) — Surgical endoscopy
TITLE: Use of fibrin sealant (Tisseel/Tissucol) in hernia repair: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-012-2156-0 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Abdominal wall and inguinal hernia repair are the most frequently performed surgical procedures in the United States and Europe. However, traditional methods of mesh fixation are associated with a number of problems including substantial risks of recurrence and of postoperative and chronic pain. The aim of this systematic review is to summarize the clinical safety and efficacy of Tisseel/Tissucol fibrin sealant for hernia mesh fixation.
METHODS: A PubMed title/abstract search was conducted using the following terms: (fibrin glue OR fibrin sealant OR Tisseel OR Tissucol) AND hernia repair. The bibliographies of the publications identified in the search were reviewed for additional references.
RESULTS: There were 36 Tisseel/Tissucol studies included in this review involving 5,993 patients undergoing surgery for hernia. In open repair of inguinal hernias, Tisseel compared favorably with traditional methods of mesh fixation, being associated with shorter operative times and hospital stays and a lower incidence of chronic pain. Similarly, after laparoscopic/endoscopic inguinal hernia repair, Tisseel/Tissucol was associated with less use of postoperative analgesics and less acute and chronic postoperative pain than tissue-penetrating mesh-fixation methods. Other end points of concern to surgeons and patients are the risks of inguinal hernia recurrence and of complications such as hematoma formation and intraoperative bleeding. Comparative studies show that Tisseel/Tissucol does not increase the risk of these outcomes and may, in fact, decrease the risk compared with tissue-penetrating fixation methods. When used in the repair of incisional hernias, Tisseel/Tissucol significantly decreased both postoperative morbidity and duration of hospital stay.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical evidence published to date supports the use of Tisseel/Tissucol as an option for mesh fixation in open and laparoscopic/endoscopic repair of inguinal and incisional hernias. Guidelines of the International Endohernia Society recommend fibrin sealant mesh fixation, especially in inguinal hernia repair. Nonfixation is reserved for selected cases.

### PMID 21740379 (2012) — Current pharmaceutical biotechnology
TITLE: In search of a consensus terminology in the field of platelet concentrates for surgical use: platelet-rich plasma (PRP), platelet-rich fibrin (PRF), fibrin gel polymerization and leukocytes.
DOI: 10.2174/138920112800624328 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: In the field of platelet concentrates for surgical use, most products are termed Platelet-Rich Plasma (PRP). Unfortunately, this term is very general and incomplete, leading to many confusions in the scientific database. In this article, a panel of experts discusses this issue and proposes an accurate and simple terminology system for platelet concentrates for surgical use. Four main categories of products can be easily defined, depending on their leukocyte content and fibrin architecture: Pure Platelet-Rich Plasma (P-PRP), such as cell separator PRP, Vivostat PRF or Anitua's PRGF; Leukocyteand Platelet-Rich Plasma (L-PRP), such as Curasan, Regen, Plateltex, SmartPReP, PCCS, Magellan, Angel or GPS PRP; Pure Plaletet-Rich Fibrin (P-PRF), such as Fibrinet; and Leukocyte- and Platelet-Rich Fibrin (L-PRF), such as Choukroun's PRF. P-PRP and L-PRP refer to the unactivated liquid form of these products, their activated versions being respectively named P-PRP gels and L-PRP gels. The purpose of this search for a terminology consensus is to plead for a more serious characterization of these products. Researchers have to be aware of the complex nature of these living biomaterials, in order to avoid misunderstandings and erroneous conclusions. Understanding the biomaterials or believing in the magic of growth factors ? From this choice depends the future of the field.

### PMID 22985756 (2012) — Revista espanola de anestesiologia y reanimacion
TITLE: [Indications and use of prothrombin complex in cardiac surgery].
DOI: 10.1016/j.redar.2012.02.033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: On of the most common, and serious, complications in cardiac surgery is postoperative bleeding. According to the majority of studies, between 10% and 92% of patients subjected to elective surgery require transfusions of blood products and blood derivatives. Transfusions and reinterventions are associated with longer stays in critical care units and a decrease in survival rates. There have been some important changes in the treatment of changes in haemostasis and post-surgical bleeding in the last few years, particularly with the introduction into clinical practice of working procedures backed up by clinical guidelines, as well as the appearance of new drugs. The aim of this work is to describe the main characteristics and update the use of prothrombin complexes that are currently available in Spain, with special emphasis on their use in cardiac surgery.

### PMID 22397329 (2012) — Drugs
TITLE: Tranexamic acid: a review of its use in the treatment of hyperfibrinolysis.
DOI: 10.2165/11209070-000000000-00000 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Tranexamic acid, a synthetic derivative of the amino acid lysine, is an antifibrinolytic agent that acts by binding to plasminogen and blocking the interaction of plasmin(ogen) with fibrin, thereby preventing dissolution of the fibrin clot. Tranexamic acid (Transamin&#xae;) is indicated in Japan for use in certain conditions with abnormal bleeding or bleeding tendencies in which local or systemic hyperfibrinolysis is considered to be involved. This article reviews the efficacy and tolerability of tranexamic acid in conditions amenable to antifibrinolytic therapy and briefly overviews the pharmacological properties of the drug. In large, randomized controlled trials, tranexamic acid generally significantly reduced perioperative blood loss compared with placebo in a variety of surgical procedures, including cardiac surgery with or without cardiopulmonary bypass, total hip and knee replacement and prostatectomy. In many instances, tranexamic acid also reduced transfusion requirements associated with surgery. It also reduced blood loss in gynaecological bleeding disorders, such as heavy menstrual bleeding, postpartum haemorrhage and bleeding irregularities caused by contraceptive implants. Tranexamic acid significantly reduced all-cause mortality and death due to bleeding in trauma patients with significant bleeding, particularly when administered early after injury. It was also effective in traumatic hyphaema, gastrointestinal bleeding and hereditary angioneurotic oedema. While it reduces rebleeding in subarachnoid haemorrhage, it may increase ischaemic complications. Pharmacoeconomic analyses predicted that tranexamic acid use in surgery and trauma would be very cost effective and potentially life saving. In direct comparisons with other marketed agents, tranexamic acid was at least as effective as &#x3b5;-aminocaproic acid and more effective than desmopressin in surgical procedures. It was more effective than desmopressin, etamsylate, flurbiprofen, mefenamic acid and norethisterone, but less effective than the levonorgestrel-releasing intra-uterine device in heavy menstrual bleeding and was as effective as prednisolone in traumatic hyphaema. Tranexamic acid was generally well tolerated. Most adverse events in clinical trials were of mild or moderate severity; severe or serious events were rare. Therefore, while high-quality published evidence is limited for some approved indications, tranexamic acid is an effective and well tolerated antifibrinolytic agent.

### PMID 22113929 (2012) — British journal of anaesthesia
TITLE: Cost analysis of re-exploration for bleeding after coronary artery bypass graft surgery.
DOI: 10.1093/bja/aer391 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Re-exploration for bleeding after cardiac surgery is an indicator of substantial haemorrhage and is associated with increased hospital resource utilization. This study aimed to analyse the costs of re-exploration and estimate the costs of haemostatic prophylaxis.
METHODS: A total of 4232 patients underwent isolated, first-time, coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery during 2005-8. Each patient re-explored for bleeding (n=127) was matched with two controls not requiring re-exploration (n=254). Cost analysis was based on resource utilization from completion of CABG until discharge. A mean cost per patient for re-exploration was calculated. Based on this, the net cost of prophylactic treatment with haemostatic drugs for preventing re-exploration was calculated.
RESULTS: Patients undergoing re-exploration had higher exposure to clopidogrel before operation, prolonged stays in the intensive care unit, and more blood transfusions than controls. The mean incremental cost for re-exploration was &#x20ac;6290 [95% confidence interval (CI) &#x20ac;3408-&#x20ac;9173] per patient, of which 48% [&#x20ac;3001 (95% CI &#x20ac;249-&#x20ac;2147)] was due to prolonged stay, 31% [&#x20ac;1928 (95% CI &#x20ac;1710-&#x20ac;2147)] to the cost of surgery/anaesthesia, 20% [&#x20ac;1261 (95% CI &#x20ac;1145-&#x20ac;1378)] to the increased number of blood transfusions, and &lt;2% [&#x20ac;100 (95% CI &#x20ac;39-&#x20ac;161)] to the cost of haemostatic drugs. A cost model, at an estimated 50% efficacy for recombinant activated clotting factor VIIa and a 50% expected risk for re-exploration without prophylaxis, demonstrated that to be cost neutral, prophylaxis of four patients needed to result in one avoided re-exploration.
CONCLUSIONS: The resource utilization costs were substantially higher in patients requiring re-exploration for bleeding. From a strict cost-effectiveness perspective, clinical interventions to prevent haemorrhage might be underutilized.

### PMID 23233882 (2012) — Archives of plastic surgery
TITLE: The efficacy and safety of platelet-rich plasma and adipose-derived stem cells: an update.
DOI: 10.5999/aps.2012.39.6.585 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: During the past decade, many studies using platelet-rich plasma (PRP) or adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) have been conducted in various medical fields, from cardiovascular research to applications for corneal diseases. Nonetheless, there are several limitations of practical applications of PRP and ASCs. Most reports of PRP are anecdotal and few include controls to determine the specific role of PRP. There is little consensus regarding PRP production and characterization. Some have reported the development of an antibody to bovine thrombin, which was the initiator of platelet activation. In the case of ASCs, good manufacturing practices are needed for the production of clinical-grade human stem cells, and in vitro expansion of ASCs requires approval of the Korea Food and Drug Administration, such that considerable expense and time are required. Additionally, some have reported that ASCs could have a potential risk of transformation to malignant cells. Therefore, the authors tried to investigate the latest research on the efficacy and safety of PRP and ASCs and report on the current state and regulation of these stem cell-based therapies.

### PMID 22633222 (2012) — Veterinary immunology and immunopathology
TITLE: Proteomic analysis of plasma from Holstein cows testing positive for Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP).
DOI: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2012.05.002 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Johne's disease (JD) is a widespread and economically important chronic inflammatory disease of the small intestine of ruminants caused by Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP). Although there are several techniques available for diagnosis of JD, their sensitivity is questionable. New proteome profiling methods, such as serum/plasma protein fingerprinting by 2-Dimensional Fluorescence Difference Gel Electrophoresis (2D-DIGE), may therefore be useful for identifying novel protein biomarkers of MAP infection. In this study, plasma samples were collected from 380 Holstein cows and screened for the presence of MAP infection using the M.pt. Johne's antibody Kit (IDEXX). Five negative (MAP-), and 5 strongly positive (MAP+) cows were selected for proteomic analysis. Highly abundant proteins were depleted from the plasma samples using the ProteoMiner technology (Bio-Rad) to enhance the resolution of low abundance proteins. Plasma samples from MAP-, MAP+, and a pooled internal control were labelled with different fluorescent dyes and separated based on their isoelectrical point (IP) and then their molecular weight. Gel images of the fluorescent plasma protein maps were acquired using a Typhoon scanner and analyzed using the DeCyder software. Proteins that were differentially expressed were excised from the gels, trypsin digested, and subjected to MS/MS analysis for identification. Six proteins were identified as being up-regulated at least 2-fold in MAP+ cows including: transferrin, gelsolin isoforms &#x3b1; &amp; &#x3b2; (actin binding protein - ABP), complement subcomponent C1r, complement component C3, amine oxidase - copper containing 3 (AOC3), and coagulation factor II (thrombin) (p&lt;0.05). Two proteins that were down-regulated approximately 2-fold in the MAP+ cows included coagulation factor XIII -B polypeptide (COAFXIII), and fibrinogen &#x3b3; chain (FGG) and its precursor.

### PMID 22790563 (2012) — European spine journal : official publication of the European Spine Society, the European Spinal Deformity Society, and the European Section of the Cervical Spine Research Society
TITLE: The management of vertebral artery injury in anterior cervical spine operation: a systematic review of published cases.
DOI: 10.1007/s00586-012-2423-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: Anterior cervical spine operations (ACSO) are generally considered to be safe and effective, but the vertebral artery (VA) is at risk during the procedure. Because the consequences of VA injury can be catastrophic, properly managing a VA injury is very important. However, due to the rarity of these injuries, there is no agreed upon treatment strategy.
METHODS: Studies were identified for inclusion in the review via sensitive searches of electronic databases through 31 December 2011. All cases included in the review were qualitatively analyzed to explore the relationship between type of VA injury management and neurological complications.
RESULTS: Seventeen articles describing 39 cases of VA injury during ACSO were included in this study. Seven patients (17.9 %) had neurological complications followed by VA insufficiency. Two patients (5.1 %) had root damage due to ligation. One case (2.6 %) resulted in intraoperative death due to fatal bleeding. Delayed vascular complications were identified in nine (45.0 %) of the 20 patients that underwent only tamponade or hemostatic agent during the operation. Four patients underwent intraoperative endovascular treatment, and three of these patients had a cerebral infarction. All three patients who underwent clipping also had neurological complications. The five patients treated by direct repair did not have any complications.
CONCLUSION: Our review suggests the management of VA injury should be considered in order listed: (1) performing tamponade with a hemostatic agent, (2) direct repair, (3) postoperative endovascular procedures to prevent delayed complications. If tamponade fails to achieve proper hemostasis, additional procedures as endovascular embolization, clipping and ligation should be considered but carry the risk of neurological complications. Because of the limitations of this review, further studies are recommended with larger sample sizes.

### PMID 22074613 (2011) — Journal of cardiothoracic surgery
TITLE: Several clinical interests regarding lung volume reduction surgery for severe emphysema: meta-analysis and systematic review of randomized controlled trials.
DOI: 10.1186/1749-8090-6-148 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: We aim to address several clinical interests regarding lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS) for severe emphysema using meta-analysis and systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCTs).
METHODS: Eight RCTs published from 1999 to 2010 were identified and synthesized to compare the efficacy and safety of LVRS vs conservative medical therapy. One RCT was obtained regarding comparison of median sternotomy (MS) and video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). And three RCTs were available evaluating clinical efficacy of using bovine pericardium for buttressing, autologous fibrin sealant and BioGlue, respectively.
RESULTS: Odds ratio (95%CI), expressed as the mortality of group A (the group underwent LVRS) versus group B (conservative medical therapies), was 5.16(2.84, 9.35) in 3 months, 3(0.94, 9.57) in 6 months, 1.05(0.82, 1.33) in 12 months, respectively. On the 3rd, 6th and 12th month, all lung function indices of group A were improved more significantly as compared with group B. PaO2 and PaCO2 on the 6th and 12th month showed the same trend. 6MWD of group A on the 6th month and 12th month were improved significantly than of group B, despite no difference on the 3rd month. Quality of life (QOL) of group A was better than of group B in 6 and 12 months. VATS is preferred to MS, due to the earlier recovery and lower cost. And autologous fibrin sealant and BioGlue seems to be the efficacious methods to reduce air leak following LVRS.
CONCLUSIONS: LVRS offers the more benefits regarding survival, lung function, gas exchange, exercise capacity and QOL, despite the higher mortality in initial three postoperative months. LVRS, with the optimization of surgical approach and material for reinforcement of the staple lines, should be recommended to patients suffering from severe heterogeneous emphysema.

### PMID 21502651 (2011) — Annals of internal medicine
TITLE: Systematic review: benefits and harms of in-hospital use of recombinant factor VIIa for off-label indications.
DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-154-8-201104190-00004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Research Support, U.S. Gov't, Non-P.H.S., Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S., Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa), a hemostatic agent approved for hemophilia, is increasingly used for off-label indications.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the benefits and harms of rFVIIa use for 5 off-label, in-hospital indications: intracranial hemorrhage, cardiac surgery, trauma, liver transplantation, and prostatectomy.
DATA SOURCES: Ten databases (including PubMed, EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library) queried from inception through December 2010. Articles published in English were analyzed.
STUDY SELECTION: Two reviewers independently screened titles and abstracts to identify clinical use of rFVIIa for the selected indications and identified all randomized, controlled trials (RCTs) and observational studies for full-text review.
DATA EXTRACTION: Two reviewers independently assessed study characteristics and rated study quality and indication-wide strength of evidence.
DATA SYNTHESIS: 16 RCTs, 26 comparative observational studies, and 22 noncomparative observational studies met inclusion criteria. Identified comparators were limited to placebo (RCTs) or usual care (observational studies). For intracranial hemorrhage, mortality was not improved with rFVIIa use across a range of doses. Arterial thromboembolism was increased with medium-dose rFVIIa use (risk difference [RD], 0.03 [95% CI, 0.01 to 0.06]) and high-dose rFVIIa use (RD, 0.06 [CI, 0.01 to 0.11]). For adult cardiac surgery, there was no mortality difference, but there was an increased risk for thromboembolism (RD, 0.05 [CI, 0.01 to 0.10]) with rFVIIa. For body trauma, there were no differences in mortality or thromboembolism, but there was a reduced risk for the acute respiratory distress syndrome (RD, -0.05 [CI, -0.02 to -0.08]). Mortality was higher in observational studies than in RCTs.
LIMITATIONS: The amount and strength of evidence were low for most outcomes and indications. Publication bias could not be excluded.
CONCLUSION: Limited available evidence for 5 off-label indications suggests no mortality reduction with rFVIIa use. For some indications, it increases thromboembolism.

### PMID 21078609 (2011) — Clinical and applied thrombosis/hemostasis : official journal of the International Academy of Clinical and Applied Thrombosis/Hemostasis
TITLE: Safety and efficacy of thrombin-JMI: a multidisciplinary expert group consensus.
DOI: 10.1177/1076029610385674 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Multicenter Study, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Consensus Statement
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The use of bovine thrombin has been an effective approach to aiding hemostasis during surgery for over 60 years. Its use has a reported association with the development of antibodies to coagulation factors with limited evidence to the clinical significance.
METHODS: The Collaborative Delphi survey methodology was used to develop a consensus on specified topic areas from a panel of 12 surgeons/scientists who have had experience with topical thrombins; it consisted of 2 rounds of a Web-based survey and a final live discussion.
RESULTS: Some key issues that reached consensus included: bovine, human plasma-derived and recombinant human thrombin are equally effective hemostatic agents with similar adverse event rates, and immunogenicity to a topical protein rarely translate into adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: Although a risk of immunogenicity is associated with all topical thrombins, no conclusive clinical evidence is available that these antibodies have any significant effect on short- and long-term clinical consequences.

### PMID 21353044 (2011) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: 2011 update to the Society of Thoracic Surgeons and the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists blood conservation clinical practice guidelines.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2010.11.078 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Practice guidelines reflect published literature. Because of the ever changing literature base, it is necessary to update and revise guideline recommendations from time to time. The Society of Thoracic Surgeons recommends review and possible update of previously published guidelines at least every three years. This summary is an update of the blood conservation guideline published in 2007.
METHODS: The search methods used in the current version differ compared to the previously published guideline. Literature searches were conducted using standardized MeSH terms from the National Library of Medicine PUBMED database list of search terms. The following terms comprised the standard baseline search terms for all topics and were connected with the logical 'OR' connector--Extracorporeal circulation (MeSH number E04.292), cardiovascular surgical procedures (MeSH number E04.100), and vascular diseases (MeSH number C14.907). Use of these broad search terms allowed specific topics to be added to the search with the logical 'AND' connector.
RESULTS: In this 2011 guideline update, areas of major revision include: 1) management of dual anti-platelet therapy before operation, 2) use of drugs that augment red blood cell volume or limit blood loss, 3) use of blood derivatives including fresh frozen plasma, Factor XIII, leukoreduced red blood cells, platelet plasmapheresis, recombinant Factor VII, antithrombin III, and Factor IX concentrates, 4) changes in management of blood salvage, 5) use of minimally invasive procedures to limit perioperative bleeding and blood transfusion, 6) recommendations for blood conservation related to extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and cardiopulmonary perfusion, 7) use of topical hemostatic agents, and 8) new insights into the value of team interventions in blood management.
CONCLUSIONS: Much has changed since the previously published 2007 STS blood management guidelines and this document contains new and revised recommendations.

### PMID 21059513 (2010) — The Canadian journal of neurological sciences. Le journal canadien des sciences neurologiques
TITLE: Use of tissue glues in endoscopic pituitary surgery: a cost comparison.
DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100010842 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Post-operative cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks are a common complication of endoscopic pituitary surgery and account for a significant proportion of hospital costs associated with this procedure. Tisseel&#xae; is a tissue glue commonly used as an adjunct in dural repair but is not optimal for this purpose. DuraSeal&#xae; has several properties advantageous for dural repair but is not widely accepted in Canada partly due to its increased cost.
OBJECTIVE: A cost analysis of DuraSeal&#xae; versus Tisseel&#xae; in endoscopic pituitary surgery.
METHODS: A cost analysis was performed based on typical endoscopic pituitary surgery cases performed at our tertiary care institution. Operating room, hospital admission, and surgical sealant costs were obtained directly while estimates of patient recovery time and post-operative CSF leak rates were based on consensus values reported in the literature. Outcomes were reported for various possible clinical scenarios of sealant use.
RESULTS: In a model where surgical sealant is employed only in high-risk cases, use of DuraSeal&#xae; allows for a yearly cost savings of at least $4486.72. If surgical sealant is used in all cases, regular use of DuraSeal&#xae; versus Tisseel&#xae; either marginally reduces yearly costs or increases them by a maximum of $7619.25, depending on the case volume and estimated post-operative CSF leak rate.
CONCLUSION: In most clinical scenarios, use of DuraSeal&#xae; in endoscopic pituitary surgery may reduce overall yearly hospital costs compared to Tisseel&#xae;.

### PMID 21294388 (2010) — Annali italiani di chirurgia
TITLE: Meta-analysis of fibrin glue versus surgery for treatment of fistula-in-ano.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Meta-Analysis
ABSTRACT: AIM: To evaluate the convenience in terms of recurrence and fecal incontinence rates of fibrin glue versus surgical treatment in the management of fistula-in-ano.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and non-randomized studies (CCTs) comparing conventional surgical treatment versus fibrin glue treatment in patients with perianal fistulae were identified using a predefined search strategy. The post treatment anal incontinence rate and the fistula recurrence rates between the two operations were compared by using the methods provided by the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. The lack of homogeneity of results between the different studies did not allow to analyze other secondary outcomes. Patients with cryptoglandular and Crohn's anal fistula were enrolled in the analysis. The employed fibrin glue came from commercial kits: Beriplast (Aventis Behring, Sussex, United Kingdom) and Tisseal or Tissucol (Baxter, Inc, Mississauga, Ontario). Surgical conventional treatment consisted of fistulotomy, placement of a cutting or loose latex seton and advancement mucosal flap closure. All patients were followed up at 6 and 12 weeks, the longest follow up was 6 months.
RESULTS: Two RCTs (106 patients) and 1 non randomized studies (232 patients) were identified. The recurrence rate is higher, although still not statistically significant, in those patients who underwent fibrin glue injection (44/81) versus conventional surgical treatment (108/230), (OR: 0.44; 95 %CI: 0.12-1.68; P = 0.23). Furthermore in the analysis of the subgroup of RCTs alone there were not significant differences with the previous results of RCTs with CCT analysis (OR: 0.33; 95 %CI: 0.03-3.66; P = 0.37). In the same way the analysis of the subgroup of RCTs with complex anal fistulae were not statistically significant and similar to the previous results regarding all type of fistulas (OR: 0.86; 95 %CI: 0.01-72.36; P = 0.95). The analysis of post-operative anal incontinence showed no difference between the group who underwent fibrin glue injection (9/230) and the conventional surgical treatment group (10/81), (OR: 1.00; 95 %CI: 0.43-2.34; P = 1.00). A very low heterogeneity in the analysis was detected (Chi-square = 0.04 - P = 0%).
CONCLUSION: Our statistical analysis does not show any significant statistical difference between fibrin glue treatment versus conventional surgical treatment for all perianal fistulae in terms of recurrence (P = 0.23) and anal incontinence (P = 1.00).

### PMID 20025455 (2010) — Tissue engineering. Part B, Reviews
TITLE: Strategies for articular cartilage lesion repair and functional restoration.
DOI: 10.1089/ten.TEB.2009.0590 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: Injury of articular cartilage due to trauma or pathological conditions is the major cause of disability worldwide, especially in North America. The increasing number of patients suffering from joint-related conditions leads to a concomitant increase in the economic burden. In this review article, we focus on strategies to repair and replace knee joint cartilage, since knee-associated disabilities are more prevalent than any other joint. Because of inadequacies associated with widely used approaches, the orthopedic community has an increasing tendency to develop biological strategies, which include transplantation of autologous (i.e., mosaicplasty) or allogeneic osteochondral grafts, autologous chondrocytes (autologous chondrocyte transplantation), or tissue-engineered cartilage substitutes. Tissue-engineered cartilage constructs represent a highly promising treatment option for knee injury as they mimic the biomechanical environment of the native cartilage and have superior integration capabilities. Currently, a wide range of tissue-engineering-based strategies are established and investigated clinically as an alternative to the routinely used techniques (i.e., knee replacement and autologous chondrocyte transplantation). Tissue-engineering-based strategies include implantation of autologous chondrocytes in combination with collagen I, collagen I/III (matrix-induced autologous chondrocyte implantation), HYAFF 11 (Hyalograft C), and fibrin glue (Tissucol) or implantation of minced cartilage in combination with copolymers of polyglycolic acid along with polycaprolactone (cartilage autograft implantation system), and fibrin glue (DeNovo NT graft). Tissue-engineered cartilage replacements show better clinical outcomes in the short term, and with advances that have been made in orthopedics they can be introduced arthroscopically in a minimally invasive fashion. Thus, the future is bright for this innovative approach to restore function.

### PMID 19877186 (2010) — The Laryngoscope
TITLE: Tissue-engineered allograft tracheal cartilage using fibrin/hyaluronan composite gel and its in vivo implantation.
DOI: 10.1002/lary.20652 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Treatment and management of tracheal defects remain challenging in head and neck surgery. Various reconstruction techniques have been used, with no consensus on the best approach. The purpose of this study was to explore a novel strategy to fabricate tissue-engineered trachea by using fibrin/hyaluronic acid (HA) composite gel and evaluate the feasibility of creating tracheal cartilage.
STUDY DESIGN: A preliminary animal experiment.
METHODS: Chondrocytes from rabbit cartilage were expanded and seeded into a culture dish at high density to form mechanically stable allograft tracheal cartilage using fibrin/HA composite gel. After a longitudinal cervical skin incision, the trachea was exposed and a rectangular defect (1 x 0.5 cm) was created on the cervical trachea by scalpel on six rabbits. Tissue-engineered cartilage using fibrin/HA composite was trimmed and fixed to defect boundaries with Tissucol (Baxter International, Deerfield, IL). Postoperatively, the site was evaluated endoscopically, histologically, radiologically, and functionally.
RESULTS: Postoperatively, rigid telescopic examination showed that the implanted scaffolds in all cases were completely covered with regenerated mucosa without granulation or stenosis. Histologic data showed ciliated epithelium regenerated at the operated site from 2 months postoperatively. Ciliary beat frequency of ciliated epithelium on implants was very similar to normal respiratory mucosa. Computed tomography images revealed fine luminal contour of the regenerated site. However, allograft cartilage implanted was found to be partially preserved on the postoperative specimen.
CONCLUSIONS: The tracheal luminal contour and functional epithelial regeneration without graft rejection and inflammation were observed after repair of a tracheal resection using allogeneic implants with chondrocytes cultured with fibrin/HA.

### PMID 20190704 (2010) — Annals of thoracic and cardiovascular surgery : official journal of the Association of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgeons of Asia
TITLE: The effects of sheet-type absorbable topical collagen hemostat used to prevent pulmonary fistula after lung surgery.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Numerous reports have been published on the application of fibrin glues, biological adhesives used as sealants for air leaks after pulmonary resection; however, the use of blood products has been questioned from both safety and economic perspectives. Therefore we were prompted to attempt the use of Integran (method C), a sheet-type absorbable topical collagen hemostat that is neither expensive nor derived from blood.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of method C with that of method G, a combined approach in which TachoComb or a polyglycolic acid (PGA) sheet was fixed with a fibrin glue in a randomized controlled trial to prevent pulmonary fistula formation after lung surgery.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Of the patients who were scheduled to undergo pulmonary resection in 2006 at the Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Juntendo University, and who provided informed consent for the study before surgery, those who developed visible air leaks during lobectomy, segmentectomy, partial resection for lung tumor or pulmonary cyst, or intractable pneumothorax were included as the subjects of this study. The subjects were randomized for treatment with either of 2 procedures, namely, method C or method G. Pulmonary fistula was defined as an obvious air leak persisting until day 3 after surgery.
RESULTS: A total of 38 patients were assigned to method C and 34 to method G. Three patients (7.9%) assigned to method C (including 1 who underwent lobectomy and 2 who underwent partial resection), and 6 (17.6%) patients assigned to method G, including 3 who each underwent a lobectomy and partial resection, developed postoperative pulmonary fistula. The incidence of pulmonary fistula was significantly lower in the group assigned to method C, with a statistically significant difference of p = 0.044.
CONCLUSIONS: In a randomized controlled trial of sealing with a sheet-type collagen vs. a combined approach of fixing a collagen sponge, using fibrin glue for closure of air leaks, the use of Integran, a sheet-type absorbable topical collagen hemostat, is feasible to prevent pulmonary fistula after lung surgery. It is also affordable and safe because it is not a blood product.

### PMID 20444339 (2010) — Il Giornale di chirurgia
TITLE: Upper gastrointestinal massive bleeding successfully treated intra-operatively with a collagen and thrombin-based high-viscosity gel for haemostasis. Case report.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: A 57-year-old male patient was admitted in our Department for a non-variceal upper gastrointestinal massive bleeding. In accordance with the clinical guidelines, the patient underwent an early endoscopy (within 24 hours from admission), which showed the source of bleeding in the second portion of the duodenum. An endoscopic haemostatic injection with dilute adrenalin (epinephrine, 1:10.000) was then performed. After 8 hours, severe recidive bleeding occurred with reduced haemoglobin levels, which led us to an emergency surgical treatment. A gastric resection was performed, followed by the application of high-viscous gel (Floseal) into the source of bleeding within the duodenal lumen. This technique allowed to obtain a definitive haemostasis without long-term complications. Our experience suggests that the intra-operative application of Floseal can be an effective alternative to traditional haemostatic techniques in the emergency surgical treatment of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. This also provides additional time to perform other haemostatic techniques techniques avoiding the precarious haemodynamic conditions of a patient in emergency.

### PMID 20569542 (2010) — Journal of obstetrics and gynaecology Canada : JOGC = Journal d'obstetrique et gynecologie du Canada : JOGC
TITLE: Adhesion prevention in gynaecological surgery.
DOI: 10.1016/S1701-2163(16)34530-3 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Practice Guideline
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To review the etiology and incidence of and associative factors in the formation of adhesions following gynaecological surgery. To review evidence for the use of available means of adhesion prevention following gynaecological surgery.
OPTIONS: Women undergoing pelvic surgery are at risk of developing abdominal and/or pelvic adhesive disease postoperatively. Surgical technique and commercial adhesion prevention systems may decrease the risk of postoperative adhesion formation.
OUTCOMES: The outcomes measured are the incidence of postoperative adhesions, complications related to the formation of adhesions, and further intervention relative to adhesive disease.
EVIDENCE: Medline, EMBASE, and The Cochrane Library were searched for articles published in English from 1990 to March 2009, using appropriate controlled vocabulary and key words. Results were restricted to systematic reviews, randomized control trials/controlled clinical trials, cohort studies, and meta-analyses specifically addressing postoperative adhesions, adhesion prevention, and adhesive barriers. Searches were updated on a regular basis and incorporated in the guideline to March 2009. Grey (unpublished) literature was identified through searching the websites of health technology assessment and health technology assessment-related agencies, clinical practice guideline collections, clinical trial registries, and national and international medical specialty societies.
VALUES: The quality of evidence was rated using the criteria described in the Report of the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care SUMMARY STATEMENTS: 1. Meticulous surgical technique is a means of preventing adhesions. This includes minimizing tissue trauma, achieving optimal hemostasis, minimizing the risk of infection, and avoiding contaminants (e.g., fecal matter) and the use of foreign materials (e.g., talcum powder) when possible. (II-2). 2. The risk of adhesions increases with the total number of abdominal and pelvic surgeries performed on one patient; every surgery needs to be carefully considered in this context. (II-2). 3. Polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-Tex) barrier is more effective than no barrier or oxidized regenerated cellulose in preventing adhesion formation. (I). 4. Oxidized regenerated cellulose (Interceed) adhesion barrier is associated with a reduced incidence of pelvic adhesion formation at both laparoscopy and laparotomy when complete hemostasis is achieved. Oxidized regenerated cellulose may increase the risk of adhesions if optimal hemostasis is not achieved. (II-2). 5. Chemically modified sodium hyaluronate/carboxymethylcellulose (Seprafilm) is effective in preventing adhesion formation, especially following myomectomies. There is insufficient evidence on the effect of sodium hyaluronate/carboxymethylcellulose on long-term clinical outcomes such as fertility, chronic pelvic pain or small bowel obstruction. (II-2). 6. No adverse effects have been reported with the use of oxidized regenerated cellulose, polytetrafluoroethylene, or sodium hyaluronate/carboxymethylcellulose. (II-1). 7. Various pharmacological agents have been marketed as a means of preventing adhesions. None of these agents are presently available in Canada. There is insufficient evidence for the use of pharmacological agents in preventing adhesions. (III-C).
RECOMMENDATIONS: 1. Surgeons should attempt to perform surgical procedures using the least invasive method possible in order to decrease the risk of adhesion formation. (II-1B ). When feasible, for example, a laparoscopic surgical approach is preferable to an abdominal approach, and a vaginal or laparoscopic hysterectomy is preferable to an abdominal hysterectomy. 2. Precautions should be taken at surgery to minimize tissue trauma in order to decrease the risk of postoperative adhesions. These precautions include limiting packing, crushing, and manipulating of tissues to what is strictly required for safe completion of the procedure. (III-B). 3. Surgeons could consider using an adhesion barrier for patients who are at high risk of forming clinically significant adhesions (i.e., patients who have endometriosis or pelvic inflammatory disease or who are undergoing a myomectomy). If there is a risk of ongoing bleeding from the surgical site, oxidized regenerated cellulose (Interceed) should not be used as it may increase the risk of adhesions in this situation. (II-2B).

### PMID 20632245 (2010) — Seminars in thrombosis and hemostasis
TITLE: Topical recombinant human thrombin in surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0030-1255441 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: The achievement of hemostasis is paramount, and good operative practice is crucial to all surgical procedures. Intraoperative hemostasis is usually achieved through suture ligation for larger vessels and electrocautery of smaller vessels; certain cases, however, are not amenable to these techniques, especially when there is diffuse raw surface bleeding. When operative hemorrhage exists despite appropriate preventive actions and good surgical technique, additional methods for controlling intra- and perioperative hemorrhage should be considered, and may include the use of topical thrombin. Recombinant human thrombin (rhThrombin) was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2008, with the expectation of overcoming the disadvantages of previously available topical thrombin preparations. The efficacy of rhThrombin has been demonstrated in three randomized controlled trials and found to be effective for achieving hemostasis within 10 minutes of administration for mild to moderate diffuse raw surface bleeding. rhThrombin is equally as effective as bovine thrombin, with a significantly lower risk of immunogenicity. Similar economic parameters, efficacy, and safety profiles between rhThrombin and other available thrombin preparations may support its use over other bovine- and plasma-derived human thrombin products and carry limited to no risk of viral transmission or development of antithrombin antibodies.

### PMID 20010084 (2010) — Annals of surgery
TITLE: A comprehensive review of topical hemostatic agents: efficacy and recommendations for use.
DOI: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3181c3bcca | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Review
ABSTRACT: Since ancient times we have attempted to facilitate hemostasis by application of topical agents. In the last decade, the number of different effective hemostatic agents has increased drastically. In order for the modern surgeon to successfully choose the right agent at the right time, it is essential to understand the mechanism of action, efficacy and possible adverse events as they relate to each agent. In this article we provide a comprehensive review of the most commonly used hemostatic agents, subcategorized as physical agents, absorbable agents, biologic agents, and synthetic agents. We also evaluate novel hemostatic dressings and their application in the current era. Furthermore, wholesale acquisition prices for hospitals in the United States are provided to aid in cost analysis. We conclude with an expert opinion on which agent to use under different scenarios.

### PMID 19527109 (2009) — Expert opinion on biological therapy
TITLE: Efficacy of TachoSil a fibrin-based haemostat in different fields of surgery--a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1517/14712590903029172 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Proper haemostasis is an important prerequisite for a successful outcome in all operative fields. TachoSil is used in many surgical specialties, especially for diffuse bleeding. However, TachoSil is not only used for haemostasis but also for closure of other anatomical structures.
OBJECTIVE: To review the literature concerning the efficacy of TachoSil, a topical fibrin-based haemostat.
METHODS: PubMed was searched for data on TachoSil and TachoComb from clinical trials and basic research.
RESULTS/CONCLUSION: TachoSil is used in many surgical specialties and has proven to be a valuable tool for several indications. It also seems to be cost effective. Solid data from randomized controlled trials are available for liver surgery, thoracic surgery and urology where a positive value is clearly documented.

### PMID 19558281 (2009) — Pharmacotherapy
TITLE: Thrombin products: economic impact of immune-mediated coagulopathies and practical formulary considerations.
DOI: 10.1592/phco.29.pt2.18S | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Thrombin has demonstrated utility in aiding surgical hemostasis since its introduction more than 60 years ago. It is used across a wide variety of surgical procedures by virtually every specialty. Only recently have new equally effective and safe products entered the market, causing decision makers to evaluate formulary selection among products with otherwise modest differences. This evaluation includes identifying costs beyond those of acquisition and storage, as well as indirect factors such as monitoring or specialized distribution requirements. One factor to consider specifically in selection of topical thrombin products is the potential for patients to develop an immune-mediated coagulopathy (IMC) after exposure to bovine-derived thrombin. Costs due to adverse drug events fall into the category of indirect costs and, in some instances, can be substantial if bleeding due to IMC occurs.

### PMID 19463180 (2009) — Patient safety in surgery
TITLE: Building an immune-mediated coagulopathy consensus: early recognition and evaluation to enhance post-surgical patient safety.
DOI: 10.1186/1754-9493-3-8 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Topical hemostats, fibrin sealants, and surgical adhesives are regularly used in a variety of surgical procedures involving multiple disciplines. Generally, these adjuncts to surgical hemostasis are valuable means for improving wound visualization, reducing blood loss or adding tissue adherence; however, some of these agents are responsible for under-recognized adverse reactions and outcomes. Bovine thrombin, for example, is a topical hemostat with a long history of clinical application that is widely used alone or in combination with other hemostatic agents. Hematologists and coagulation experts are aware that these agents can lead to development of an immune-mediated coagulopathy (IMC). A paucity of data on the incidence of IMC contributes to under-recognition and leaves many surgeons unaware that this clinical entity, originating from normal immune responses to foreign antigen exposure, requires enhanced post-operative vigilance and judicious clinical judgment to achieve best outcomes.Postoperative bleeding may result from issues such as loosened ties or clips or the occurrence of a coagulopathy due to hemodilution, vitamin K deficiency, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) or post-transfusion, post-shock coagulopathic states. Other causes, such as liver disease, may be ruled out by a careful patient history and common pre-operative liver function tests. Less common are coagulopathies secondary to pathologic immune responses. Such coagulopathies include those that may result from inherent patient problems such as patients with an immune dysfunction related to systemic lupus erythrematosus (SLE) or lymphoma that can invoke antibodies against native coagulation factors. Medical interventions may also provoke antibody formation in the form of self-directed anti-coagulation factor antibodies, that result in problematic bleeding; it is these iatrogenic post-operative coagulopathies, including those associated with bovine thrombin exposure and its clinical context, that this panel was convened to address.The RETACC panel's goal was to attain a logical consensus by reviewing the scientific evidence surrounding IMC and to make recommendations for the clinical recognition, diagnosis and evaluation, and clinical management of these complications. In light of the under-recognition and under-reporting of IMC, and given the associated morbidity, utilization of health care resources, and potential economic impact to hospitals, the panel engaged in a detailed review of peer-reviewed reports of bovine thrombin associated IMC. From that clinical knowledge base, recommendations were developed to guide clinicians in the recognition, diagnosis, and management of this challenging condition.

### PMID 19404538 (2009) — Thrombosis and haemostasis
TITLE: Acquired factor V inhibitor. A problem-based systematic review.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: Acquired factor V(FV) inhibitors as a rare bleeding disorder, poses a formidable challenge to treating physicians with limited evidence to guide its management. We systematically reviewed our experience in Singapore and the published literature to determine possible answers to clinical questions formulated on the manifestation and best management of non-bovine thrombin and non-congenital acquired FV inhibitors. The incidence in Singapore was 0.09 cases per million person years (3 cases over 10 years). Seventy-three other cases meeting pre-defined search criteria were found in the published literature. Bleeding occurred in 68.4% of these patients, with mucous membranes being the most common site. Intracranial and retroperitoneal bleeds carried the highest mortality. The mortality rate from bleeding was 12%. There was a tendency for FV levels and PT/aPTT prolongation to predict bleeding but not the inhibitor level. No consistently effective haemostatic agent could be determined, but platelet transfusion should probably be the first line therapy. Among bleeding patients, inhibitors tended to disappear faster with inhibitor elimination therapy (IET) compared to without IET (60 vs. 150 days, p=0.299). IET made no significant difference among non-bleeding patients (p=0.511) and is thus recommended for bleeding patients or those with high bleeding risk. Steroids as single agent IET was effective in the majority of patients. Logical management approaches may be drawn but are limited by small sample size, heterogeneity of reports, and potential publication bias. The inception of a comprehensive registry will provide more reliable data that may verify our findings.

### PMID 19243705 (2009) — Clinical therapeutics
TITLE: A review of three stand-alone topical thrombins for surgical hemostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.clinthera.2009.01.005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Topical thrombins are active hemostatic agents that can be used to minimize blood loss during surgery. Before 2007, the only topical thrombins available were derived from bovine plasma. Antibody formation to bovine thrombin and/or factor V, with subsequent risk of cross-reactivity with human factor V, and hemorrhagic complications associated with human factor-V deficiencies have been described in case reports of surgeries in which bovine thrombins were used. This risk is now included in the boxed warning section of the bovine thrombin prescribing information. In 2007 and 2008, 2 new topical thrombins from nonbovine sources received approval for use from the US Food and Drug Administration. The 3 active topical thrombins that are currently marketed are bovine plasma-derived thrombin, human plasma-derived thrombin, and human recombinant thrombin.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this review was to evaluate the literature on the efficacy and safety of topical thrombins and discuss the pharmacoeconomic considerations associated with their use.
METHODS: PubMed, EMBASE, and International Pharmaceutical Abstracts were searched for relevant papers published in English through October 10,2008, using the terms thrombin, human recombinant thrombin, bovine thrombin, plasma derived thrombin, and topical thrombin. Manufacturer-provided materials were also reviewed. Abstracts and unpublished data, as well as evaluations of sealants, adhesives, glues, and other hemostats that contain thrombin mixed with fibrinogen and other clotting factors, were excluded.
RESULTS: Four randomized, double-blind studies involving the active, stand-alone topical thrombins were found. The bovine thrombin involved in these studies was the predecessor to the currently marketed, highly purified bovine formulation. No studies comparing the human products, studies involving the highly purified bovine preparation, or placebo-controlled studies involving bovine thrombin were found. In a Phase III comparison of human recombinant thrombin and bovine thrombin, the percentages of patients who achieved hemostasis within 10 minutes of topical thrombin application were 95.4% and 95.1%, respectively (95% CI, -3.7 to 5.0). The incidence of hemostasis within 10 minutes was also similar in a Phase III comparison of human plasma-derived thrombin and bovine thrombin (both, 97.4% [95% CI, 0.96 to 1.05]). In the study that compared human recombinant and bovine thrombin, the incidence of antiproduct antibody formation was 21.5% (43/200) in the bovine thrombin group and 1.5% (3/198) in the human recombinant thrombin group (P &lt; 0.001); patients with antibodies to bovine thrombin had numerically higher incidences of bleeding or thromboembolic events than did patients without these antibodies (19% vs 13%; P value not reported). Human plasma-derived thrombin is available as a frozen sterile solution that must be thawed before application, whereas the human recombinant and bovine plasma-derived products are supplied as unrefrigerated sterile powders that must be reconstituted before use. The human thrombins are more costly than bovine thrombin on a per-vial basis. The average wholesale prices (US $, 2008) for 5000-IU vials of bovine thrombin and human recombinant thrombin were $87.85 and $103.20, respectively; the average wholesale price for a 4000- to 6000-IU vial of human plasma-derived thrombin was $96.00.
CONCLUSIONS: Topical thrombins vary in the ways in which they are manufactured and their safety profiles, storage requirements, and costs. Human recombinant thrombin and human plasma-derived thrombin have each been shown to have hemostatic efficacy comparable to that of bovine thrombin. Bovine thrombin carries the risk of formation of cross-reactive antibodies to bovine thrombin, factor V, and other impurities that may be present in these formulations. Immunogenicity data for the currently marketed, highly purified bovine thrombin relative to older formulations of bovine thrombin could not be found. Whether the potential safety advantage justifies the added cost of the human products remains to be established.

### PMID 18431871 (2008) — Khirurgiia
TITLE: [Methodology of new pharmacoeconomic method "impact on hospital budget" by the example of local hemostatic agents in abdominal surgery].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: (no abstract)

### PMID 19154707 (2008) — Therapie
TITLE: [A medical and economic study about use of hemostatic glues in cardiac surgery].
DOI: 10.2515/therapie:2008057 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: INTRODUCTION: The impact of the use of biological and synthetic glues in cardiac surgery was assessed by an economic and medical study.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The observational prospective study had duration of three months. All the patients undergoing cardiac surgery were included in the study. The end points were medical (blood transfusion) and economic (duration and cost of the stay in hospital). There were 2 groups: treated or not by glues.
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: T Student tests.
RESULTS: Among 154 patients, the 2 principal indications were valvular replacement (48%) and coronary artery bypass grafting (37%). Fifty seven (37%) patients received a glue. The number of transfused globular units and the duration of the stay in the intensive care unit were significantly higher (p&lt;0.05) by treated patients.
CONCLUSION: Not only the use of glues did not decrease the post-operative bleedings but it increased also the cost of the stay in hospital. Guidelines were validated by the hospital Commission on drugs.

### PMID 18681490 (2008) — Drugs
TITLE: An evaluation of eptacog alfa in nonhaemophiliac conditions.
DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200868120-00005 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: We have analysed the published literature on eptacog alfa (recombinant factor VIIa; rFVIIa) for nonhaemophiliac conditions with the aim of determining its current place in therapy. Initial surgical and/or medical management is required for any patient with life-threatening bleeding. In those with continued life-threatening bleeding (i.e. despite maximal surgical and/or medical therapy), eptacog alfa may be considered as additional therapy, in exceptional circumstances. There is good evidence from systematic reviews and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that eptacog alfa stops bleeding in adults with intracerebral haemorrhage (ICH) if it is given within 4 hours of symptom onset. However, a recent phase III RCT suggests that it does not improve clinically relevant long-term outcomes (death and disability). There is also good evidence against prophylactic use of eptacog alfa during orthotopic liver transplantation or liver resection, and in treating variceal and nonvariceal haemorrhage in patients with cirrhosis. The evidence for the use of eptacog alfa for unexpected life-threatening bleeding in liver, cardiac or other surgery, or in blunt trauma, is not robust. In these circumstances, it should only be given as part of a clinical trial or in exceptional cases when other therapies have failed. The evidence for use of eptacog alfa in penetrating trauma is lacking. Conflicting RCT results exist for the prophylactic use of eptacog alfa in elective surgery; therefore, it cannot be recommended in this situation. There is insufficient evidence for a primary role of eptacog alfa in reversal of anticoagulation with heparin-like molecules and novel anticoagulant agents. There are effective therapies that correct all warfarin-induced factor deficiencies; thus, off-label use of eptacog alfa for reversal of warfarin should only be considered in the context of ICH. The evidence for eptacog alfa use in children is limited. The only RCT is in cardiac surgery for congenital heart disease, where eptacog alfa prophylaxis was actually associated with increased time to chest closure. It may be of potential benefit in some children with life-threatening bleeding in the context of trauma, surgery or liver disease (as additional therapy when surgical and/or medical control of bleeding has failed), but the overall benefit-risk ratio may be unfavourable if there is an underlying risk of thromboembolism (e.g. trauma, congenital heart disease, other hyperviscous or hypercoagulable states, presence of arterial or central venous catheters). Thromboembolism may be associated with eptacog alfa use. Although the magnitude of this risk and possible predisposing factors are not clearly delineated, some data suggest increased risk at higher doses. Variable effects of eptacog alfa use on mortality have been shown in a pooled analysis of RCTs. Data from some observational studies and postmarketing surveillance suggest an increased risk of thromboembolism associated with off-label uses. Further well designed studies are required to more definitively assess the risk of thromboembolism with eptacog alfa and to better determine its effects on mortality. Optimum dosages for nonhaemophiliac conditions are not defined and nor is the optimum timing of administration. Moreover, it is not clear which patients will be most likely to benefit in terms of haemostatic efficacy and mortality. In addition to conventional measures to stop bleeding (i.e. surgery and blood transfusion), correction of hypothermia and acidosis, and reversal of anticoagulation are all recommended. The outcomes (effectiveness and safety) of all off-label uses should be systematically evaluated and reported. Adequate data to assess cost effectiveness for eptacog alfa does not exist for most off-label indications.

### PMID 17719390 (2007) — Journal of oral and maxillofacial surgery : official journal of the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
TITLE: Evaluation of autologous platelet-poor plasma gel as a hemostatic adjunct after posterior iliac crest bone harvest.
DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2006.09.008 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D018848">Controlled Clinical Trial, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: To evaluate the hemostatic efficacy of autologous platelet-poor plasma (PPP) gel following posterior iliac crest bone graft harvesting for oral and maxillofacial reconstruction.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a prospective study of 24 consecutive patients involving 26 posterior iliac crest bone harvests that had bone wax and either 1-gram of bovine microfibrillar collagen or 20 mL of autologous PPP, activated as a gel, used as adjunct hemostatic agents. Compression bulb suction drain was placed into the graft site and drain output recorded every 8 hours for 64 hours. Cost analysis was also undertaken between the 2 methods. Statistical significance between means of each group was determined by Student's t test and found significant for P &lt; .05.
RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences in average drain output between the PPP and MFC groups for each 8-hour interval. There was no statically significant difference in average total drain output between the PPP and MFC groups over the entire 64 hour period. Additionally, unlike the addition of MFC, the addition of PPP added no additional costs to the procedure.
CONCLUSION: PPP gel, when compared with bovine microfibrillar collagen, is an effective and inexpensive adjunct in hemostasis following posterior iliac crest bone harvest.

### PMID 17258029 (2007) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Recombinant activated factor VII in cardiac surgery: a systematic review.
DOI: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2006.10.033 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: Postoperative hemorrhage is a common complication in cardiac surgery, and it is associated with a considerable increase in morbidity, mortality, and cost. Recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa) is an emerging hemostatic agent, increasingly used in cardiac surgery. This article systematically reviews the evidence regarding the efficacy, safety, and cost of rFVIIa in this setting. Although definitive evidence from randomized controlled trials is lacking, the use of rFVIIa in patients experiencing refractory postoperative hemorrhage seems promising and relatively safe. However further research is required to definitively establish its clinical utility in the postoperative cardiac patient.

### PMID 18270189 (2007) — Seminars in cardiothoracic and vascular anesthesia
TITLE: Vascular injury and thrombotic potential: a note of caution about recombinant factor VIIa.
DOI: 10.1177/1089253207311357 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: Postoperative hemorrhage following cardiac surgery increases morbidity, mortality, and costs. Several case reports have described the successful use of recombinant factor VIIa to decrease or stop bleeding in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. The mechanism of action of recombinant factor VIIa is thought to be increased site-specific thrombin generation by tissue factor-mediated activation of coagulation or from activated platelets. However, there have also been many reports of thrombotic complications after recombinant factor VIIa administration. Randomized clinical trials and further laboratory studies should help better clarify the efficacy, safety, cost-effectiveness, and optimal dosing of recombinant factor VIIa in the cardiac surgical setting.

### PMID 17943760 (2007) — The Cochrane database of systematic reviews
TITLE: Anti-fibrinolytic use for minimising perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001886.pub2 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Concerns regarding the safety of transfused blood have led to the development of a range of interventions to minimise blood loss during major surgery. Anti-fibrinolytic drugs are widely used, particularly in cardiac surgery and previous reviews have found them to be effective in reducing blood loss and the need for transfusion. Recently, questions have been raised regarding the comparative performance of the drugs and the safety of the most popular agent, aprotinin.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the comparative effects of the anti-fibrinolytic drugs aprotinin, tranexamic acid (TXA), and epsilon aminocaproic acid (EACA) on blood loss during surgery, the need for red blood (RBC) transfusion, and adverse events, particularly vascular occlusion, renal dysfunction, and death.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched CENTRAL, MEDLINE, EMBASE, and the internet. References in identified trials and review articles were checked and trial authors were contacted to identify any additional studies. The searches were last updated in July 2006.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) of anti-fibrinolytic drugs in adults scheduled for non-urgent surgery. Eligible trials compared anti-fibrinolytic drugs with placebo (or no treatment), or with each other.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors independently assessed trial quality and extracted data.
MAIN RESULTS: This review summarises data from 211 RCTs that recruited 20,781 participants. Data from placebo/inactive controlled trials, and from head-to-head trials suggest an advantage of aprotinin over the lysine analogues TXA and EACA in terms of operative blood loss, but the differences were small. Aprotinin reduced the probability of requiring RBC transfusion by a relative 34% (relative risk [RR] 0.66, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.61 to 0.71). The RR for RBC transfusion with TXA was 0.61 (95% CI 0.54 to 0.69) and it was 0.75 (95% CI 0.58 to 0.96) with EACA. When the pooled estimates from the head-to-head trials of the two lysine analogues were combined and compared to aprotinin alone, aprotinin appeared superior in reducing the need for RBC transfusion: RR 0.83 (95% CI 0.69 to 0.99). Aprotinin reduced the need for re-operation due to bleeding: RR 0.48 (95% CI 0.35 to 0.68). This translates into an absolute risk reduction of just under 3% and a number needed-to-treat (NNT) of 37 (95% CI 27 to 56). Similar trends were seen with TXA and EACA, but the data were sparse and the differences failed to reach statistical significance. The blood transfusion data were heterogeneous and funnel plots indicate that trials of aprotinin and the lysine analogues may be subject to publication bias. Evidence of publication bias was not observed in trials reporting re-operation rates. Adjustment for these effects reduced the magnitude of estimated benefits but did not negate treatment effects. However, the apparent advantage of aprotinin over the lysine analogues was small and may be explained by publication bias and non-equivalent drug doses. Aprotinin did not increase the risk of myocardial infarction (RR 0.92, 95% CI 0.72 to 1.18), stroke (RR 0.76, 95% CI 0.35 to 1.64) renal dysfunction (RR 1.16, 95% CI 0.79 to 1.70) or overall mortality (RR 0.90, 95% CI 0.67 to 1.20). The analyses of myocardial infarction and death included data from the majority of subjects recruited into the clinical trials of aprotinin. However, under-reporting of renal events could explain the lack of effect seen with aprotinin. Similar trends were seen with the lysine analogues but data were sparse. These results conflict with the results of recently published non-randomised studies.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Anti-fibrinolytic drugs provide worthwhile reductions in blood loss and the need for allogeneic red cell transfusion. Based on the results of randomised trials their efficacy does not appear to be offset by serious adverse effects. In most circumstances the lysine analogues are probably as effective as aprotinin and are cheaper; the evidence is stronger for tranexamic acid than for aminocaproic acid. In high risk cardiac surgery, where there is a substantial probability of serious blood loss, aprotinin may be preferred over tranexamic acid. Aprotinin does not appear to be associated with an increased risk of vascular occlusion and death, but the data do not exclude an increased risk of renal failure. There is no need for further placebo-controlled trials of aprotinin or lysine analogues in cardiac surgery. The principal need is for large comparative trials to assess the relative efficacy, safety and cost-effectiveness of anti-fibrinolytic drugs in different surgical procedures.

### PMID 17934352 (2007) — Current opinion in hematology
TITLE: Antifibrinolytic use in adult cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328270b89e | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Antifibrinolytics are used to attenuate the coagulopathy associated with cardiopulmonary bypass. However, recent studies suggest that the antifibrinolytic aprotinin is associated with increased renal and vascular events and death compared to its alternatives. To develop a recommendation for antifibrinolytic use in adult cardiac surgery, we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to determine the association of the antifibrinolytics with efficacy, safety and cost outcomes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Aprotinin, when compared to placebo, significantly decreased blood transfusions and reoperations for bleeding, strokes and cognitive dysfunction, and significantly increased renal dysfunction but not renal failure. Tranexamic acid significantly decreased blood transfusions, but was not statistically associated with other outcomes. Aminocaproic acid was not statistically associated with any measured outcome. Although aprotinin costs more than its alternatives, its costs may approximate those of its alternatives when longer time horizons are considered.
SUMMARY: We support the targeted use of aprotinin in adult cardiac surgery patients at high risk for bleeding or stroke, and discourage the use of aprotinin in those at high risk for renal failure. Although fewer data are available for tranexamic and aminocaproic acid, we support their use as alternatives to aprotinin in those at high risk for bleeding.

### PMID 17218108 (2007) — European journal of cardio-thoracic surgery : official journal of the European Association for Cardio-thoracic Surgery
TITLE: Topical use of antifibrinolytic agents reduces postoperative bleeding: a double-blind, prospective, randomized study.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2006.12.003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Randomized Controlled Trial
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: Postoperative bleeding is still one of the most common complications of cardiac surgery. Antifibrinolytic agents successfully reduce bleeding, but there are controversies concerning adverse effects after their systemic use. By topical application of antifibrinolytic agents in pericardial cavity, most of these effects are avoided. We compared the effects of topically applied aprotinin, tranexamic acid and placebo on postoperative bleeding and transfusion requirements.
METHODS: In this single-center prospective, randomized, double-blind trial, 300 adult cardiac patients were randomized into three groups to receive one million IU of aprotinin (AP group), 2.5g of tranexamic acid (TA group) or placebo (PL group) topically before sternal closure. Groups were comparable with respect to all preoperative and intraoperative variables. Postoperative bleeding, transfusion requirements and hematologic parameters were evaluated.
RESULTS: Postoperative bleeding within first 12-h period (AP group 433+/-294 [350; 360]ml, TA group 391+/-255 [350; 305]ml, PL group 613+/-505 [525; 348]ml), as well as cumulative blood loss within 24h (AP group 726+/-432 [640; 525]ml, TA group 633+/-343 [545; 335]ml, PL group 903+/-733 [800; 445]ml), showed statistically significant inter-group differences (both p&lt;0.001). Bleeding rates values were significantly higher in placebo group compared to the groups treated with antifibrinolytic agents (AP and TA groups) concerning both variables. Although TA group showed the lowest values, no statistical differences between TA and AP groups were found. Inter-group difference of blood product requirements was not statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Topical use of either tranexamic acid or aprotinin efficiently reduces postoperative bleeding. TA seems to be at least as potent as aprotinin, but potentially safer and with better cost-effectiveness ratio.

### PMID 16572090 (2006) — The Journal of cardiovascular surgery
TITLE: The use of a surgical sealant (CoSeal) in cardiac and vascular reconstructive surgery: an economic analysis.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIM: We designed a study to estimate the economic impact of CoSeal Surgical Sealant for the prevention of anastomotic bleeding in cardiac and vascular surgery. We also explored the potential economic value of CoSeal as a means of inhibiting the formation of pericardial tissue adhesions.
METHODS: A Delphi panel of 6 expert vascular and cardiac surgeons provided the assumptions and estimates needed to develop a decision analysis model to assess the impact of sealant on the costs associated with low- and high-risk forms of cardiac (valve replacement/reconstruction) and vascular (abdominal aortic aneurysm [AAA] repair, femoral bypass grafting) surgery. The primary outcome was incremental cost per patient.
RESULTS: For valve repair/replacement surgery, sealant was expected to confer cost-savings in high-risk but not low-risk procedures. Predicted cost savings for high-risk AAA repairs were substantial, but minimal in the overall AAA group. Cost-savings were predicted for sealant use in all femoral-popliteal ePTFE bypass grafts, but in high-risk femoral-femoral ePTFE bypass grafts only.
CONCLUSIONS: According to our decision analysis model, routine use of surgical sealant in select subgroups may confer considerable economic benefits to health service budgets. Future research should aim at testing this model in a real-world hospital setting. Assessment of the value of CoSeal in the prevention of postsurgical adhesions showed that expert surgeons see a need for effective prophylaxis. Further research into the clinical and economic benefit of this intervention is required.

### PMID 16696446 (2006) — Acta medica (Hradec Kralove)
TITLE: Treatment of postparotidectomy fistulae with fibrin glue.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Although fistulae resulting from superficial parotidectomy represent a serious problem, there is still little consensus on the optimal treatment. Some suggest management by applying dressings, while others advise surgery. In recent years several other strategies have been proposed. In this manuscript, we present two cases of postparotidectomy fistulae treated by injection with fibrin tissue glue (Tissucol Duo 500, Baxter AG, Vienna, Austria). Furthermore, a review of the literature is presented. In both patients the fistulae completely healed within months without complications. A literature search revealed that this is the first time postparotidectomy fistulae were treated this way. We conclude that postparotidectomy fistulae can be effectively treated with fibrin glue. Moreover, this treatment is simple, safe and has no side effects.

### PMID 17049141 (2006) — Health technology assessment (Winchester, England)
TITLE: Cost-effectiveness of cell salvage and alternative methods of minimising perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion: a systematic review and economic model.
DOI: 10.3310/hta10440 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVES: To compare patient outcomes, resource use and costs to the NHS and NHS Blood Transfusion Authority (BTA) associated with cell salvage and alternative methods of minimising perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic databases covering the period 1996-2004 for systematic reviews and 1994-2004 for economic evidence.
REVIEW METHODS: Existing systematic reviews were updated with data from selected randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that involved adults scheduled for elective non-urgent surgery. Any resource use or cost data were extracted for potential use in populating an economic model. Relative risks or weighted mean difference of each outcome for each intervention were assessed, taking into account the number of RCTs included in each outcome and intervention and the presence of any heterogeneity. This allowed indirect comparison of the relative effectiveness of each intervention when the intervention is compared with allogeneic blood transfusion. A decision analytic model synthesised clinical and economic data from several sources, to estimate the relative cost-effectiveness of cell salvage for people undergoing elective surgery with moderate to major expected blood loss. The perspective of the NHS and patients and a time horizon of 1 month were used. The economic model was developed from reviews of effectiveness and cost-effectiveness and clinical experts. Secondary analysis explored the robustness of the results to changes in the timing and costs of cell salvage equipment, surgical procedure, use of transfusion protocols and time horizon of analysis.
RESULTS: Overall, 668 studies were identified electronically for the update of the two systematic reviews. This included five RCTs, of which two were cell salvage and three preoperative autologous donation (PAD). Five published systematic reviews were identified for antifibrinolytics, fibrin sealants and restrictive transfusion triggers, PAD plus erythropoietin, erythropoietin alone and acute normovolaemic haemodilution (ANH). Twelve published studies reported full economic evaluations. All but two of the transfusion strategies significantly reduced exposure to allogeneic blood. The relative risk of exposure to allogeneic blood was 0.59 for the pooled trials of cell salvage (95% confidence interval: 0.48 to 0.73). This varied by the type and timing of cell salvage and type of surgical procedure. For cell salvage, the relative risk of allogeneic blood transfusion was higher in cardiac surgery than in orthopaedic surgery. Cell salvage had lower costs and slightly higher quality-adjusted life years compared with all of the alternative transfusion strategies except ANH. The likelihood that cell salvage is cost-effective compared with strategies other than ANH is over 50%. Most of the secondary analyses indicated similar results to the primary analysis. However, the primary and secondary analyses indicated that ANH may be more cost-effective than cell salvage.
CONCLUSIONS: The available evidence indicates that cell salvage may be a cost-effective method to reduce exposure to allogeneic blood transfusion. However, ANH may be more cost-effective than cell salvage. The results of this analysis are subject to the low quality and reliability of the data used and the use of indirect comparisons. This may affect the reliability and robustness of the clinical and economic results. There is a need for further research that includes adequately powered high-quality RCTs to compare directly various blood transfusion strategies. These should include measures of health status, health-related quality of life and patient preferences for alternative transfusion strategies. Observational and tracking studies are needed to estimate reliably the incidence of adverse events and infections transmitted during blood transfusion and to identify the lifetime consequences of the serious hazards of transfusion on mortality, health status and health-related quality of life.

### PMID 15992412 (2005) — BMC cardiovascular disorders
TITLE: Are antifibrinolytic drugs equivalent in reducing blood loss and transfusion in cardiac surgery? A meta-analysis of randomized head-to-head trials.
DOI: 10.1186/1471-2261-5-19 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Meta-Analysis, Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov't
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Aprotinin has been shown to be effective in reducing peri-operative blood loss and the need for re-operation due to continued bleeding in cardiac surgery. The lysine analogues tranexamic acid (TXA) and epsilon aminocaproic acid (EACA) are cheaper, but it is not known if they are as effective as aprotinin.
METHODS: Studies were identified by searching electronic databases and bibliographies of published articles. Data from head-to-head trials were pooled using a conventional (Cochrane) meta-analytic approach and a Bayesian approach which estimated the posterior probability of TXA and EACA being equivalent to aprotinin; we used as a non-inferiority boundary a 20% increase in the rates of transfusion or re-operation because of bleeding.
RESULTS: Peri-operative blood loss was significantly greater with TXA and EACA than with aprotinin: weighted mean differences were 106 mls (95% CI 37 to 227 mls) and 185 mls (95% CI 134 to 235 mls) respectively. The pooled relative risks (RR) of receiving an allogeneic red blood cell (RBC) transfusion with TXA and EACA, compared with aprotinin, were 1.08 (95% CI 0.88 to 1.32) and 1.14 (95% CI 0.84 to 1.55) respectively. The equivalent Bayesian posterior mean relative risks were 1.15 (95% Bayesian Credible Interval [BCI] 0.90 to 1.68) and 1.21 (95% BCI 0.79 to 1.82) respectively. For transfusion, using a 20% non-inferiority boundary, the posterior probabilities of TXA and EACA being non-inferior to aprotinin were 0.82 and 0.76 respectively. For re-operation the Cochrane RR for TXA vs. aprotinin was 0.98 (95% CI 0.51 to 1.88), compared with a posterior mean Bayesian RR of 0.63 (95% BCI 0.16 to 1.46). The posterior probability of TXA being non-inferior to aprotinin was 0.92, but this was sensitive to the inclusion of one small trial.
CONCLUSION: The available data are conflicting regarding the equivalence of lysine analogues and aprotinin in reducing peri-operative bleeding, transfusion and the need for re-operation. Decisions are sensitive to the choice of clinical outcome and non-inferiority boundary. The data are an uncertain basis for replacing aprotinin with the cheaper lysine analogues in clinical practice. Progress has been hampered by small trials and failure to study clinically relevant outcomes.

### PMID 15133722 (2004) — European spine journal : official publication of the European Spine Society, the European Spinal Deformity Society, and the European Section of the Cervical Spine Research Society
TITLE: What is the evidence for using hemostatic agents in surgery?
DOI: 10.1007/s00586-004-0717-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: The pharmacological methods used to achieve systemic hemostasis have generated much discussion due to concerns of serious adverse effects (e.g., thromboembolic complications) and costs of therapy in addition to efficacy considerations. There are a limited number of well-controlled trials involving pharmacological hemostasis for spine surgery. In the largest double-blinded randomized controlled trial to date involving spine surgery, there was a trend toward reduced homologous transfusion in patients receiving aprotinin, but the only statistically significant result ( p&lt;0.001) was a reduction in autologous red cell donations. The findings of this trial are important, since the investigators used a number of restrictive transfusion strategies (e.g., autologous donation, low hematocrit trigger for transfusion, blood-salvaging procedures with the exception of no cell saver) that were not always employed in earlier trials involving hemostatic agents. Smaller studies involving antifibrinolytic agents other than aprotinin have demonstrated reductions in blood loss and transfusion requirements in patients undergoing spine surgery, although the results were not always statistically significant. A very large randomized trial would be required to address comparative medication- and transfusion-related adverse events; such a trial involving patients undergoing cardiac surgery is currently being performed. Additionally, cost-effectiveness analyses are needed to help define the role of these agents based on the data that is available.

### PMID 12527288 (2003) — Biomaterials
TITLE: Evaluating the in vitro adhesive strength of biomaterials. Biosimulator for selective leak closure.
DOI: 10.1016/s0142-9612(02)00522-7 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D023362">Evaluation Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: AIMS: Surgical measures always involve problems of hemostasis and tissue management. Tissue sealing can be carried out in this case, with knowledge of the adhesive strength of liquid and fleece-bound sealing being of great clinical relevance. By employing a leak closure model, it has been possible to perform in vitro standardized technological-biomechanical experiments on a biomembrane mounted in a pressure chamber (biosimulator).
FINDINGS: Liquid sealing (fibrin gluing: 4.1 hPa, photopolymerisate: 82.9 hPa) offers minimal and maximal adhesive strengths. Fleece-bound sealing does not depend on the carrier material and is always more stabile than pure liquid sealing, whereby systems that must be coated "on the spot" (prepare-to-use: 22.3-25.3 hPa) exhibit significantly lower adhesive strength (p &lt; 0.0001) than a biodegradable collagen system, which is ready-to-use thanks to its fibrinogen-based coating (TachoComb H). Practicability, effectiveness and efficiency are further advantages of ready-to-use systems.
CONCLUSIONS: The biosimulator, presented here, is flexible in terms of its application for tissue management and it enables reproducible, economic and ecological evaluation of repair systems, e.g. tissue sealings.

### PMID 12715727 (2002) — Przeglad lekarski
TITLE: [New possibilities in the postoperative measures to prevent bleeding in cardiac surgery. Will the recombinant activated factor VII improve surgical results?].
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D002363">Case Reports, English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: The authors present the diagnostic and therapeutic management in bleeding episodes associated with cardiosurgical operations, which constitutes the policy that is employed at Department of Cardiac Surgery and Transplantology, Silesian Academy of Medicine, Zabrze, Poland. The paper also presents a compendium of information on the pathophysiology of coagulation processes, most significant from the standpoint of cardiosurgical practice. Separate issues associated with providing optimal hemostasis in patients operated on using cardiopulmonary bypass are discussed, along with the effect of cardiac procedures on coagulation processes. Further, the authors present their clinical observations and experience in the utilization of the recombinant activated factor VII (NovoSeven, NovoNordisk) in two patients with severe perioperative bleeding. In the first case bleeding was associated heart transplantation procedure in a 37-year old woman, who had previously been twice subjected to operations for valvular heart disease. A dysfunction of two artificial valves implanted 15 years previously resulted in considerable heart muscle damage and an extremenally severe form of cardiac insufficiency. Two months after the heart transplant the patient unfortunately died due to infectious complications. In the second patient the recombinant activated factor VII was employed in an attempt at controlling severe bleeding encountered in a 15-year old boy in the course of reoperation in surgical treatment of a complex congenital heart defect. In this case the treatment was successful. In both described patients who were characterized by a high risk of surgical bleeding, the employment of the recombinant activated factor VII led to significant improvement in coagulation system indices and the hemostatic outcome was regarded positive. The authors state that the introduction of the recombinant activated factor VII to clinical practice in a selected group of patients presenting with most serious coagulation abnormalities and difficult to control perioperational bleeding allows for improving therapeutic results and decreasing mortality in cardiac surgery patients. In view of the significant economic barrier associated with a high cost of the preparation, the authors propose a consistent approach of employing at all times the classic, well-balanced hemostatic management, based primarily on extended knowledge of the pathophysiology of the clotting system and on very thorough surgical hemostasis, with the recombinant activated factor VII being reserved for exceptional situations only.

### PMID 12381219 (2002) — Drugs
TITLE: Pharmacological strategies to decrease transfusion requirements in patients undergoing surgery.
DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200262150-00003 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: Surgical procedures are inevitably associated with bleeding. The amount of blood loss may vary widely between different surgical procedures and depends on surgical as well as non-surgical factors. Whereas adequate surgical haemostasis may suffice in most patients, pro-haemostatic pharmacological agents may be of additional benefit in patients with (diffuse) surgical bleeding or in patients with a specific underlying haemostatic defect. In general, surgical haemostasis and pharmacological therapies can be complementary in controlling blood loss. The use of pharmacological therapies to reduce blood loss and blood transfusions in surgery has historically been restricted to a few drugs. Antifibrinolytic agents (aprotinin, tranexamic acid and aminocaproic acid) have the best evidence supporting their use, especially in cardiac surgery, liver transplantation and some orthopaedic surgical procedures. Meta-analyses of randomised, controlled trials in cardiac patients have suggested a slight benefit of aprotinin, compared with the other antifibrinolytics. Desmopressin is the treatment of choice in patients with mild haemophilia A and von Willebrand disease. It has also been shown to be effective in patients undergoing cardiac surgery who received aspirin up to the time of operation. However, overall evidence does not support a beneficial effect of desmopressin in patients without pre-existing coagulopathy undergoing elective surgical procedures. Topical agents, such as fibrin sealants have been successfully used in a variety of surgical procedures. However, only very few controlled clinical trials have been performed and scientific evidence supporting their use is still limited. Novel drugs, like recombinant factor VIIa (eptacog alfa), are currently under clinical investigation. Recombinant factor VIIa has been introduced for the treatment of haemophilia patients with inhibitors, either in surgical or non-surgical situations. Preliminary data indicate that it may also be effective in surgical patients without pre-existing coagulation abnormalities. More clinical trials are warranted before definitive conclusions can be drawn about the safety and the exact role of this new drug in surgical patients. Only adequately powered and properly designed randomised, clinical trials will allow us to define the most effective and the safest pharmacological therapies for reducing blood loss and transfusion requirements in surgical patients. Future trials should also consider cost-effectiveness because of considerable differences in the costs of the available pro-haemostatic pharmacological agents.

### PMID 11417369 (2001) — Klinische Padiatrie
TITLE: [Minimal invasive pediatric surgery: development and progress by innovative technology].
DOI: 10.1055/s-2001-15858 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D004740">English Abstract, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Minimally invasive pediatric surgery (MIPS) has a solid tradition in which technique and technology have made key contributions to an already broad range of indications. This surgical method still has a deficiency with regard to tissue management of large-area defects, however. Sealing techniques can further expand the range of application.
METHOD: Technological evaluation provided outstanding data of fleece-bound collagen- and fibrinogen-based sealing systems (TachoComb) on biodegradability, adhesive strength and practicability. A relevant instrument was developed for MIS application and was introduced as the ATCS (AMISA-TachoComb-System).
PATIENTS: From 1993-2000, ATCS sealing was carried out in the scope of thoracoscopy (105 procedures) and laparoscopy (53 procedures) and specifically for recurring pneumothorax, traumatic chylothorax and splenic trauma.
RESULTS: Pneumothorax: 59 ACTS procedures in 49 patients (mean age: 11.4 yrs) with 6 reoperations (10.2%) and one recurrence (1.7%). The drainage dwell time was reduced (p &lt; 0.05) using a conventional comparison (31.9 hours vs. 17 days) and further relevant parameters were also reduced. Chylothorax: 3 ATCS procedures in 3 patients (mean age: 6.3 years) with reduction in the drainage dwell time (p &lt; 0.05) based on a conventional comparison (35 hours vs. 18 days). Splenic trauma: 17 ATCS procedures in 16 patients (mean age: 8.9 years) with one re-operation (5.9%) for associated liver trauma, organ conservation in each case and no significant drainage volumes.
CONCLUSION: The ATCS is an innovative instrument for MIPS and ca be employed for efficient and socio-economic (e.g. DRGs) closure of large-area defects.

### PMID 11261754 (2001) — Infection
TITLE: Collagen patches impregnated with antimicrobial agents have high local antimicrobial efficacy and achieve effective tissue gluing.
DOI: 10.1007/s15010-001-0073-6 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Local antimicrobial systems have gained importance, as illustrated by current research on drug delivery systems (DDS). We aimed to develop materials that combine hemostatic and antimicrobial efficacy as well as adhesiveness for use in surgical tissue management.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Materials were evaluated by in vitro studies employing microbiological and technological methods.
RESULTS: Antimicrobial impregnation of a collagen fleece, which is a pre-coated fibrinogen-based adhesive and therefore ready-to-use (TachoComb), is significantly more efficient--both in terms of the antimicrobial efficacy (p &lt; 0.001) as well as the adhesive strength (p = 0.03) -than coating an antibiotic-containing collagen fleece "on-site" with fibrin glue.
CONCLUSION: Due to ease of practical handling and favorable pharmacoeconomics, this DDS is recommended for both open and minimally invasive surgery.

### PMID 14728016 (2001) — American journal of cardiovascular drugs : drugs, devices, and other interventions
TITLE: Transfusion medicine : support of patients undergoing cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.2165/00129784-200101050-00004 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: There is still no alternative that is as effective or as well tolerated as blood; nevertheless, the search for ways to conserve, and even eliminate blood transfusion, continues. Based on hemoglobin levels, practice guidelines for the use of perioperative transfusion of red blood cells in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting have been formulated by the National Institutes of Health and the American Society of Anesthesiologists. However, it has been argued that more physiologic indicators of adequacy of oxygen delivery should be used to assess the need for blood transfusion. Methods used for conserving blood during surgery include autologous blood donation, acute normovolemic hemodilution and intra- and postoperative blood recovery and reinfusion. The guidelines for the use of autologous blood transfusion are controversial and it does not appear to be cost effective compared with allogeneic blood transfusion in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Similarly, the cost effectiveness of intra- and postoperative blood recovery and reinfusion need further evaluation. Treatment with recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO) remains unapproved in the US for patients undergoing cardiac or vascular surgery, but it is a valuable adjunct in Jehovah's Witness patients, for whom blood is unacceptable. The characterization of darbepoetin alfa, a novel erythropoiesis stimulating protein with a 3-fold greater plasma elimination half-life compared with rhEPO, is an important advance in this field. Darbepoetin alfa appears to be effective in treating the anemia in patients with renal failure or cancer and trials in patients with surgical anemia are planned. Desmopressin has been used to effectively reduce intraoperative blood loss. Topical agents to prevent blood loss, such as fibrin glue and fibrin gel, and agents that alter platelet function, such as aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) or dipyridamole, need further evaluation in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Aprotinin has been shown to preserve hemostasis and reduce allogeneic blood exposure to a greater extent than the antifibrinolytic agents tranexamic acid and aminocaproic acid. Controlled clinical trials comparing the costs of these agents with clinical outcomes, along with tolerability profiles in patients at risk for substantial perioperative bleeding are needed.

### PMID 11279735 (2001) — The Cochrane database of systematic reviews
TITLE: Anti-fibrinolytic use for minimising perioperative allogeneic blood transfusion.
DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001886 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Systematic Review
ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: Concerns regarding the safety of transfused blood have prompted re-consideration of the use of allogeneic (blood from an unrelated donor) blood transfusion.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of the anti-fibrinolytic drugs aprotinin, tranexamic acid, and epsilon aminocaproic acid, on peri-operative red blood cell (RBC) transfusion.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched MEDLINE (to May 1998), EMBASE (to December 1997), web sites of international health technology assessment agencies (to May 1998). References in identified trials and review articles were checked and authors contacted to identify any additional studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials of anti-fibrinolytic drugs in adults scheduled for non-urgent surgery.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers independently assessed trial quality and extracted data.
MAIN RESULTS: We found 61 trials of aprotinin (7027 participants). Aprotinin reduced the rate of RBC transfusion by a relative 30% (RR=0.70: 95%CI: 0.64 to 0.76). The average absolute risk reduction (ARR) was 20.4% (95%CI: 15.6% to 25.3%). On average, aprotinin use saved 1.1 units of RBC (95%CI: 0.69 to 1.47) in those requiring transfusion. Aprotinin also significantly reduced the need for re-operation due to bleeding (RR=0.40: 95%CI: 0.25 to 0.66). We found 18 trials of tranexamic acid (TXA) (1,342 participants). TXA reduced the rate of RBC transfusion by a relative 34% (RR=0.66: 95%CI: 0.54 to 0.81). This represented an ARR of 17.2% (95%CI: 8.7% to 25.7%). TXA use resulted in a saving of 1.03 units of RBC (95%CI: 0.67 to 1.39) in those requiring transfusion. We found four trials of epsilon aminocaproic acid (EACA) (208 participants). EACA use resulted in a statistically non-significant reduction in RBC transfusion (RR=0.48: 95%CI: 0.19 to 1.19). Comparisons between agents Eight trials made 'head-to-head' comparisons between TXA and aprotinin. There was no significant difference between the two drugs in the rate of RBC transfusion: RR=1.21 (95%CI: 0.83 to 1.76) for TXA compared to aprotinin. Adverse Effects Aprotinin did not seem to be associated with an excess risk of adverse effects, including thrombo-embolic events (thrombosis RR=0.64: 95%CI: 0.31 to 1.31) and renal failure (RR=1.19: 95%CI: 0.79 to 1.79). Fewer data were available for TXA and EACA.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: From this review it appears that aprotinin reduces the need for red cell transfusion, and the need for re-operation due to bleeding, without serious adverse effects. However, there was significant heterogeneity in trial outcomes, and some evidence of publication bias. Similar trends were seen with TXA and EACA, although the data were rather sparse. The poor evaluation of these latter drugs is unfortunate as results suggest they may be equally as effective as aprotinin, but are significantly cheaper. The evidence reviewed here supports the use of aprotinin in cardiac surgery. Further small trials of this drug are not warranted. Future trials should be large enough to compare the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of aprotinin with that of TXA and EACA.

### PMID 11573859 (2001) — The Annals of pharmacotherapy
TITLE: Antifibrinolytic agents and desmopressin as hemostatic agents in cardiac surgery.
DOI: 10.1177/106002800103500905 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: To review the use of systemic hemostatic medications for reducing bleeding and transfusion requirements with cardiac surgery.
DATA SOURCES: Articles were obtained through computerized searches involving MEDLINE (from 1966 to September 2000). Additionally, several textbooks containing information on the diagnosis and management of bleeding associated with cardiac surgery were reviewed. The bibliographies of retrieved publications and textbooks were reviewed for additional references.
STUDY SELECTION: Due to the large number of randomized investigations involving systemic hemostatic medications for reducing bleeding associated with cardiac surgery, the article selection process focused on recent randomized controlled trials, metaanalyses and pharmacoeconomic evaluations.
DATA EXTRACTION: The primary outcomes extracted from the literature were blood loss and associated transfusion requirements, although other outcome measures such as mortality were extracted when available.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Although the majority of investigations for reducing cardiac bleeding and transfusion requirements have involved aprotinin, evidence from recent meta-analyses and randomized trials indicates that the synthetic antifibrinolytic agents, aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid, have similar clinical efficacy. Additionally, aminocaproic acid (and to a lesser extent tranexamic acid) is much less costly. More comparative information of hemostatic agents is needed retative to other outcomes (eg., reoperation rates, myocardial infarction, stroke). There is insufficient evidence to recommend the use of desmopressin for reducing bleeding and transfusion requirements in cardiac surgery, although certain subsets of patients may benefit from its use.
CONCLUSIONS: Of the medications that have been used to reduce bleeding and transfusion requirements with cardiac surgery, the antifibrinolytic agents have the best evidence supporting their use. Aminocaproic acid is the least costly therapy based on medication costs and transfusion requirements.

### PMID 11336434 (2001) — Canadian journal of anaesthesia = Journal canadien d'anesthesie
TITLE: Pharmacological strategies for blood conservation in cardiac surgery: erythropoietin and antifibrinolytics.
DOI:  | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: PURPOSE: We review the clinically important benefits of the two principal pharmacological strategies, erythropoietin (EPO) and antifibrinolytics (aprotinin and lysine analogues), to decrease transfusion of allogeneic blood products (ABP) during and after cardiac surgery.
SOURCE: Articles were selected from an ongoing review of the literature, with special attention to meta-analyses dealing with EPO and/or antifibrinolytics and cardiac surgery.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The few studies available include a number of patients insufficient to allow definitive conclusions on the benefits of EPO in cardiac surgery. Further studies are required to determine the optimal dose of EPO and to compare its cost-effectiveness with other blood sparing strategies in this context. Both aprotinin and lysine analogues effectively decrease ABP transfusions and the incidence of re-thoracotomy. In addition, high-dose aprotinin reduces cerebrovascular morbidity and mortality after cardiopulmonary bypass. Several mechanisms have been put forward to explain these beneficial effects, some of which could well be common to all antifibrinolytics. The clinical benefits of aprotinin's unique anti-inflammatory effect are not entirely clear but the finding that it reduces the incidence of stroke and death is certainly a major argument in favor of its utilization. Yet, we have to ensure that aprotinin's benefits are not offset by side-effects such as allergy.
CONCLUSIONS: We still need large scale studies to definitely confirm the benefits and exclude the deleterious effects of these drugs on outcomes other than ABP requirements. At present, aprotinin is the only agent that has been shown to reduce the risk of cerebrovascular accident and mortality after cardiac surgery in adults.

### PMID 10587389 (1999) — Journal of vascular surgery
TITLE: Thrombin injection versus compression of femoral artery pseudoaneurysms.
DOI: 10.1016/s0741-5214(99)70043-1 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article
ABSTRACT: OBJECTIVE: The compression of femoral artery pseudoaneurysms is a time consuming, painful, and sometimes unsuccessful procedure. Thrombin injection has been advocated as a superior alternative. In this study, we compare our experiences with both techniques.
METHODS: All the records of femoral artery false aneurysms that were treated in the vascular laboratory from January 1996 to April 1999 were retrospectively reviewed. Treatment with ultrasound scan-guided compression was compared with treatment with dilute thrombin injection (100 U/mL).
RESULTS: Both groups had similar demographics and aneurysm sizes (P &gt;.2). Of the pseudoaneursyms, 88% were caused by cardiac catheterization and the others were the results of femoral artery access for cardiac surgery (6%), arteriography (5%), and renal dialysis (1%). Compression was successful in 25 of 40 patients (63%). Nine persistent aneurysms necessitated operation, and six were treated successfully with thrombin injection. Primary thrombin injection successfully obliterated 21 pseudoaneurysms in 23 patients. Overall, 27 of 29 pseudoaneurysms were treated successfully with thrombin injection (93%). Thrombosis occurred within seconds of the thrombin injection and required, on average, 300 units of thrombin (100 to 600 units). The patients who underwent successful compression required an average of 37 minutes of compression (range, 5 to 70 minutes) and required analgesia on several occasions. No patients in the thrombin group required analgesia or sedation. Neither group had complications. A cost analysis shows that thrombin treatment results in considerable savings in vascular laboratory resource use but not in overall hospital expenditures.
CONCLUSION: Ultrasound scan-guided thrombin injection is a safe, fast, and painless procedure that completely obliterates femoral artery pseudoaneurysms. The shift from compressive therapy to thrombin injection reduces vascular laboratory use and is less expensive, although it does not significantly impact hospital costs.

### PMID 10400410 (1999) — Drugs
TITLE: Tranexamic acid: a review of its use in surgery and other indications.
DOI: 10.2165/00003495-199957060-00017 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D003160">Comparative Study, Journal Article, Review
ABSTRACT: UNLABELLED: Tranexamic acid is a synthetic derivative of the amino acid lysine that exerts its antifibrinolytic effect through the reversible blockade of lysine binding sites on plasminogen molecules. Intravenously administered tranexamic acid (most commonly 10 mg/kg followed by infusion of 1 mg/kg/hour) caused reductions relative to placebo of 29 to 54% in postoperative blood losses in patients undergoing cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), with statistically significant reductions in transfusion requirements in some studies. Tranexamic acid had similar efficacy to aprotinin 2 x 10(6) kallikrein inhibitory units (KIU) and was superior to dipyridamole in the reduction of postoperative blood losses. Transfusion requirements were reduced significantly by 43% with tranexamic acid and by 60% with aprotinin in 1 study. Meta-analysis of 60 trials showed tranexamic acid and aprotinin, unlike epsilon-aminocaproic acid (EACA) and desmopressin, to reduce significantly the number of patients requiring allogeneic blood transfusions after cardiac surgery with CPB. Tranexamic acid was associated with reductions relative to placebo in mortality of 5 to 54% in patients with upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Meta-analysis indicated a reduction of 40%. Reductions of 34 to 57.9% versus placebo or control in mean menstrual blood loss occurred during tranexamic acid therapy in women with menorrhagia; the drug has also been used to good effect in placental bleeding, postpartum haemorrhage and conisation of the cervix. Tranexamic acid significantly reduced mean blood losses after oral surgery in patients with haemophilia and was effective as a mouthwash in dental patients receiving oral anticoagulants. Reductions in blood loss were also obtained with the use of the drug in patients undergoing orthotopic liver transplantation or transurethral prostatic surgery, and rates of rebleeding were reduced in patients with traumatic hyphaema. Clinical benefit has also been reported with tranexamic acid in patients with hereditary angioneurotic oedema. Tranexamic acid is well tolerated; nausea and diarrhoea are the most common adverse events. Increased risk of thrombosis with the drug has not been demonstrated in clinical trials.
CONCLUSIONS: Tranexamic acid is useful in a wide range of haemorrhagic conditions. The drug reduces postoperative blood losses and transfusion requirements in a number of types of surgery, with potential cost and tolerability advantages over aprotinin, and appears to reduce rates of mortality and urgent surgery in patients with upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage. Tranexamic acid reduces menstrual blood loss and is a possible alternative to surgery in menorrhagia, and has been used successfully to control bleeding in pregnancy.

### PMID 3876814 (1985) — The Annals of thoracic surgery
TITLE: Hemostatic effectiveness of fibrin glue derived from single-donor fresh frozen plasma.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(10)60074-4 | TYPE: <PublicationType UI="D016428">Journal Article
ABSTRACT: Fibrin glue derived from pooled human blood is an effective sealant for high-porosity vascular grafts and a valuable topical hemostatic agent in heparinized patients. Use of this agent in the United States is prohibited because of potential transmission of hepatitis B, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, and other serologically transmitted illnesses. We have developed a cryoprecipitation technique that allows preparation of fibrin glue from single-donor fresh frozen plasma. Use of this agent presumably entails no greater risk of disease transmission than intravenous administration of single-unit fresh frozen plasma. This report describes our early clinical experience with this material. Fibrin glue was used as a sealant for porous woven Dacron tubular prostheses and cardiovascular patches in 19 patients. The fibrin glue sealant has also been employed to control bleeding from needle holes and small anastomotic tears in 22 patients. No patient in this series had a bleeding complication from a suture line or graft treated with fibrin glue. This experience indicates that like fibrin glue from pooled blood, fibrin glue from single-donor plasma is effective as a graft sealant and topical hemostatic agent. Preparation of fibrin glue from single-donor plasma is simple and economical, and may provide cardiothoracic surgeons in the United States with a widely available, valuable hemostatic adjunct.

