Masters of Cardiothoracic Surgery

Different styles in trocar placement in robotic-assisted beating
heart coronary artery bypass grafting
Michiel Algoet1, Husam H. Balkhy2, Dries Dewulf1, Wouter Oosterlinck1

Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Research Unit of Cardiac Surgery, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 2Division of Cardiac Surgery,

Department of Surgery, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA
3000 Leuven, Belgium. Email: michiel.algoet@kuleuven.be.

Introduction

Surgical technique

Since the mid-nineties, minimally invasive direct coronary
artery bypass grafting (MIDCAB) has evolved and, thanks
to technological development of robotically assisted
beating heart coronary surgery known as robot-assisted
MIDCAB (RA-MIDCAB) and totally endoscopic coronary
artery bypass (TECAB), the procedure has become
even less invasive. Here we describe trocar placement
for both techniques. Both techniques can be used for
single or multiple vessel bypass using single or bilateral
internal thoracic arteries as an in-situ graft. The presented
techniques are used in an off-pump strategy.

Preparation

Clinical vignette
The first case is a sixty-three-year-old male with a history of
pacemaker implantation. Because of shortness of breath, he
underwent coronary angiography. A significant stenosis of
the right coronary artery was diagnosed which was treated
by a drug eluted stent. Second, a significant stenosis on the
bifurcation of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery and
first diagonal branch was observed. The indication for RAMIDCAB was set.
The second case is a sixty-eight-year-old male with stable
angina. He underwent coronary angiography revealing an
ostial stenosis of the LAD (70–90%) and proximal stenosis
of the circumflex artery (50–70%). Cardiovascular risk
factors are a body mass index (BMI) of 28.1 kg/m2, history
of smoking, arterial hypertension, hypercholesterolemia.
He was scheduled for a TECAB.

Pre-operative evaluation
A chest X-ray (and/or computed tomography scan) should
be available for pre-operative assessment of the thoracic
cavity. Anatomical references or landmarks should be
marked before incision: sternal midline, intercostal space
(ICS) 2-3-4, xiphoid process and the lower rib.
Anaesthesia
For both techniques, RA-MIDCAB and TECAB, we advise
to administer intrathecal morphine to reduce post-operative
pain and facilitate an enhanced recovery after cardiac
surgery. Endotracheal intubation should be performed by
a double lumen tube or endotracheal tube and bronchus
blocker to allow single lung ventilation.
Patient positioning
The patient is installed in dorsal decubitus, the left side
of the body is aligned with the table’s edge such that the
left shoulder overhangs slightly and the left arm can be
placed underneath the back. The operation table is slightly
tilted towards the right. This positioning lessens impeded
manipulations of the superior thoracic robotic arm.
Trocar placement
RA-MIDCAB
Three trocars are needed for a RA-MIDCAB approach.
The standard approach is placement in ICS 2, 4 and 6. The

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):458-460 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0209

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

first trocar is the video trocar and is usually placed in the
fourth ICS. Before placement of the first trocar a Verres
needle is placed in the fourth ICS just lateral of the nipple.
The pleural cavity is insufflated to a pressure of 6 mmHg
before the trocar is placed at the site of the Verres needle.
The next trocar is placed in the second ICS on the anterior
axillary line. The last trocar is placed in the sixth ICS on
the mid axillary line. At the end of the robotic procedure, a
mini-thoracotomy is performed at the fourth ICS.

cardiovascular outcomes compared to open coronary
revascularization with the additional advantages of shorter
intensive care stay, shorter total hospital stay, less blood
transfusion and faster revalidation (2,3). Nonetheless,
TECAB allows more flexibility inside the chest and allows
the surgeon to use all the robotic advantages for the most
delicate work in the procedure: the anastomosis.

TECAB
When performing a TECAB procedure, four trocar and
one working (assistant) port is needed. Insufflation of the
pleural cavity using the Verres needle is performed first
in the fourth ICS. The first three trocar are placed on
the anterior axillary line in ICS 2, 4 and 6. The fourth
trocar is usually placed lateral to the xiphoid process (left
internal mammary-LAD) or subcostal between the mid
clavicular line and midsternal line (posterolateral wall
revascularization, e.g., obtuse marginal branches) depending
on the coronary target that needs to be treated. At the end
of the robotic harvesting phase, one additional working port
is placed in the left ICS 2 parasternal.

Since the chest remains closed by avoiding sternotomy,
much-feared sternal dehiscence and infection are no longer
a consideration (4,5). While generally minimizing surgical
trauma, it also hastens the patient’s recovery and therefore,
has a positive impact on the patient’s early return to work or
normal daily activities (3).

Important notes during trocar placement
Keep hemodynamics in mind during every step of trocar
placement, creating a pneumothorax can cause severe
hypotension. Communication with the anesthesiologic
team is key during robotic surgery. Put the pressure below
6 mmHg to start and flow low to allow adaptation with
minimal repercussions. If you have difficulties insufflating
the pleural space, place your Verres needle at a different
trocar site and repeat the insufflation or directly use the
blunt introduction of the trocar. During TECAB, it can be
useful to use an Airseal® (CONMED, Largo, FL, USA) to
maintain a stable intrapleural pressure even when advancing
sutures or snaring devices.

Caveats
As there is a general desire for many minimally invasive
cardiac surgeons to perform TECAB, there are some
technical caveats. The supply of the Endowrist stabilizer
(Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) has been stopped
for several years, the absence of this stabilizer including the
support of the robotic surgery industry has made it difficult
to perform totally endoscopic cardiac surgery. On top of
that, European legislation has ordered a medical device
regulation in which many devices, including those from
robotic cardiac surgery is considered as class III. This upclassification has led towards a more complex application
process which also withholds the breakthrough of robotic
cardiac surgery in Europe.
Acknowledgments
Footnote

Comments
Clinical results
Since the first report (1) of robotic-assisted coronary
artery bypass grafting at the turn of the millennium,
several teams have adopted this technique. Many variants
have been proposed, but RA-MIDCAB and TECAB have
stood ground for the longest time and are described best
in the literature. Both techniques have shown equivalent

Advantages

Intuitive Surgical. The other authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the non-

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):458-460 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0209

Algoet et al. Trocar placement in robotic CABG

commercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

4.
