Keynote Lecture Series

How to advance from minimally invasive coronary artery
bypass grafting to totally endoscopic coronary bypass grafting:
challenges in Europe versus United States of America
Michiel Algoet1, Tom Melvin2, Stepan Cerny3, Johannes Bonatti4, Sandeep Singh5, Thierry Folliguet6,
Paul Modi7, Ulrich Franke8, Monica Gianoli9, Alfonso Agnino10, Filip Casselman11, Wouter Oosterlinck1

Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Research Unit of Cardiac Surgery, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 2School of Medicine, Trinity College

Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; 3Cardiothoracic Surgery Department, Na Homolce Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic; 4Division of Cardiac Surgery,
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 5ISALA Hospital, Zwolle, The Netherlands;

Department of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital Henri-Mondor, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris Créteil, Paris, France; 7The

Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK; 8Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Robert Bosch Hospital,
Stuttgart, Germany; 9Department of Cardiac Surgery, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; 10Department of Cardiac
Surgery, Humanitas Gavazzeni, Bergamo, Italy; 11Cardiovascular Center Aalst, OLV Clinic Aalst, Aalst, Belgium
3000 Leuven, Belgium. Email: michiel.algoet@kuleuven.be.

Robotic coronary and intra-cardiac surgery has been available for more than 25 years. In this period,
multiple studies have demonstrated the beneficial effects of robotic surgery over conventional open surgery.
Throughout the years, technical developments have enabled us to perform totally endoscopic coronary artery
bypass (TECAB) grafting. But these techniques remained in the hands of a small group of pioneers because
of a lack of structured training programs and the absence of long-term results at that time. Currently, a
renewed interest and a wide dispersion of robotic platforms, thanks to use of robotics in other disciplines, has
led to an exponential increase in robotic cardiac centers both in Europe and USA. Nonetheless, this increase
was slowed down in Europe as a result of the uncertainty introduced by the implementation of a revised
regulatory framework for medical devices [Regulation 2017/745, ‘Medical Device Regulation’ (‘MDR’)]. The
MDR was introduced with the goal of increasing patient safety and supporting innovation. Implementing
the MDR has proven to be exceptionally challenging and risks to the supply of essential devices have been
identified. Changes to both regulatory and market dynamics led to a circumstance where the only available
robotic platform for cardiac surgery decided to cease marketing of essential accessories for conducting
surgery. This resulted in the disappearance of dedicated tools such as the Endowrist stabilizer, essential
for TECAB, and the atrial retractor which is essential for intra-cardiac surgery. In the mean-time, further
clinical evidence was published demonstrating the superiority of robotic cardiac surgery over other minimally
invasive approaches. This has demonstrated the need to better define the clinical evidence requirements
for regulatory purposes to ensure that dedicated tools for evidence-based interventions in robotic coronary
surgery remain available such that TECAB can continue in Europe.
Keywords: Totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass (TECAB); minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass
(MIDCAB); robotic cardiac surgery

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):397-408 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0210

Algoet et al. MIDCAB to TECAB

Background
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is a procedure
with a direct effect on life expectancy and quality of life (1).
Although, in its early days, the procedure was invasive
and required a long recovery time, minimally invasive
approaches in the contemporary era have facilitated
earlier recovery after surgery. The first minimally invasive
left internal mammary artery (LIMA) to left anterior
descending artery (LAD) was performed in 1994 by
Benetti and Ballester (2), but was a procedure with a steep
learning curve, high conversion, and too high complication
rates (including post-operative pain) compared to median
sternotomy. Techniques and procedures have been
optimized since then based on the best knowledge, new
techniques and experiences. This evolution leads to a new
gold-standard clinical practice and continuously reduce
the risk of the surgery. Most recent data underline the
importance of the robotic graft harvesting as the graft
quality is pivotal in enhancing patency rates and overall
outcomes (3). In smaller series, even now thoracoscopic
procedures show damage to the internal mammary artery
(IMA) in up to 1.8% of cases (4). When the da Vinci robot
was introduced in 1998, it allowed surgeons to work in
the chest with articulating instruments, minimizing rib
spreading, overcoming tremor, and elevating accuracy to
the next level. The results of this ‘new’ way of harvesting
the IMA were excellent and reiterated in a late European
status report (5). Additionally, intra-cardiac procedures
showed excellent results with low risk. New robotic
platforms are now coming onto the European market and
should demonstrate comparable safety and efficacy.
Although the initial dispersion of robotically assisted
procedures was rather low and limited to a group of
dedicated surgical teams, exponential growth is currently
taking place both in USA and Europe. Focus of the initial
teams is oriented towards training and education of new
surgeons, creating a new safe environment with a lot of
background knowledge and support. The available ways of
supporting other surgeons can be both live and in a digital
environment, but both lead to a higher patient safety as the
experienced surgeons co-chair at the operation table.
Medical Device Regulation (MDR) entered into
force in May 2021 replacing the Medical Devices
Directive (Directive 93/42/EC, ‘MDD’). There was no
‘grandfathering’ (i.e., an automatic acceptance of previously

approved devices). In effect, all medical devices were treated
as new devices, requiring compliance with a variety of new
rules and procedures. For robotic surgical systems and
their accessories, when used for interventions in contact
with the central circulatory system, this brought the system
from class II under the MDD to class III under MDR.
This change in risk classification, combined with stricter
procedural rules concerning clinical data expectations,
led to a general, but not a specific increase in the clinical
evidence expectations and as a result, notified bodies (the
organizations who assess medical devices for CE-marking)
were more likely to request specific clinical investigation
data for particular accessories and interventions. The
challenge in practice, however, is that it is not possible
to know exactly what is required, and this may not be
discovered until the manufacturer is undergoing ‘conformity
assessment’ (the formal term for the assessment of technical
documentation undertaken by a notified body). This likely
led to some medical device manufacturers deciding to
withdraw devices or accessories from the market, rather
than take the risk that their device would be found to have
insufficient clinical data following a long and expensive
assessment. Some discussions between manufacturers and
notified bodies as to the clinical evidence expectations are
possible in the form of ’structured dialogue’ (6), however,
the type of advice that can be requested or provided is as
yet unclear with respect to clinical evidence. European
Medicines Agency (EMA) expert panels for medical devices
can provide pilot advice to a small number of device
developers, however, the pilot will focus on orphan or
paediatric devices. European Union (EU) advice structures
are in stark contrast to the United States (US) Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) system where advice is possible
via the Q-Submission programme, where the US FDA can
provide clear advice on clinical evidence expectations, with
the opportunity to provide consistent advice to developers
of similar technologies in a way that the decentralized
system of notified bodies cannot. As minimally invasive
robotically assisted procedures are estimated to be 3%
of the current cardiac procedures, the current benefits
for industry were rather small in proceeding to bring the
accessories through an assessment, despite the potential
benefits for patients [which includes a 20% shorter hospital
stay, a shorter intensive care unit (ICU) stay, fewer blood
transfusions, and excellent graft patency] (7).

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):397-408 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0210

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

A

B

Figure 1 Endoscopic surgery performed by a master-slave concept. (A) Two robotic da Vinci consoles in a training setting. (B) Robotic view
during ITA harvesting. ITA, internal thoracic artery.

Robotic-assisted (RA) cardiac surgery in the field

Coronary surgery

Concept

The robotic system is used in two types of coronary surgery:
RA-minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass
(RA-MIDCAB) grafting and totally endoscopic coronary
artery bypass (TECAB) grafting (Figure 3). Both procedures
are indicated for surgical coronary bypass grafting, but local
legislation and availability of surgical instruments determine
which procedure can be performed. The RA-MIDCAB
technique is by definition a robotic thoracic procedure, as
the robotic assistance is only used in harvesting the IMA on
the left side (or bilaterally). After the thoracic phase, a minithoracotomy is made to perform the IMA to coronary artery
anastomosis. The difference with the TECAB procedure
is the possibility of making the coronary anastomosis with
the assistance of the robotic system. Both procedures can be
performed with or without cardiopulmonary bypass, and all
instruments and technologies necessary for this operation
have been used and validated for many years. However,
due to the absence of agreed upon definitions of minimally
invasive CABG, various techniques have developed.
Although most of these techniques have contributed to the
field, some have misused this term in various ways. It is
important to adhere to some elements that define minimal
invasive cardiac surgery: minimally invasive cardiothoracic
access, off-pump strategy, minimally invasive graft
harvesting, anti-inflammatory management, and enhanced
recovery after surgery. Maximal compliance with these
determinants is encouraged to fall under the definition
of minimally invasive coronary surgery, including robotic
coronary surgery (9).

Robotic assistance for coronary surgery was used for the
first time in 1999 by Carpentier and Loulmet in Paris (8).
It was described as ‘computer-enhanced cardiac surgery’.
The terms ‘robotic-assisted’ and ‘computer-enhanced’
covers the topic well; it means the endoscopic procedure is
now facilitated by a robotic computer system. This system
is a master-slave concept, the instruments that are held by
several persons during conventional endoscopic surgery are
now held by a digitalized robotic system that mimics the
movements made by the surgeon in his console (Figure 1).
What is important is that the robotic system does not make
any decisions itself and does not leave any implants or marks
behind on the patient. It is an external device that facilitates
difficult endoscopic surgery by adding more flexibility and
accuracy, avoiding tremor and hinge effect.
Interaction of the robotic system with the patient
RA cardiac surgery is endoscopic surgery and requires
thoracic trocar placement. Depending on the cardiac
procedure, 3–4 intercostal trocar placements are made with
or without an additional mini-thoracotomy. RA cardiac
surgery is less invasive than conventional open cardiac
surgery and comes with well-known benefits as shorter
intensive care and hospital stay, less blood transfusion, less
wound infections (5). The patient is positioned in dorsal
decubitus as in conventional surgery. Trocars serve as pivot
point and protection for the instruments. The robot is an
external system that is positioned next to the operating table
(Figure 2). The arms are connected to the trocar to allow an
organized movement and articulation of the instruments.

Intra-cardiac surgery
The use of the robotic system in valve surgery mainly

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):397-408 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0210

Algoet et al. MIDCAB to TECAB

Figure 2 Overview of the surgical setup for robotic coronary surgery.

RA-MIDCAB

TECAB

Figure 3 Incisions (red lines) for different robot assisted coronary procedures. RA-MIDCAB, robotic-assisted-minimally invasive direct
coronary artery bypass; TECAB, totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass.

involves interventions to the mitral valve (MV). The
surgical approach has evolved over the years into a fairly
standardized approach. The technique uses four 8 mm
robotic ports introduced through the chest wall of the right
hemithorax towards the heart. One port is used for the
camera and the remaining three for robotic instruments
that operate inside the heart. An assistant incision of
approximately 1.5–4.0 cm in size is used during the

procedure to support the intervention on the valve (Figure 4).
The entire procedure can also be performed as a “ports
only” procedure, where the assistant incision is replaced by
a port with a diameter between 10–12 mm (10).
The main indication for this technique is primary mitral
regurgitation in asymptomatic, typically young patients.
During the same procedure and with the same approach, a
tricuspid valve (TV) repair can also be performed, the left

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):397-408 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0210

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

Figure 4 Incisions (red lines) for mitral and aortic valve robotassisted surgery.

atrial appendage can be closed, and cryoablation of the left
or both atria can be performed (11). This approach has also
been successfully used for a long time for the correction
of congenital heart defects [e.g., patent foramen ovale
and atrial septal defect (ASD)] and extirpation of cardiac
tumors, such as myxomas (12,13). Recently, the same
approach has been successfully used for replacement or
repair of the aortic valve. The position of the robotic ports
is the same as for MV surgery, the only modification being
that the assistant incision must be large enough to allow
the artificial valve to be inserted into the chest (14). All of
these procedures are by definition intra-cardiac procedures
because the robotic instruments directly touch the heart and
great vessels.
Clinical evidence on robotic assisted cardiac
surgery procedures
Coronary surgery
Surgical revascularization currently accounts for half of the
robotic cardiac surgery volume in Europe. Data presented
by Cerny et al. (5), covering the years 2016 to 2019, shows
that robotic CABG is associated with very low mortality
(0.6%) and no strokes. Conversions to larger incisions were
performed in 2.6% of patients and the rate of revision for
bleeding was 2.1%. Most (98.7%) of these procedures were

beating-heart procedures. Cumulative incidence for all
robotic procedures indicates that robotic cardiac procedures
have a lower in-hospital mortality compared to the
predicted EuroSCORE II, mainly driven by the RA-CABG
group (Figure 5). Cavallaro et al. (15) studied 2,582 patients
undergoing RA-CABG from 2008 to 2010 using the
Nationwide Inpatient Sample database, a publicly available
database of inpatient hospital care in the USA. The study
showed lower stroke and transfusion rates in patients
undergoing single-vessel robotic CABG compared to
conventional surgery. Multi-vessel operations had similar
mortality and cardiovascular complications, regardless of
whether a robotic or conventional approach was utilized.
A recent 25-year review reported on 1,762 RA-MIDCAB
and 1,678 robotic TECAB procedures worldwide was
done by Bonatti et al. (16). RA-MIDCAB resulted in 6.6%
conversion to larger incisions, 1.9% revision for bleeding,
0.4% stroke, and 0.4% mortality. For robotic TECAB,
there was 10.3% conversion to larger incisions, 3.4%
revision for bleeding, 1.0% stroke, and 1.3% mortality,
but the percentage of multi-vessel bypass surgeries in this
cohort was larger. Hospital length of stay was slightly more
than 5 days for both methods.
The current European outcomes for robotic CABG,
as published in the status report, are comparatively
positive (5). The low (2.6%) conversion rate likely reflects
a learning curve of the robotic cardiac surgery community
and demonstrates that the procedures have become more
standardized. This learning curve has also been quantified
by Göbölös and coworkers in a review on TECAB
(Figure 6) (17). He demonstrated a reduction of the
conversion rate from more than 50% to less than 5%
over a period of 20 years. In the European status report,
very few TECAB procedures were performed, likely
due the lack of the Endowrist stabilizer for the new da
Vinci X and Xi systems, which were most commonly
used in Europe. The revision for bleeding rate of 2.1%
was acceptable, but the hospital length of stay of 6.5 days
seemed comparable to sternotomy. European healthcare
and reimbursement systems, where shorter hospital stays
lead to lower remuneration, have probably been a factor in
this observation. Early recovery after surgery and return to
activities should further be assessed prospectively.
The latest series was published by Lo et al. and al
reviewed their 10-year experience involving 562 patients
using both mammary and radial grafts operated with
RA-MIDCAB. The morbi-mortality rate was low, with
conversion to sternotomy of less than 1%. Their long-term

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):397-408 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0210

Algoet et al. MIDCAB to TECAB

A

B

Observed mortality vs. EuroSCORE II
2016–2019: 2,563 consecutive patients

Observed mortality vs. EuroSCORE II
2016–2019: stratified into CABG (n=1,266) and MV/TV surgery (n=945)

MV/TV surgery

CABG

EuroSCORE

EuroSCORE
Mortality

Consecutive patients in time

Cumulative number of deaths

Cumulative number of deaths

EuroSCORE
Mortality

Mortality

250 500
Consecutive patients in time

Figure 5 Cited from Cerny et al. (5). Cumulative incidence curve of observed mortality vs. expected mortality according to EuroSCORE
II for (A) all consecutive patients and (B) stratified for CABG and MV/TV surgery. The x-axis represents all consecutive patients operated
between 2016–2019. The red line represents the cumulative number of deaths as observed in this cohort of patients undergoing robotic
cardiac surgery (“observed mortality”) while the blue line represents the cumulative sum of mortality risk as predicted based on the same
patient’s baseline demographical characteristics using the EuroSCORE II as if they had undergone conventional surgery (“expected
mortality”). The observed mortality was lower than that expected according to EuroSCORE II in the overall sample, mainly driven by a
reduction in the mortality after CABG. CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; MV, mitral valve; TV, tricuspid valve.

Intra-cardiac surgery

Conversion to larger incision, %

Year of publication

Figure 6 Cited from Göbölös et al. (17). Percentage representation
of conversion to larger surgical incision on the publication
timeline. The trend curve well demonstrates the decreasing
probability of conversion in TECAB grafting evolution. TECAB,
totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass.

results report 5- and 10-year survival of 82% and 65%,
respectively. This paper shows that the use of multiple
coronary grafts is safe using robotic assistance with the
avoidance of sternotomy complications (18).

R o b o t i c M V s u r g e r y, i n c l u d i n g b o t h r e p a i r a n d
replacement, accounted for one third of the European
volume. The current rates of conversion (2.2%), revision
for bleeding (2.3%), and stroke (0.6%) are all in line with
published data (5,13,14), while the 1.8% mortality appears
higher than that reported in the robotic literature. It needs
to be pointed out that combined MV/TV operations (9.6%
mortality rate, 5/52) and MV replacement (4.1% mortality
rate, 8/197) were included in this analysis, which had a
higher mortality rate than isolated TV procedures (0.0%
mortality rate, 0/70) and isolated MV repair (MVR) (0.6%
mortality rate, 4/626). When considering only the latter,
the reported mortality rate can very well compete with
results reported from high volume centers in the USA.
By comparison, in Chitwood’s series of 540 robotic MV
repairs performed at East Carolina University, revision for
bleeding, stroke, and mortality occurred in 2.4, 0.6, and
0.4%, respectively. Conversion to sternotomy was necessary
in only one patient (0.2%) and the mean hospital stay was
5.6 days (19). In 1,257 patients operated at Emory University

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):397-408 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0210

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

School of Medicine, Murphy et al. (20) noted reoperation
for bleeding, stroke, and mortality in 2.2%, 0.7%, and
0.6% respectively, with a mean post-operative length of stay
of 4.9 days. Urgent conversions were necessary in 1.0%.
Gillinov et al. (21) reported an extremely low mortality
(0.1%) and stroke rate (1.4%) in the first 1,000 robotic
MV patients at the Cleveland Clinic. Conversion to
larger incisions occurred in 2.0% (sternotomy) and 2.3%
(small thoracotomy), reoperation for bleeding in 2.5%,
and median hospital stay was 5 days. Our post-operative
hospital stay of 7.5 days exceeded that of USA series and
this again is likely a reflection of European reimbursement
systems. While robotic MV repair is more commonly
performed in the USA, only 1,533 (35.5%) out of 4,322
minimally invasive MV repairs documented in the Society
of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) database were carried out using
robotic assistance, with only five centers in this analysis
performing more than 20 cases per year (22). Data based
on recent meta-analyses (23,24) demonstrate that robotic
MV procedures offer a lower incidence of postoperative
atrial fibrillation, a lower need for transfusions, a shorter
stay in the ICU and a shorter overall hospital stay,
despite somewhat longer extracorporeal circulation and
cardioplegic cardiac arrest times, compared to the classical
sternotomy technique. In his meta-analysis including
14 studies and 2,804 patients in the robotic group and
3,537 in the conventional sternotomy group, Williams
even demonstrated lower mortality in both matched and
unmatched cohorts (23).
The strongest evidence was published in 2024, when
Mori et al. (25) performed a retrospective analysis based on
data from the STS Adult Cardiac Surgery Database with
a total of 7,962 robotic MV procedures. Using propensity
matching, they created 6,962 identical pairs for comparing
the robotic approach with the sternotomy approach and
5,540 identical pairs for comparing the robotic approach
with the mini-thoracotomy approach. Mortality was
comparable for all approaches, but the robotic approach
demonstrated lower conversion to MV replacement, less
need for transfusion, shorter duration of postoperative
artificial ventilation, lower incidence of postoperative atrial
fibrillation, shorter overall hospital stay, and lower need for
hospital readmission compared to both other approaches.
Compared to the sternotomy approach, it also demonstrated
a lower need for perioperative transfusion.
Robotic MV replacement is technically more complex
and more demanding than repair. The major challenge is
dealing with calcification and valve suture arrangement with

the robotic arms in place. The largest series was reported by
Kuo et al. (26) from Tainan and Taipei in Taiwan, including
52 patients who received bioprosthetic replacements with
73% concomitant procedures, such as maze procedures,
patent foramen ovale closure, and TV repair. The
conversion rate to sternotomy was 1.9% and 1.9% of the
patients were re-explored for bleeding. The stroke rate
was 1.9%, but there was no in-hospital mortality. Another
recent large series of robotic MV replacement by Arslanhan
and colleagues reports a mean cardiopulmonary bypass
time and cross clamp time were 143±54 and 93±37 minutes,
respectively. Mean ICU stay time was 26.5±26.0 hours.
Postoperative stroke was observed in one (0.9%) patient
and new onset renal failure was observed in two (1.7%)
patients. Perioperative and postoperative early mortality
was observed in three (2.6%) patients, which was lower
than expected. They concluded that robotic MVR can be
performed with good early postoperative outcomes (27).
Other procedures eligible for robotic cardiac surgery are
atrial septum defect closure, left atrial myxoma resection,
epicardial left ventricular lead placement, epicardial
ablations (e.g., maze procedure), myocardial bridge division,
ventricular tumor resection, and hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy resection. Atrial septum defect closure
has been the largest cohort of these other procedures.
Multiple case series have been published, all with excellent
outcomes and survival (13,28). Regarding the left atrial
myxoma resection, robotic surgery is ideally suited for the
minimal invasive approach, with the dexterity and flexibility
of the instruments allowing for excellent visualization
and resection. In the published cases, no conversions
nor revisions has been needed (12). Arrhythmia surgery
including lead placement and surgical treatment of atrial
fibrillation are interesting cases for starting up a robotic
program. Small series have shown comparable results to
open techniques (29).

Legal aspects towards robotic assisted cardiac
surgery
The regulation of robotic surgical systems in Europe
Robotic surgical systems are a type of medical technology
that is regulated as a medical device in the EU. In order to
be made available in Europe, these systems must comply
with the applicable regulations for medical devices. These
rules are in the process of significant change in the EU,
as the system moves from a directive-based system, with
laws initially published in the early 1990s (93/42/EC,

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):397-408 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0210

Algoet et al. MIDCAB to TECAB

‘MDD’) (5), to the MDR (EU 2017/745 ‘MDR’). The
MDR was published in 2017, it came into initial effect in
May of 2021 and it has a transitional period that has been
extended from 2024 to 2027 for high-risk devices (i.e., class
III medical devices). As a result of a series of challenges in
complying with the new rules, product withdrawals have
been reported across a variety of specialties (7). This may
be due to a lack of assessment capacity in notified bodies
(the organizations responsible for assessing devices) (8),
increased costs and durations of assessments, and a lack of
predictability in understanding the type of clinical evidence
which is required (9).
When the MDD was first introduced in the 1990s, a
compilation of clinical evidence (clinical evaluation) was
not required for all devices and was only suggested ‘in
particular’ for implantable and class III devices (30). Clinical
evidence expectations are markedly different for medical
devices when compared to medicines. All medicines require
phased clinical trials, whereas medical devices undergo a
more procedural assessment known as clinical evaluation,
which can utilize data from other devices (demonstrated
to be ‘equivalent’), clinical studies, literature reviews and
post-market data relating to the use of the device. Under
the MDD, there was a much more liberal acceptance of
equivalence data, and as a result, it was often possible
to avoid the need to conduct pre-market clinical studies
by referencing the evidence for another device. MDR
changed this by linking the risk classification of a device
to a requirement to have ‘clinical investigations’, however,
the design or purpose of these investigations is not further
described. MDD required a demonstration of safety and
‘performance’. Device performance has been seen as a
characteristic of the device alone, to be determined when
it is correctly used for its intended purpose on patients, but
which is not assessed by a study of patient outcome (31). In
other words, if the design engineers tested the device, this
could often be taken as sufficient ‘performance’ and the
need for a clinical study could often be avoided.
MDR requires that all devices shall be safe and
‘effective’ (32). This is a much stronger clinical evidence
requirement, however, it is rarely discussed in guidance
documents, which still tend to refer to ‘performance’.
Surveys have found that the biggest challenge in preparing
clinical evaluations for device developers is determining
the “amount of data needed to generate sufficient clinical
evidence” (33). Under the MDD rules, which continue
to apply during the transition period, robotic surgical
systems such as the da Vinci system (Intuitive Surgical,

Inc., California, USA) are marketed as intermediaterisk devices (class IIb) for indications including general
thoracoscopic surgical procedures (10). As a result of
changes in the classification rules in the MDR, Really
Simple Syndication (RSS) will in general be upclassified
to class III. This upclassification, combined with other
changes in the MDR which increases the requirement for
clinical investigations for class III devices in particular—
has increased the expectation for clinical investigations with
respect to individual indications. As the classification rules
are based on the timing and anatomical invasiveness of
exposure, manufacturers may seek to limit the indications to
those which stay within class IIb. As such, the use of these
devices with respect to the MDR could become off-label,
and the accessories for the higher risk indications may be
withdrawn.
In the US, robotic surgical systems are in general class
II devices. The classification rules are different between
the US and EU. As a result of the classification system in
the US, the device can be marketed by following the 510(k)
pathway, which allows a clearance based on substantial
equivalence to a predicate (i.e., a previously approved
device). Robotic surgical systems are medical products,
however, the outcomes associated with the use of these
products relies significantly on the practice of surgery and
the healthcare system in which they are used. The overall
responsibilities for the deployment of robotic surgical
systems within a hospital therefore requires that device
manufacturers, surgeons and health systems each take their
responsibility. Surgeons in Europe have a responsibility to
ensure that the interventions they conduct are supported by
robust clinical evidence. The extent to which this clinical
responsibility interacts with the regulatory responsibilities
of manufacturers in complying with the MDR is currently
unclear, as the clinical evidence requirements are not
technology- or intervention-specific. Robotic surgical
systems are not without challenges when used for different
interventions (11). In some cases, an overall positive benefit/
risk is not clear. In the EU, there is high-quality registry
data relating to cardiothoracic interventions, however, it is
unclear as to whether this is sufficient for notified bodies to
approve the device for the MDR.
FDA and RA cardiac surgery
In the US, medical devices are approved by the FDA.
Approvals are usually procedure-specific. The da Vinci
robot was cleared by the FDA in 1997 for assisting surgery

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):397-408 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0210

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

and in 2000 for performing actual surgery. It received
clearance for robotically assisted MV surgery in 2002, ASD
repair and coronary bypass surgery followed in 2003 and
2004, respectively. These approvals were through so called
510(k) processes and fulfil the requirements for a class II
medical device. The different classification and regulatory
pathways are important differences between the EU and US
systems. There is no guidance for either system concerning
type of clinical studies that are necessary to receive
regulatory approval and requirements are decided on a caseby-case basis. The current clearance of the da Vinci Surgical
robot is “general thoracoscopic and thoracoscopicallyassisted cardiotomy procedures”. Under cardiotomy
procedures, only MV surgery and coronary artery bypass are
included. Any new indication needs to be approved by the
FDA in the US meaning procedures like myxoma resection
and arrhythmia surgery are by definition off-label uses, and
as such they should typically be used under institutional
review board (IRB) approval of each hospital and are under
the surgeon’s prevue of responsibility to perform them. The
FDA is a US federal agency and approvals on a state-level
are not possible. The only way to use devices outside official
approval is under investigational device exemption (IDE) by
the FDA or through IRB approval per hospital. In the US,
all medical device manufacturers participate in the FDA
MAUDE database which tracks post-market medical device
reports regarding safety incidents.

experience are gathered, robotic systems will become more
sophisticated and refined. Machine learning algorithms
may be employed to analyze vast amounts of surgical data
already available, enabling surgeons to make more informed
decisions and customize procedures according to individual
patient needs. The use of robotic technology in conjunction
with artificial intelligence has the potential to revolutionize
the field and further improve patient safety and outcomes.
However, with the introduction of MDR in Europe,
patients in Europe may be deprived of these potentially
game-changing developments in cardiac surgery, since
currently no robotic platform is available for cardiac surgery
in Europe due to administrative constraints. The initial
research and development work 25 years ago was performed
on the da Vinci Si system. The current out phasing of Si and
replacement towards Xi systems will make it impossible to
use the previously developed Endowrist stabilizer. It will be
necessary to re-adapt these tools to the current platforms.
To get this work done, engagement of the surgical society
as a whole is essential, and a proficiency-based training
pathway and learning should be promoted. The procedures,
both coronary and MV interventions, are no longer limited
to pioneers but are now standardized and safe procedures
that need to be taught in a structural way to allow a
significant pool of surgical teams to be ready and operate
at the highest level. Only then industrial partners will be
able to re-engage and will be able to deal with the current
MDR constraints and stay economically healthy. The same
requirements are applicable to progress from MIDCAB to
TECAB, as the knowledge is there but the dispersion and
implementation now needs to be improved. The scientific
society is best placed to embrace this procedural knowledge,
monitor outcomes, and connect with industry to make these
crucial steps forward. In recent years, new robotic platforms
became available, such as CMR Surgical (United Kingdom),
Medicaroid (Japan), SS Innovations (India), Medtronic
(USA) and others. These new players might enable the
relaunch of robotic cardiac surgery but will benefit from
clear accreditation requirements, the cost of accreditation,
and timeline.

The future of RA cardiac surgery
The future of robotic cardiac surgery holds immense
promise. RA cardiac surgery is synonymous with minimally
invasive techniques, reducing the need for large incisions,
minimizing trauma to the patient, contributing to faster
recovery times, reducing pain, and lowering the risks of
infection while maintaining (or even improving) patient
outcomes. Moreover, the high level of precision offered by
robotic cardiac surgery ensures that delicate procedures,
through small incisions, are executed with optimum
precision. Visualization is paramount in surgery, and robotic
systems typically offer an immersive and detailed view of
the surgical site. The integration of augmented reality and
virtual reality technologies, together with the excellent
surgical view, holds immense potential in enhancing the
surgeon’s ability to visualize the patient’s anatomy, leading
to better identification of critical structures with improved
decision-making and surgical planning (e.g., in valve
repair, complex congenital defects, etc.). As more data and

Conclusions
Robotic cardiac surgery has been present for over 25 years
and has demonstrated good early, mid- and long-term
results. When the results are compared to conventional
‘open’ surgery, we see the largest progress in terms of
blood loss, wound infections, intensive care stay, and total

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):397-408 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0210

Algoet et al. MIDCAB to TECAB

hospital stay while maintaining the standard cardiovascular
outcomes. When robotics are compared to other types
of minimal invasive surgery, recent evidence also shows
better outcomes in favor of RA cardiac surgeries. One
may suggest the learning curve for robotics is less difficult
compared to thoracoscopic-assisted surgeries and thus
lower the threshold to perform robot-assisted cardiac
surgery. However, at the moment we are in a legislative
framework that creates the absence of certain crucial robotic
instruments in Europe. These circumstances have made
it difficult to perform robotic MV surgery and pushed the
coronary field towards robot-assisted MIDCAB to harvest
the internal thoracic arteries but a conventional hand sewn
anastomosis instead of TECAB where you can perform the
complete procedure without opening the patient’s chest.
Since the da Vinci Si was announced to be outphased,
the last centers in the US performing TECAB will have to
cease their activities. Together with surgeons and industry,
we need to pave a way to keep robotic cardiac surgery at
the forefront of innovative cardiovascular medicine and
make it available worldwide. Both surgeons and legal
authorities must embrace old and new industrial partners
to ensure patient safety and optimal outcomes in cardiac
surgery. Together, we need to keep working on evidence
that supports the use of the Endowrist stabilizer to allow
us to perform TECAB. For coronary and intra-cardiac
surgery, the techniques have been standardized throughout
the years (both for on- and off-pump) with excellent results
on medium and long term. All knowledge, evidence and
experience combined. RA cardiac surgery seems to be future
proofed and is a safe surgical innovation with an added value
for the patient. We believe that together with surgeons,
societal, industry, and regulatory bodies, RA cardiac surgery
can be further developed towards a new standard for select
cardiac diseases.
When regulation was revised in the US following the
thalidomide tragedy and Kefauver-Harris amendments, it
became necessary to demonstrate ‘efficacy’ of medicines
for the first time. This led to the establishment of a
process with the US FDA to understand which drugs had
evidence to support efficacy or not, known as the drug
efficacy study implementation (DESI) (34). For medical
devices in the EU, we appear to have similarly updated the
clinical evidence expectations, however, we have left it to
individual developers, companies, and regulators to make
a determination on a case-by case basis as to whether the
regulatory requirements have been met. In order to bring the
regulatory and evidence-based medicine worlds together,

we need to develop methods, processes, and specifications
to ensure that evidence requirements are clearly defined and
communicated to developers, regulatory bodies, and the
clinical community in order to ensure that safe and effective
interventions can continue and that innovation can be safely
introduced.
Acknowledgments
Footnote
to declare.
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
