AlJamal, Nisivaco, Balkhy

Original Manuscript

Robotic endoscopic cardiac surgery in the reoperative
patient: Is it feasible?
Yazan N. AlJamal, MBBS, Sarah Nisivaco, MD, and Husam H. Balkhy, MD, FACS, FACC
ABSTRACT
Objective: Robotic cardiac surgery is increasingly adopted in the United States but
remains a relative contraindication in reoperative settings for many programs. We
hypothesize that in experienced hands, robotic approaches offer significant advan­
tages in redo cardiac surgery by avoiding graft and cardiac injury during sternal
reentry. We present our single-center experience with robotic redo endoscopic
cardiac surgery, including midterm outcomes up to 10 years.
Methods: A retrospective review of 1834 robotic cardiac surgeries from 2013 to
2024 was performed. Of these, 105 patients (6%) with previous cardiac surgery
were included. Patients underwent either epicardial (n = 45) or intracardiac
(n = 60) procedures. Preoperative characteristics, intraoperative and postopera­
tive outcomes, and midterm survival were analyzed.

8 mm Robotic Camera

5 mm Laparoscopic Camera

5 mm working port

HEAD

FEET

Robotic mitral valve surgery after sternotomy with
right chest port placement.

CENTRAL MESSAGE

Robotic redo totally endoscopic
Results: In the intracardiac group, procedures included mitral valve (n = 49), coronary and mitral valve sur­
aortic valve (n = 4), tricuspid valve (n = 3), cryomaze (n = 2), myxoma (n = 1), gery is feasible and safe in
and atrial septal defect (n = 1). Epicardial procedures included totally endoscopic selected patients, with low 30coronary artery bypass (n = 31), pericardiectomy (n = 4), left ventricular leads
(n = 7), and others (n = 3). The mean Society of Thoracic Surgeons score was day mortality and acceptable
4.0%. Thirty-day mortality was 1.9% (observed to expected ratio 0.5), and hospital midterm survival.
mortality was 1.9%. Conversion to sternotomy occurred in 2 cases (1.9%). Inten­
sive care unit and hospital length of stay averaged 1.6 and 3.2 days, respectively. At a
mean follow-up of 37.5 months, all-cause mortality was 15%, with 6.6% cardiacrelated mortality.
Conclusions: Robotic endoscopic cardiac surgery is feasible and safe in selected
reoperative patients. Despite the challenges of reoperation, excellent early
outcomes and acceptable midterm survival were achieved. These procedures
can be successfully integrated into comprehensive robotic programs to expand
minimally invasive options for complex cardiac reoperations. (JTCVS Structural
and Endovascular 2025;8:100079)

PERSPECTIVE
Redo robotic totally endoscopic cardiac surgery
serves as a viable alternative in reoperative intra­
cardiac and epicardial surgery in selected
patients.

To view the AATS Annual Meeting Webcast, see the
URL next to the webcast thumbnail.

Video clip is available online.

From the Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill.
Read at the 105th Annual Meeting of The American Association for Thoracic Sur­
gery, Seattle, Washington, May 2-5, 2025.
Received for publication Feb 10, 2025; revisions received April 22, 2025; accepted
for publication April 23, 2025; available ahead of print Sept 17, 2025.
Address for reprints: Husam H. Balkhy, MD, FACS, FACC, Department of
Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 (E-mail:
aljamal.yazan@mayo.edu).
2950-6050
ican Association for Thoracic Surgery. This is an open access article under the CC BY
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Reoperative cardiac surgery has traditionally been associ­
ated with significant challenges as a result of increased risks
of morbidity and mortality associated with sternal re-entry.
The risks include injury to critical vascular and cardiac
anatomy (innominate vein, ascending aorta, right atrium
and ventricle) that lie directly behind the sternum; injury
to adjacent cardiac and lung structures during the adhesiol­
ysis; inadequate exposure such as mitral valve surgery in the
redo setting; and finally graft injury in patients with previ­
ous coronary bypass surgery and patent bypass grafts.1-3
Conventional sternotomy-based reoperations are associated

JTCVS Structural and Endovascular c Volume 8, Number C

Original Manuscript

Abbreviations and Acronyms
ICU
= intensive care unit
RITA = right internal thoracic artery
TECAB = totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass
with operative mortality rates ranging from 4% to 7%,
which are markedly greater than those for primary cardiac
surgeries.4-7 Consequently, alternative approaches such as
minimally invasive surgeries have been explored to
mitigate these risks.8,9
Robotic cardiac surgery offers several advantages,
including superior visualization (10 3 magnification), pre­
cision in adhesiolysis, and minimized trauma to surround­
ing structures. Compared with minimally invasive
approaches conducted by direct vision through a minithor­
acotomy, the endoscopic view afforded by the robotic scope
offers a wide panoramic appreciation of the anatomy. Early
reports demonstrate that robotic systems facilitate meticu­
lous dissection and enable complex intracardiac and epicar­
dial procedures with favorable outcomes.10-12,13
In cases of mitral valve surgery or coronary revasculariza­
tion after previous sternotomy, robotic surgery has shown
promise in reducing blood loss, hospital stay, and recovery
times compared with traditional approaches.11,12,17 For coro­
nary reoperations, alternatives like the use of the right gastro­
epiploic artery via subxiphoid or transdiaphragmatic
approaches have been explored; however, these techniques
are often limited by anatomical constraints and previous
abdominal surgeries.14-16 Robotic-assisted totally endoscopic
coronary artery bypass (TECAB) further pushes the bound­
aries by enabling revascularization without sternotomy or car­
diopulmonary bypass and the harvesting of a frequently
previously unused right internal thoracic artery conduit.10,13,17
Since initiating the robotic cardiac surgery program at
our current institution in 2013, we hypothesized that reoper­
ative robotic approaches could overcome the limitations of
traditional sternotomy while maintaining surgical safety
and efficacy.13 Our institution’s experience spans a wide
spectrum of robotic cardiac procedures, emphasizing the
totally endoscopic approach with increasing application to
reoperations. This study aims to evaluate the feasibility,
safety, and outcomes of robotic endoscopic cardiac surgery
in patients with previous cardiac operations over a decade of
institutional data.
METHODS
Study Design and Patient Population
This retrospective, single-center study was conducted at University of
Chicago and included all patients undergoing robotic endoscopic cardiac
surgery between July 2013 and April 2024. Institutional review board
approval was obtained for this study (institutional review board #180742; approval date April 28, 2020). Given the retrospective nature of
the study, the need for individual informed consent was waived. A total

AlJamal, Nisivaco, Balkhy

of 1834 patients underwent robotic cardiac procedures during the study
period, of whom 105 patients (6%) had a history of previous cardiac sur­
gery and constitute the focus of this review. Data collection included demo­
graphics, comorbidities, surgical details, and outcomes, with follow-up
extending up to 10 years. Redo robotic cardiac cases were initiated at the
University of Chicago after early institutional success with primary robotic
procedures. Although the program formally began in 2013, the primary sur­
geon (H.H.B.) had previous extensive experience in robotic cardiac surgery
dating back to 2006, facilitating early integration of complex reoperative
cases into the program.
Inclusion criteria included all adult patients (age >18 years) with a his­
tory of previous cardiac surgery who underwent robotic endoscopic cardiac
procedures between 2013 and 2024. Patients undergoing primary opera­
tions, nonendoscopic, or hybrid procedures were excluded. The decision
to pursue a robotic approach was determined by patient anatomy, previous
surgical history, and team experience, which introduces a degree of selec­
tion bias inherent to this single-center retrospective study.

Patient Preparation and Operative Setup
Patients were positioned supine with appropriate lateral chest elevation
depending on the planned surgical access (right for intracardiac or left for
epicardial procedures). A single-lumen tube with bronchial blocker was
used for one-lung ventilation in all cases. Defibrillator pads were placed
prophylactically. In intracardiac (on-pump) procedures, the femoral artery
and vein were cannulated under ultrasound guidance or using a small cutdown incision. Epicardial (off-pump) procedures required groin prepara­
tion for potential cannulation.

Port Placement and Adhesiolysis
Initial thoracoscopic access was established through a 5-mm port placed
away from previous scars in the second or fourth intercostal space at the
anterior axillary or midclavicular line. A blunt needle with CO2 insufflation
was used to create a controlled pneumothorax. The thoracoscope was intro­
duced to evaluate adhesions, and subsequent robotic ports (camera and ro­
botic arms) were placed under direct vision. Adhesiolysis was performed
meticulously with low-energy electrocautery to clear the surgical field
while minimizing tissue trauma. Robotic ports were strategically placed
to optimize access to the target anatomy and avoid previous surgical sites.
The surgical robot was docked from the appropriate side.

Surgical Technique
All procedures were performed by an experienced robotic surgical team
using the da Vinci Si or Xi surgical system (Intuitive Surgical) (Video 1).
The approach and conduct of each procedure were tailored to the patient’s
anatomy and surgical requirements.
• Epicardial (off-pump) procedures: These included TECAB, coronary
unroofing, pericardiectomy, and epicardial lead placement. Dissection
was performed to expose target structures while preserving phrenic
nerve integrity. Patent bypass grafts were identified and protected. Anas­
tomoses in TECAB were completed using either conventional sutures or
specialized anastomotic devices.
• Intracardiac (on-pump) procedures: Cardiopulmonary bypass was initi­
ated via femoral or axillary artery cannulation. The procedure was per­
formed either under ventricular fibrillatory arrest or aortic occlusion with
antegrade cardioplegia achieving diastolic cardiac arrest. Aortic occlu­
sion with antegrade cardioplegia was achieved using the IntraClude
balloon (Edwards Lifesciences) or a transthoracic clamp. Hypothermic
ventricular fibrillatory arrest was used in patients with intact aortic valve
and normal ventricular function in the presence of a patent internal
thoracic artery graft or when no aortic manipulation was desired. Our
hypothermia ventricular fibrillatory arrest approach was discussed in
a previous publication.18 Procedures included mitral valve repair/

JTCVS Structural and Endovascular c December 2025

AlJamal, Nisivaco, Balkhy

Original Manuscript

RESULTS
Surgical Procedure Distribution
A total of 105 patients underwent robotic redo cardiac
procedures, with 45 patients (42.8%) in the epicardial
group and 60 patients (57.2%) in the intracardiac group.
The distribution of procedures performed in each group is
summarized in Table 1.

VIDEO 1. Robotic endoscopic cardiac surgery in the reoperative patient.
Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.org/article/S2950-6050(25)00038-5/
fulltext.

replacement, aortic valve replacement, atrial septal defect closure, and
cryomaze ablation. Cardiac structures were accessed with minimal
dissection and after establishing CPB to reduce injury.
The pericardium was routinely closed loosely with running sutures to
prevent adhesion formation. When the right internal thoracic artery
(RITA) was used for redo TECAB, it was routed beneath the innominate
vein and covered with the anterior mediastinal fat pad to protect against
future re-entry injuries. Lung surfaces dissected during adhesiolysis were
treated with Progel (NeoMend) to reduce air leaks. Patients were extubated
as early as possible to expedite recovery.

Outcome Measures
The primary outcome was 30-day mortality, defined as death occurring
within 30 days of the index operation, regardless of discharge status. In addi­
tion to 30-day mortality, midterm mortality outcomes were analyzed,
including survival up to 10 years. Cardiac-related mortality was defined
as death resulting from heart failure, myocardial infarction, fatal
arrhythmia, or cardiac surgical complications. Cause of death was deter­
mined through electronic medical record review and/or direct communica­
tion with the patient’s family. When the cause of death was unknown it was
considered a cardiac mortality. The observed to expected ratio for 30-day
mortality was calculated using only patients who underwent coronary artery
bypass or intracardiac valve procedures. Patients undergoing left ventricular
lead placement or pericardiectomy were excluded from this calculation.
Secondary outcomes included intensive care unit (ICU) and hospital
length of stay, postoperative complications such as reoperation for bleeding,
atrial fibrillation, pneumonia, myocardial infarction, stroke, acute kidney
injury, and prolonged ventilation (defined as >24 hours). Pump and cross­
clamp were not used in all cases because a significant number were
completed off pump; therefore, operative time was used as a consistent sur­
rogate for intraoperative complexity. All patients were scheduled for struc­
tured follow-up within 30 days of discharge, conducted either in person or
via telemedicine for patients residing out of town. Midterm outcomes were
obtained through a combination of electronic medical record review and
direct telephone contact with patients or their families. Using this method­
ology, follow-up completeness exceeded 95% at the time of analysis.

Statistical Analysis
Continuous variables were presented as mean ± standard deviation or
median (interquartile range) and analyzed using the Student t test or
Mann-Whitney U test, as appropriate. Categorical variables were expressed
as percentages and analyzed using the χ2 test or Fisher exact test. Statistical
analyses were performed using SPSS, version 24 (IBM Corp).

Patient Demographics and Preoperative
Characteristics
The mean age was 64.7 years in the epicardial group and
64.2 years in the intracardiac group. There were 31 male pa­
tients (69%) in the epicardial group and 41 (68%) in the
intracardiac group. The mean BMI was 28.9 kg/m2 in the
epicardial group and 27.3 kg/m2 in the intracardiac group.
Among preoperative conditions, hypertension and dia­
betes mellitus were present in 38 (84.4%) and 34 (75.6%)
of epicardial cases and 43 (71.6%) and 32 (53.3%) of intra­
cardiac cases. Atrial dysrhythmia was reported in 9 (20%) of
epicardial cases and 27 (45%) of intracardiac cases. Chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease was present in 6 (13.3%) of
epicardial cases and 10 (16.7%) of intracardiac cases. The
mean creatinine level was 1.64 mg/dL in the epicardial group
and 1.3 mg/dL in the intracardiac group.
The mean ejection fraction was 44.9% in the epicardial
group and 52.27% in the intracardiac group. Eighteen
(40%) of the patients in the epicardial and 5 (8.3%) of
the intracardiac group had an ejection fraction less than
40%. Eleven (24.4%) in the epicardial group and 5
(8.3%) of the patients in the intracardiac group had a previ­
ous permanent pacemaker. The mean preoperative Society
of Thoracic Surgeons score was 4.6% in the epicardial
group and 3.6% in the intracardiac group (Table 2).
Intraoperative Outcomes
The mean operating room time was 260 minutes in the
epicardial group and 237 minutes in the intracardiac group.
Conversion to sternotomy was observed in 1 (2.2%) patient
in the epicardial group and 1 (1.6%) of intracardiac group.
Two (4.4%) patients in the epicardial group,required con­
version to cardiopulmonary bypass from the intended offpump approach.
Extubation in the operating room was performed in 11
(24.4%) patients in the epicardial group and 1 (1.6%) patient
in the intracardiac group. Intraoperative blood transfusion
was required in 4 (8.9%) patients in the epicardial group
and 21 (35%) patients in the intracardiac group (Table 3).
Postoperative Outcomes
Extubation within 6 hours occurred in 18 (40%) patients in
the epicardial group and 31 (51.6%) patients in the intracar­
diac group. Prolonged extubation ≥24 hours was observed in
2 (4.4%) patients in the epicardial group and 8 (13.3%)

JTCVS Structural and Endovascular c Volume 8, Number C

Original Manuscript

AlJamal, Nisivaco, Balkhy

TABLE 1. The distribution of procedures performed in the
intracardiac and epicardial groups
Procedure

n

Intracardiac group
Mitral valve surgery
Aortic valve surgery
Tricuspid valve surgery
Atrial septal defect closure
Cardiac mass excision
Epicardial lead placement
Total

Epicardial group
TECAB
Pericardiectomy
LV epicardial lead placement/exchange
Robotic VT ablation
RV biopsy
Robotic unroofing myocardial bridge
Total

TECAB, Totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass; LV, left ventricular; VT, ventric­
ular tachycardia; RV, right ventricular.

patients in the intracardiac group. Reintubation was required
in 4 (6.7%) patients in the intracardiac group, whereas no pa­
tients required reintubation in the epicardial group.
Chest tube removal on postoperative day 1 was achieved
in 24 (53.3%) patients in the epicardial group and 31
(51.6%) patients in the intracardiac group, with an average
chest tube duration of 2.2 days in the epicardial group and
2.3 days in the intracardiac group.

Postoperative blood transfusion was necessary in 2
(4.4%) patients in the epicardial group and 20 (33.3%) pa­
tients in the intracardiac group. New-onset atrial fibrillation
occurred in 5 (11.1%) patients in the epicardial group and 6
(10%) patients in the intracardiac group. Postoperative
pneumonia was reported in 1 (2.2%) patient in the epicar­
dial group and 2 (3.3%) patients in the intracardiac cases.
The mean ICU length of stay was 1.23 days in the epicar­
dial group and 1.76 days in the intracardiac group. The
mean hospital stay was 2.75 days in the epicardial group
and 3.75 days in the intracardiac group.
There was no take-back for bleeding in the epicardial
group, whereas 3 (5%) patients in the intracardiac group
required reoperation for bleeding—all managed robotically
without conversion to sternotomy. Thirty-day mortality was
2% (1/45) in the epicardial group and 1.6% (1/60) in the
intracardiac group. Readmission within 30 days occurred
in 4 (8.8%) of epicardial cases and 4 (6.6%) of intracardiac
cases (Table 4).
Midterm Follow-up
At a mean follow-up of 32.4 months in the epicardial
group and 36.2 months in the intracardiac group, all-cause
mortality was 9 (20%) in the epicardial group and 7
(11.6%) in the intracardiac group. Cardiac-related mortal­
ity was 3 (6.7%) in the epicardial group and 4 (6.6%) in
the intracardiac group. No patients were lost to early
follow-up, and midterm data were available for more than
95% of patients (Table 5, Figure 1).

TABLE 2. Patient demographics and preoperative characteristics
Variables
Mean age, y, mean ± SD

Epicardial group (n = 45)

Intracardiac group (n = 60)

64.7 ± 12.2

64.2 ± 12.4
41 (68%)

Male, n (%)

31 (69%)

Mean BMI, kg/m2, mean ± SD

28.9 ± 5.64

27.3 ± 5

Hypertension, n (%)

38 (84.4%)

43 (71.6%)

Diabetes mellitus, n (%)

34 (75.6%)

32 (53.3%)

Atrial dysrhythmia, n (%)

9 (20%)

27 (45%)

Previous CVA, n (%)

4 (8.9%)

13 (21.6%)

Previous MI, n (%)

17 (37.8%)

1 (1.7%)

History of smoking, n (%)

27 (60%)

N/A

COPD, n (%)

6 (13.3%)

10 (16.7%)

Heart disease, n (%)

4 (8.9%)

5 (8.3%)

Creatinine level, mg/dL, mean ± SD

1.64 ± 1.93

1.3 ± 1.6

Ejection fraction, %mean ± SD

44.9 ± 13.2

52.27 ± 2.7

Ejection fraction <40, n (%)

18 (40%)

5 (8.3%)

PPM, n (%)

11 (24.4%)

5 (8.3%)

Mean preoperative STS score, %, mean ± SD

4.6% ± 5.6

3.60% ± 3.7

SD, Standard deviation; BMI, body mass index; CVA, cerebral vascular accident; MI, myocardial infarction; N/A, not applicable; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;
PPM, permanent pacemaker; STS, Society of Thoracic Surgeons.

JTCVS Structural and Endovascular c December 2025

AlJamal, Nisivaco, Balkhy

Original Manuscript

TABLE 3. Intraoperative outcomes
Variables

Epicardial group (n = 45)

Intracardiac group (n = 60)

Mean OR time, min, mean ± SD

260 ± 101

237 ± 68

Conversion to bypass, n (%)

2 (4%)

N/A

Conversion to sternotomy, n (%)

1 (2%)

1 (1.6%)

Extubation in the OR, n (%)

11 (24.4%)

1 (1.6%)

OR, Operating room; SD, standard deviation; N/A, not applicable.

DISCUSSION
This study demonstrates that robotic endoscopic cardiac
surgery is feasible, safe, and effective in patients with pre­
vious cardiac surgery. All TECAB procedures included suc­
cessful graft completion using intraoperative flow
measurement tools. Similarly, mitral and valve procedures
were confirmed intraoperatively and on follow-up as clini­
cally successful.
Among 105 patients, low 30-day mortality (1.9%) and
minimal conversion rates (1.9%) highlight the technical
feasibility of the robotic approach, even in the complex re­
operative setting. Patients undergoing epicardial procedures
(TECAB, pericardiectomy, and left ventricular lead place­
ment) had short ICU stays (1.23 days) and hospital stays
(2.75 days), whereas patients undergoing intracardiac pro­
cedures (mitral, aortic, and tricuspid valve surgery) had
similar favorable outcomes. The midterm follow-up
(mean 36.2 months) revealed a cardiac-related mortality
of 6%, with freedom from major adverse cardiac and

cerebrovascular events of 93% (epicardial) and 73%
(intracardiac).
These results suggest that cardiac reoperations can be
performed using a robotic endoscopic approach with peri­
operative outcomes comparable with or better than tradi­
tional sternotomy-based reoperations, particularly in
patients in whom avoiding sternal re-entry is highly
beneficial.
One of the most critical advantages of robotic surgery in
the reoperative setting is the potential to reduce the need for
sternotomy in selected patients. The precision of roboticassisted dissection allows for careful adhesiolysis and tar­
geted exposure while reducing the risk of graft or cardiac
injury. Previous studies, including those from our group,17
have emphasized the benefits of robotic-assisted adhesiolysis
in preventing inadvertent damage to patent grafts and medias­
tinal structures. The historical risk of mortality for redo car­
diac surgery via sternotomy is 4% to 7%, with increased
morbidity from adhesiolysis and graft injury.1-3,5-7 Our

TABLE 4. Postoperative outcomes
Epicardial group (n = 45)

Intracardiac group (n = 60)

Extubation within 6 h, n (%)

Variables

18 (40%)

31 (51.6%)

Extubation >24 h, n (%)

2 (4.4%)

8 (13.3%)

0%

4 (6.7%)

CT removed on POD 1, n (%)

24 (53.3%)

31 (51.6%)

CT removal, d, mean ± SD

2.2 ± 2.5

2.3 ± 2.4

Postoperative blood transfusion, n (%)

2 (4.4%)

8 (13.3%)

New-onset atrial fibrillation, n (%)

5 (11.1%)

6 (10%)

Reintubation, n (%)

Wound infection, n (%)

0%

0%

Pneumonia, n (%)

1 (2.2%)

2 (3.3%)

Postoperative ECMO, n (%)

1 (2.2%)

3 (5%)

Acute kidney injury, n (%)

1 (2.2%)

3 (5%)

ICU length of stay, d, mean ± SD

1.23 ± 0.64

1.76 ± 1.9

Hospital length of stay, d, mean ± SD

2.75 ± 2

3.75 ± 4

0%

3 (5%)

30-d mortality, n (%)

1 (2%)

1 (1.6%)

Readmission within 30 d, n (%)

4 (8.8%)

4 (6.6%)

Take-back for bleeding, n (%)

CT, Chest tube; POD, postoperative day; SD, standard deviation; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; ICU, intensive care unit.

JTCVS Structural and Endovascular c Volume 8, Number C

Original Manuscript

AlJamal, Nisivaco, Balkhy

TABLE 5. Midterm follow-up outcomes
Variables

Epicardial group (n = 45)

Intracardiac group (n = 60)

Follow-up, mo, mean ± SD

32.4 ± 28

36.2 ± 33.5

All-cause mortality, n (%)

9 (20%)

7 (11.6%)

Cardiac-related mortality, n (%)

3 (6.7%)

4 (6.6%)

Freedom from MACCE, n (%)

42 (93.3%)

44 (73.3%)

SD, Standard deviation; MACCE, major adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular events.

findings of 1.9% early mortality and 1.9% sternotomy
conversion rates reinforce previous reports suggesting that
robotic surgery minimizes reentry complications and
enhances surgical precision.
The ability to avoid a repeat sternotomy is particularly
significant in patients with previous coronary artery bypass
grafting, in whom injury to patent grafts poses a major
risk.2,19 The ability to access the heart through a thoraco­
scopic approach minimizes manipulation of previous
bypass grafts, preserving their function while reducing peri­
operative morbidity. Furthermore, previous studies have
shown that redo sternotomy is associated with prolonged
operative times because of the need for extensive dissection,
whereas robotic surgery enables a more targeted approach
with efficient adhesiolysis, reducing operative and bypass
times in selected cases.
For redo coronary revascularization, techniques such as
subxiphoid right gastroepiploic artery bypass have been
used to avoid sternotomy.14-16 However, these approaches
are often limited by anatomical constraints. Our results
support previous findings that robotic TECAB enables
safe and effective redo coronary surgery, aligning with
studies showing excellent midterm survival and graft
patency with robotic redo-TECAB.10,13,17,20
In addition to avoiding sternotomy, the ability to perform
totally endoscopic TECAB in a redo setting maintains graft
patency while minimizing morbidity. Previous studies have
demonstrated that robotic-assisted revascularization pro­
vides comparable long-term graft patency with conven­
tional approaches while reducing the need for prolonged
mechanical ventilation and ICU stays. Given that many pa­
tients who undergo redo coronary artery bypass grafting
have compromised sternal integrity from previous proced­
ures, the ability to revascularize using a robotic approach
is a significant advantage that can potentially enhance
long-term outcomes by minimizing sternal complications.
This approach can also allow the routine harvesting of an
often previously unused RITA conduit. In this series of 31
redo TECAB procedures, 20 patients (65%) had a new
RITA graft placed. Moreover, robotic TECAB enables mul­
tivessel bypass in selected cases, expanding the utility of ro­
botic coronary surgery beyond single-vessel interventions.
For valve reoperations, minimally invasive techniques
(eg, right thoracotomy) have been preferred over redo

sternotomy.9,21 Our findings mirror those of large robotic
mitral surgery series, where robotic reoperations demon­
strated low mortality (0.6% to 2%) and reduced hospital
stays. Our mean hospital stay (3.75 days for intracardiac
procedures) is significantly lower than traditional redo valve
surgery (∼7 days), reinforcing the benefits of the robotic
endoscopic techniques.2,19
The success of reoperative robotic mitral and aortic valve
procedures in this study further highlights the ability of the
robotic platform to offer high-quality, durable repairs and
replacements in a true minimally invasive fashion. In our
experience, we believe that an endoscopic robotic approach
using a very small working port (8 mm) can still be main­
tained in the reoperative setting as long as enough care
and consideration are given to avoiding lung injury and
meticulous adhesiolysis. Furthermore, the lateral approach
to the mitral valve allows for much better visualization in
the presence of intrapericardial adhesions or even a previ­
ous aortic valve prosthesis as we have previously re­
ported.22 A special mention should be made about the
importance of being versatile in the technique of cardiac ar­
rest in the reoperative setting. For example, we have found
hypothermic fibrillatory arrest to be a valuable option in
selected patients with a patent internal thoracic artery graft
undergoing reoperative robotic valve surgery. The ability to
perform valve reoperations through a robotic endoscopic
approach enables excellent visualization of the mitral and
aortic valve apparatus while reducing the trauma associated
with redo sternotomy. Our findings suggest that robotic
valve reoperations can be performed by an experienced
team with reproducible results and a favorable safety pro­
file, supporting their increasing adoption in select highrisk redo patients.
Clinical Implications
This study highlights the potential of robotic surgery in
patients undergoing reoperative cardiac procedures. One
of the major advantages of robotic TECAB is that it elimi­
nates the need for sternotomy, reducing the risks associated
with re-entry while preserving graft patency. Similarly, ro­
botic mitral and aortic valve reoperations offer important
benefits, including shorter hospital stays, less bleeding,
and quicker recovery compared with traditional open ap­
proaches. The ability to perform precise adhesiolysis with

JTCVS Structural and Endovascular c December 2025

AlJamal, Nisivaco, Balkhy

Original Manuscript

Kaplan-Meier - Freedom from Cardiac Death (Intracardiac)

Survival Probability (%)

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
Years since Surgery
Intracardiac: Freedom from Cardiac Death
At risk 45
Censored 0
Events 0
A
Intracardiac: Freedom from Cardiac Death

Kaplan-Meier - Freedom from Cardiac Death (Epicardial)

Survival Probability (%)

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

Years since Surgery

Epicardial: Freedom from Cardiac Death
At risk 45
Censored 0
Events 0
B
Epicardial: Freedom from Cardiac Death

FIGURE 1. Kaplan-Meier survival curves for freedom from cardiac mortality in the (A) intracardiac and (B) epicardial groups. The x-axis represents years
since surgery, and shaded bands represent 95% confidence intervals. The tables below each curve show the number of patients at risk at yearly intervals from
0 to 5 years.

robotic assistance allows for safer re-entry in patients with
previous cardiac surgery, minimizing the risk of injuring
critical structures. As cardiac surgeons become more and

more comfortable with the robotic approach through dedi­
cated training programs and wider adoption, they will join
the ranks of other surgical subspecialists in leveraging this

JTCVS Structural and Endovascular c Volume 8, Number C

Original Manuscript

important technology with its superior visualization in
avoiding some of the well-known drawbacks of traditional
redo open surgery.23,24
In addition, beyond its benefits in the reoperative setting,
robotic cardiac surgery has the potential to redefine the stan­
dard of care for selected high-risk patients. As more institu­
tions develop dedicated robotic cardiac surgery programs,
the experience gained in complex redo cases will continue
to improve, ultimately leading to further reductions in
morbidity and mortality. In addition, the ability to perform
multiprocedure robotic interventions, such as combining
mitral valve surgery with TECAB, represents an exciting
frontier in minimally invasive cardiac surgery.
Limitations
This study has several limitations that should be consid­
ered. It is a single-center retrospective study, meaning the
results reflect the experience of one institution with a highly
experienced robotic cardiac team and may not be applicable
to all centers. Another limitation is the relatively small sam­
ple size of 105 patients, which, although one of the largest
reported series on robotic reoperative cardiac surgery, still
limits the generalizability of the findings. In addition, pa­
tient selection bias is a factor, because patients referred
for robotic reoperations were likely carefully selected and
treated by a highly experienced surgical team. Although
the midterm outcomes are promising, long-term data
beyond 5 years remain limited, and further studies are
needed to assess durability and graft patency over time.
Moving forward, randomized trials comparing robotic reop­
erations with conventional sternotomy-based approaches
will be necessary to fully understand the long-term benefits
and ideal patient selection for robotic redo cardiac surgery.
Another limitation of this study is the lack of direct com­
parison with alternative minimally invasive techniques,
such as right thoracotomy approaches. Although our results
demonstrate favorable outcomes with robotic reoperations,
a head-to-head comparison with other minimally invasive
options would provide a clearer perspective on the advan­
tages and disadvantages of each approach.
CONCLUSIONS
This study confirms that robotic endoscopic cardiac sur­
gery in reoperative patients is feasible, safe, and effective
when performed by an experienced team. By avoiding ster­
notomy, reducing perioperative morbidity, and achieving
midterm survival rates comparable with or better than tradi­
tional approaches, robotic surgery represents a viable op­
tion for carefully selected redo patients.
The low mortality and excellent 30-day and midterm
outcomes suggest that robotic approaches can provide
durable outcomes in the reoperative setting. Roboticassisted cardiac surgery offers a minimally invasive
approach that preserves previous surgical grafts, reduces

AlJamal, Nisivaco, Balkhy

complications, and enhances recovery for patients requiring
redo operations.
These favorable results compare very well with those re­
ported in large multicenter series of reoperative cardiac sur­
gery. In a recent propensity-matched analysis by Bianco and
colleagues25 of more than 3000 patients, 30-day and 1-year
mortality rates for reoperative cardiac surgery were re­
ported as 8.1% and 16.4%, respectively, with a 14.1% re­
operation rate and an average ICU stay exceeding 98 hours.
By contrast, our series—which is among the largest to date
using a totally robotic endoscopic approach—demonstrates
markedly lower 30-day mortality (1.9%), reoperation for
bleeding (2.9%), and ICU stay (1.6 days), underscoring
the potential benefits of a minimally invasive approach in
the reoperative setting. Moving forward, future studies
should focus on long-term outcomes, patient selection opti­
mization, and advancements in robotic technology to
further improve the safety and efficacy of robotic cardiac
reoperations.
Webcast
You can watch a Webcast of this AATS meeting presenta­
tion by going to: https://www.aats.org/resources/roboticendoscopic-cardiac-sur-9906.

Audio
Audio Recording: You can listen to the audio recording
of the presentation and discussion associated with this
paper: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xjse.2025.100079.
H.B. is a proctor for Intuitive. All other authors reported
no conflicts of interest.
The Journal policy requires editors and reviewers to
disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling or re­
viewing manuscripts for which they may have a conflict
of interest. The editors and reviewers of this article have
no conflicts of interest.
