ADULT: CORONARY: CASE REPORT

Combined robotic totally endoscopic multivessel
coronary artery bypass and mitral valve repair
Akihito Arai, MD, Hiroto Kitahara, MD, and Husam H. Balkhy, MD, Chicago, Ill
From the Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill.
Read at the 105th Annual Meeting of the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Seattle, Washington,
May 2-5, 2025.
IRB/Consent: This single-patient case report does not constitute research; thus, Institutional Review Board
approval was not required. Written informed consent for publication of clinical details and images was obtained
from the patient.
Received for publication Aug 24, 2025; revisions received Nov 18, 2025; accepted for publication Nov 24, 2025;
available ahead of print Dec 1, 2025.
Address for reprints: Husam H. Balkhy, MD, Department Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Chicago, 5841 S
Maryland Ave, E-500, Chicago, IL 60637 (E-mail: hbalkhy@bsd.uchicago.edu).
JTCVS Techniques 2026;35:102169
2666-2507
Surgery. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

Video clip is available online.

Robotic totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass (TECAB)
or mitral valve repair (MVR) are established,1 but combined
surgery remains technically challenging. We report an
80-year-old man undergoing combined robotic TECAB and
MVR, detailing steps and early outcomes.
CASE PRESENTATION
An 80-year-old man with severe mitral regurgitation
presented. Transesophageal echocardiography showed left
ventricular ejection fraction 57% and moderate-to-severe
A2–P2/A3-P3 regurgitation. Coronary angiography revealed
90% proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) and
70% mid-first diagonal branch stenoses. Computed tomography demonstrated diffuse aortic calcifications and scattered
atheromatous plaques (Video 1). After informed discussion
and at the patient’s request, combined robotic TECAB and
MVR were planned.
This single-patient case report does not constitute
research; thus, institutional review board approval was not
required. Written informed consent for publication of clinical details and images was obtained from the patient.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
TECAB
The patient was positioned supine with bilateral chest
compression bags for flexible adjustment. Chest, abdomen,

Da Vinci Si left for TECAB; da Vinci Xi right for
mitral valve repair.

CENTRAL MESSAGE

Combined robotic totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass
and mitral valve repair is a safe
and practical minimally invasive
strategy for carefully selected
patients.

and groins were prepped. General anesthesia used a singlelumen endotracheal tube and left bronchial blocker.
Carbon dioxide insufflated into the left pleural via a
Veress needle. Ports: 12-mm camera (fourth intercostal
space [ICS]) and 8-mm arms (second and sixth ICS)
(Figure 1). The da Vinci Si robot (Intuitive Surgical) was
docked to the left chest for the off-pump TECAB. Anterior
pericardiotomy exposed the target arteries. Mediastinal fat
was dissected and the right pleural space opened for future
clamping of the left internal thoracic artery (LITA) from the
right chest. The LITA was skeletonized.

VIDEO 1. Case video. Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.org/article/
S2666-2507(25)00550-4/fulltext.

JTCVS Techniques c Volume 35, Number C

Adult: Coronary: Case Report

FIGURE 1. Port placement for totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass. ICS, Intercostal space.

A 12-mm stabilizer port was placed lateral to the xiphoid.
After heparinization (ACT 300s), papaverine was infused
into the LITA using a 20-G epidural catheter. LAD arteriotomy and 1.5-mm shunt (Chase Medical) insertion were
performed. The LITA anastomosed end-to-side to the
LAD with a running double-armed 7-0 Pronova suture
(Ethicon). Transit-time flowmetry (Medistim) confirmed
graft flow (85 mL/minute; pulsatility index, 1.3). After
exposing the first diagonal branch, arteriotomy and
1.75-mm shunt insertion were performed. A sequential
side-to-side anastomosis was completed using a similar
sutured technique (50 mL/min; pulsatility index, 1.7).
Heparin was fully reversed with protamine. A 24Fr pleural
drain was placed via the left arm port. The pericardium was
partially closed, left lung reinflated, and robot undocked.
MVR
With lungs deflated, an 8-mm camera port was placed in
the right fourth ICS. Under thoracoscopy with carbon dioxide insufflation, a fifth ICS atrial retractor port was added
and the camera repositioned there. Arm ports were placed
in the second and sixth ICSs. The initial camera port was

JTCVS Techniques c February 2026

replaced with an Alexis XXS wound protector (Applied
Medical) as an 8-mm working port, and a new 8-mm robotic
camera port was inserted medially in the same interspace
(Figure 2). The da Vinci Xi robot (Intuitive Surgical) was
docked to the right chest. Cardiopulmonary bypass was
initiated through the right femoral artery and vein cutdown
and cooled to 30◦ .
Under carbon dioxide insufflation, a diaphragmatic
retraction suture was placed on the central tendon. A longitudinal pericardiotomy was made anterior to the phrenic
nerve, with 2 traction stay sutures. An epicardial temporary
bipolar pacing wire placed on the right ventricle. Rapid pacing at 800 beats/minute induced fibrillatory arrest. The
mitral valve was approached via Sondergaard’s groove
and exposed using a dynamic atrial retractor. Percutaneous
drains were placed into the left ventricle and left pulmonary
veins to exposure.
The valve showed P1 and P2 prolapse with annular dilatation. CV-4 Gore-Tex neochordae (Gore Medical) were
placed from the posterior papillary muscle to P1 and P2
in figure-of-8 fashion. A 34-mm semirigid partial annuloplasty ring (Simulus; Medtronic) was introduced via the

Adult: Coronary: Case Report

FIGURE 2. Port placement for mitral valve repair. ICS, Intercostal space.

working port and implanted from trigone to trigone using a
continuous 3-0 Prolene (Ethicon) mattress suture. Saline
test revealed localized P1-P2 regurgitation, closed with
4-0 Prolene. A 24Fr Blake drain was placed into the pericardium traversing the right pleural space. Weaned from
bypass without inotropes, echocardiography showed no
significant regurgitation and 2 mm Hg gradient.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient
was discharged on postoperative day 3. At 4-week followup, he had returned to full activity. Chest radiograph was
normal and transthoracic echocardiography showed trace
residual mitral regurgitation and normal ventricular
function.
DISCUSSION
Although combined TECAB and MVR was reported by
our team via a right thoracic approach,2 we have recently

adopted a bilateral approach, allowing initial off-pump
TECAB and reducing cardiopulmonary bypass time.
Notably, the left thoracic access facilitates target artery
exposure and multivessel TECAB, which we routinely
perform. We have reserved this approach for patients
requiring LAD or LAD + diagonal branch grafting with 1
ITA graft. For right coronary artery grafting, we perform
the procedure entirely from the right side using the right
ITA.
In 8 patients, the bilateral approach yielded no mortality
and a median stay of 2.8 days (Table 1). Ventricular fibrillatory arrest was used in three cases, avoiding aortic and ITA
clamping, simplifying the procedure and minimizing neurologic complications. We favor a ventricular fibrillatory
approach for patients with small, diseased, or tortuous iliofemoral vessels unsuitable for the endoballoon, provided
there is no aortic regurgitation and left ventricle function

JTCVS Techniques c Volume 35, Number C

Adult: Coronary: Case Report

TABLE 1. Preoperative characteristics, intraoperative details, and
postoperative outcomes (N = 8)
Variable
Preoperative data
Age (y)
Male
STS score
Degenerative mitral valve
Multivessel CAD
Intraoperative data
Cardiopulmonary bypass time, min
Crossclamp time, min
Arrest method
Endoballoon
Fibrillating
Crossclamp
LITA-LAD grafting
Multivessel grafting
BITA use
Leaflet repair
Resection
Neochordae
Median annuloplasty ring size (mm)
Conversion to sternotomy
Postoperative outcome
30-d mortality
Stroke
Reoperation
Renal failure
Acute kidney injury
Postoperative atrial fibrillation
Early extubation (<6 h)
ICU stay (d)
Hospital stay (d)

Result
68 ± 5.7
4.0 ± 2.2
218 ± 108
115 ± 33
37.5
37.5
12.5
12.5
87.5
12.5
12.5
87.5
1.6 ± 0.5
2.8 ± 0.7

Values are presented as mean ± SD or %, unless otherwise noted. STS, Society of
Thoracic Surgeons; CAD, coronary artery disease; LITA, left internal thoracic artery;
LAD, left anterior descending artery; BITA, bilateral internal thoracic artery; ICU,
intensive care unit.

JTCVS Techniques c February 2026

is normal. We previously reported our ventricular fibrillatory arrest technique, indications, and outcomes.3
Combined robotic TECAB and MVR appears to be a safe
and feasible option for selected patients.
Dr Balkhy is a proctor for Intuitive Surgical, maker of the
Da Vinci robot. All other authors reported no conflicts of
interest.
The Journal policy requires editors and reviewers to
disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling or reviewing manuscripts for which they may have a conflict
of interest. The editors and reviewers of this article have
no conflicts of interest.
