Masters of Cardiothoracic Surgery

How to perform distal anastomosis using a robotic platform:
totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass
Johannes Bonatti1,2, Syed Faaz Ashraf1,2, Martin Winter1,2, Thomas E. Rubino1,2, Catalin Toma1,2,
Ibrahim Sultan1,2

Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 2UPMC Heart and Vascular Institute,

Pittsburgh, PA, USA
School of Medicine, 200 Lothrop Street, Suite C-700, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; UPMC Heart and Vascular Institute, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Clinical vignette

Exposition

A 79-year-old male patient with a past medical history
significant for non-ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction (NSTEMI) experienced worsening dyspnea
on exertion and chest pain. A stress nuclear test showed
ischemia in the apical area with coronary angiogram
revealing an occlusion of the left anterior descending artery
(LAD). He was referred for minimally invasive placement
of a left internal mammary artery (LIMA) bypass to the
LAD. Preoperative workup for robotic totally endoscopic
coronary artery bypass (TECAB) grafting revealed a forced
vital capacity (FVC) of 82% of the predicted value and a
forced expiratory volume of 92% of the predicted value. A
computed tomography (CT) angiogram of chest, abdomen
and pelvis demonstrated only mild atherosclerotic plaques
on the aorto-iliac level and the ascending aortic diameter
was less than 35 mm. He was therefore regarded as a good
candidate for TECAB using peripheral heart lung machine
cannulation and use of endoaortic balloon occlusion for
cardioplegia.

The da Vinci Xi system (Intuitive, Sunnyvale, CA, USA)
was used to perform the procedure. Ports were placed in the
left third, fifth and seventh intercostal spaces and, the robot
was docked.

Surgical technique
Preparation
The patient received general anesthesia and a bronchial
blocker for left lung isolation was placed. Two radial artery
pressure lines were used to monitor the position of the
aortic endoballoon. The patient was positioned with the left
chest 30 degrees elevated.

Operation
With robotic camera view 30 degrees up, the LIMA was
harvested in skeletonized technique using a robotic cautery
level of 2. The vessel after harvesting was clipped distally
and detached from the thoracic wall.
Femoral cannulation was carried out in parallel to LIMA
harvesting. A. distal leg perfusion line was installed into the
ipsilateral superficial femoral artery. A 25-F venous cannula
was brought up into the right atrium and superior vena
cava under transesophageal echo (TEE) guidance. A 23-F
Edwards Intraclude (Edwards, Irvine, CA, USA) cannula
was inserted into the left femoral artery. The endoaortic
occlusion balloon was brought up through the cannula into
the ascending aorta. The catheter was connected to the
cardioplegia and aortic root vent lines and to balloon and
aortic root pressure measurements.
An 8 mm assistance port was brought in parasternally
and a 12 mm subcostal port was inserted and docked to the
4th arm of the da Vinci system. With a robotic camera view
30 degrees down the pericardial fat-pad was taken down and
the pericardium was opened in L-shaped fashion.
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was started. The aortic

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(4):382-384 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0211

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 4 July 2024

endoballoon was inflated, 6 mg of adenosine were injected
into the aortic root, and 1,200 mL of del Nido cardioplegia
were given.
The LAD was then exposed and incised using robotic
Pott’s scissors. The LIMA was occluded with an endobulldog, incised distally, and checked for adequate freeflow. A robotic long-tip forceps was inserted through
the subcostal port and used to optimize the exposure of
the LAD.
Robotic black diamond micro-forceps were used to
carry out the anastomosis with a 7 cm 7/0 Pronova suture
(Somerville, Ethicon, NJ, USA). The first stitch was placed
inside out on the LAD close to the anastomotic toe on
the anastomotic back wall. The needle was parked in the
apical epicardium. Using the other needle, the back wall
was sutured using all forehand stitches going inside out
on the graft and outside in on the target vessel. Care was
taken to pull frequently on the two suture ends in order to
avoid sling formation on the back wall. The suture was then
carried around the heel of the anastomosis and the needle
was parked in the cranial epicardium. The other suture
end was then used to continue the anastomosis. Stitches
were placed outside in on the graft and inside out on the
target vessel going around the toe and along the anterior
wall of the anastomosis. Care was again taken to correct
suture slings by intermittently pulling on the suture with
the needle. After inspection of the back wall and heel with
correction of lose slings, the needles were taken off and
the suture was tied of using robotic instrument ties. A preemptive repair stitch was placed on the back wall.
The endoaortic occlusion balloon was deflated and the
heart started beating in sinus rhythm. During reperfusion,
graft flow measurements were carried out which showed
a transit time flow of 25 mL/min and a pulsatility index of
2.5. The patient was weaned from CPB and decannulated.
Protamine was given and an inspection of the chest cavity
followed. The robot was undocked. A chest tube was
inserted through the camera port hole and the ports and
inguinal wound were closed in layers.
Comments
Clinical results
Concerning results, we refer readers to papers which the
first author has published (1-3).

Advantages
The main advantage of a totally endoscopic approach to
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is that the procedure
is carried out only through robotic ports. The robotic
device allows complex intrathoracic maneuvers, and all
components of bypass grafting can be performed in a closed
chest. Endoscopic suturing is ergonomically very appealing,
and the robotic camera provides insights into suturing that
are not available with standard loupe magnification in open
CABG. The cardioplegia version of TECAB also lets the
surgeon take full advantage of completely tremor free work
as the robot filters out the latter.
Caveats
TECAB with use of the endoballoon for induction of
cardioplegia requires additional training and it is highly
recommended acquire the skills for endoballoon use in
procedures other than TECAB. As the EndoWrist TM
stabilizer (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA)
for beating heart TECAB is currently unavailable, the
procedure described herein is one of the few ways to
perform robotic TECAB. Proper patient selection for
TECAB is extremely important and endoscopic suturing
needs to be practiced intensely in simulation models before
it can be carried out clinically.
Acknowledgments
Footnote
to declare.
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(4):382-384 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-0211

Bonatti et al. Robotic totally endoscopic distal anastomosis
