Safeguards and Pitfalls

Safeguards and pitfalls in minimally invasive mitral valve surgery
Markus Czesla, Julia Götte, Timo Weimar, Tamas Ruttkay, Nicolas Doll
Sana Heart Surgery Stuttgart, Herdweg 2, 70174 Stuttgart, Germany
Corresponding to: Markus Czesla. Sana Heart Surgery Stuttgart, Herdweg 2, 70174 Stuttgart, Germany. Email: Markus.Czesla@sana.de.

Minimally invasive mitral valve surgery has been established in many institutions worldwide. Appropriate
indications and patient selection for this procedure must be based on a thorough understanding of its
limitations and specific pitfalls. Particular risks can be minimized with careful attention to detail when
planning and performing the surgery. The following chapter offers a stepwise description of the procedure;
we point out particular advantages, discuss our rationale for certain steps, as well as focus on potential
dangers of minimally invasive mitral valve surgery. Several graphics have also been provided to illustrate our
approach and demonstrate important structural and anatomical concepts of the mitral valve apparatus.
Keywords: Minimally invasive mitral valve surgery
Scan to your mobile device or view this article at: http://www.annalscts.com/article/view/2904/3820

In experienced hands, minimally invasive mitral valve
surgery offers multiple advantages, including far more than
improved cosmetic results. The entire range of mitral valve
surgeries can be performed using this approach. To achieve
the desired result, various key steps throughout the case
need to be performed with close attention to detail. Keeping
the procedure simple, efficient and with perfect exposure
will allow the surgeon to focus upon the task at hand.
Preoperative echocardiography is a crucial investigative
modality used to identify the specific underlying mitral valve
pathology. Echocardiography is essential in establishing
the operative indication, determining patient selection and
allowing for pre-operative planning. Valve parameters (size
of the orifice and height of the anterior leaflet), annular
calcification, size of the left atrium, and thrombus in the left
atrial appendage should be evaluated. To prevent myocardial
injury, significant aortic valve regurgitation needs to be
excluded prior to surgery. Safe application of cardioplegia
is not possible in patients with moderate (or severe) aortic
regurgitation, and in this instance, a minimally invasive
approach should not be pursued.
A pre-operative chest X-ray should be performed to
determine the level of the diaphragm. This is important
for planning the site of the thoracic incision, with the chest
film used to determine the correct height and appropriate
intercostal space to enter the thorax.

Previous thoracic surgery or other potential causes
of significant pleural adhesions in the right hemithorax
should prompt the surgeon to reconsider a minimally
invasive approach. In this situation, the increased risks of
significant intra-operative hemorrhage (US spelling) and/
or bronchopleural fistulas may outweigh the benefits of
minimally invasive surgery, and the patient and surgical
team should discuss (and be prepared for) the possibility of
a conversion into an open sternotomy.
In our practice, we prefer commencing the surgical
procedure by placing both the venous and arterial cannulae
into the right femoral vessels using the Seldinger technique
(Figure 1). Placing cannulation lines out of the surgical field is
a major advantage. However, the surgeon must also be aware
of potential hazards when preparing the groin. Irritation of
the femoral nerve, seromas and lymphatic fistulas should
be avoided by using atraumatic techniques with diligent
ligation or clipping of sizeable vessels. The incision should
be just long enough to allow safe access to both vessels.
Prior to cannulation, isolating the femoral artery via blunt
dissection will allow safe application of clamps if required.
In some situations the artery may require repair after the
cannula is removed. The guide wire as well as the two-staged
venous cannula should be inserted with its tip in the superior
vena cava under transesophageal echo guidance to avoid
inadvertently perforating the right atrial wall. Upon placing

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2013;2(6):849-852 | https://dx.doi.org/10.3978/j.issn.2225-319X.2013.07.26

Czesla et al. Safeguards and pitfalls in mini-mitral surgery

Figure 1 Cannulation of right femoral vessels.

Figure 2 Aortic cross-clamping (Chitwood clamp) in the transverse
sinus under direct vision.

the arterial cannula, retrograde dissection can be performed.
The femoral artery needs to be inspected carefully for plaques
prior to placing the guide wire. In patients with significant
peripheral artery disease, direct cannulation of the ascending
aorta or even the axillary artery should be considered.
Positioning the patient with the right chest wall slightly
elevated off the operating table allows for convenient
placement of the thoracotomy incision. The thoracotomy
incision (approximately 5 cm long) is made straight laterally
from a point 1-2 cm inferior and lateral to the nipple in men,
and in the sub-mammary crease in women. Identifying the
most appropriate intercostal space (usually 4th) depends
on the height of the diaphragm, as determined on the
preoperative chest X-ray. A more superior and lateral
incision allows for a straight on view of the mitral valve. Prior
to entering the pleural space, the lungs are taken off the
ventilator. Intercostal muscle and vascular hemorrhage can be
avoided by staying along the superior surface of the rib. A soft
tissue retractor is used to prevent the incidence of fat emboli
(when the left atrium is later accessed). The retractor should
be opened gradually to avoid rib fractures and the potential
for postoperative chest wall hemorrhage or hemothorax.
Fat pads covering the pericardium should be removed
sparingly and well cauterized. To avoid damage to the
phrenic nerve, the pericardium should be entered 3 cm
anteriorly, allowing enough space for placing stay sutures at
the posterior edge for lateral traction.
Preparations prior to clamping the aorta include blunt
dissection of the oblique sinus (Figure 2) and dissection of
the fat in the interatrial groove. When placing the aortic

cross-clamp using the Chitwood clamp (1), there is a chance
of injury to the pulmonary artery or left atrial appendage,
which would force the surgeon to convert to a full
sternotomy. Cardioplegia can be utilized using either a rigid
large bore cannula or a y-catheter. This allows for repeat
cardioplegia doses and standard de-airing maneuvers later
on. Other surgical groups have reported using endoaortic
balloons for aortic occlusion and cardioplegia application
instead of external clamping (2). In our experience, after two
previous incidents of aortic dissection caused by endoaortic
balloons, we have chosen to abandon this technique. Upon
completion of cardioplegia application, while decompressing
the left heart through a stab incision in the left atrium, the
left atriotomy is extended, with careful attention to avoid
injury of the coronary sinus and perforation of the interatrial
septum or pulmonary veins. While positioning the retractor
to elevate the left atrial roof, there is a risk that the venous
cannula may be dislodged out of the SVC, which would
compromise the upper body venous drainage. Hence, correct
cannula placement and normal central venous pressure need
to be confirmed prior to proceeding further.
In re-do scenarios, cross-clamping of the aorta might
not be possible due to adhesions at the ascending aorta.
Minimally invasive mitral valve surgery using fibrillatory
arrest can still be performed in these cases, but only in the
absence of concomitant aortic regurgitation (3).
During annuloplasty ring or valve implantation,
placement of the sutures should be performed in
consideration of the anatomical proximity of the aortic
valve and the circumflex artery. Deep stitches in the region

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2013;2(6):849-852 | https://dx.doi.org/10.3978/j.issn.2225-319X.2013.07.26

Annals of cardiothoracic surgery, Vol 2, No 6 November 2013

Figure 3 Distance of mitral annulus and coronary system: three dimensional CT-reconstruction provided by 3 mensio Structural Heart 6.0.
Yellow, coronary sinus; Green, LAD; Violet, circumflex artery.

Figure 4 Anatomical study indicating correlation between circumflex
artery and mitral annulus. 1, left auricle; 2, circumflex branch of
the left coronary artery; 3, posterior mitral leaflet; 4, anterolateral
commissure; 5, anterior mitral leaflet; 6, anterior papillary muscle.

of the anterolateral commissure and the A1 segment should
be avoided. The distance of the circumflex artery from
the mitral annulus is variable, depending on left or right
dominance of the coronary system (Figures 3,4).
After completion of the mitral valve procedure, the
left atrium should be closed in two layers and usual deairing maneuvers are performed prior to removing the
aortic cross-clamp. The potential sites of peri-operative
hemorrhage include the trocar site, the anterior chest
wall stab incision for the atrial roof retractor close to the
mammary vessels, and the soft tissues at the thoracotomy
site. These areas should be thoroughly inspected prior to
closing the chest to minimize postoperative hemorrhage
and take backs. Deflating the lung while inspecting these
chest wall sites can be very helpful; hence, our team prefers
de-cannulating afterwards. Some groups advocate using
double lumen tube intubations routinely with the advantage
of de-cannulation and protamine application prior to final
bleeding control under isolated left lung ventilation.
Postoperative ECG changes, wall motion abnormalities
on echocardiography and impaired hemodynamics may
suggest air embolism or compromised circumflex artery
perfusion (4). Pre- and perioperative transesophageal

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2013;2(6):849-852 | https://dx.doi.org/10.3978/j.issn.2225-319X.2013.07.26

Czesla et al. Safeguards and pitfalls in mini-mitral surgery

echocardiography has proven to be useful in identifying the
course and flow of the circumflex artery. If there is suspicion
of new onset coronary malperfusion, caused by extrinsic
compression of the implanted prosthesis, immediate
transfer to the catheterization lab is of utmost importance
in initiating the appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic
measures promptly. If interventional treatment fails, surgical
bypass grafting of the circumflex artery is required as soon
as possible to minimize further myocardial damage.
Meticulous attention to detail is required in minimally
invasive mitral valve surgery, allowing the surgeon to
move through the case with efficiency and optimal results.
Particularly devastating complications associated with
minimally invasive mitral valve cases include (5): phrenic
nerve injury, vascular complications of the femoral artery,
aortic dissections, and perioperative strokes. These
complications should be minimized at all costs.
Acknowledgements
