ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Lessons Learned From Robotic-Assisted Coronary
Artery Bypass Surgery
Risk Factors For Conversion to Median Sternotomy
William T. Daniel, BS, John D. Puskas, MD, Kim T. Baio, MSN, Henry A. Liberman, MD,
Chandan Devireddy, MD, Aloke Finn, MD, and Michael E. Halkos, MD

Objective: Robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass is a minimally
invasive alternative to traditional coronary artery bypass surgery via
median sternotomy with an associated learning curve. The purpose of
this study was to investigate the reasons for conversion to sternotomy.
Methods: From October 2009 to June 2012, two surgeons at one US
academic institution performed 271 consecutive robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass procedures. For all cases, isolated, off-pump left
internal mammary artery (LIMA) to left anterior descending coronary
artery grafting was planned via a 3- to 4-cm sternal-sparing thoracotomy
after robotic internal mammary artery harvest and pericardiotomy.
Results: Conversion to sternotomy occurred in 15 of 271 (5.5%)
patients. The most common reason was technical difﬁculty with the
anastomosis, which occurred in 6 (40.0%) patients. Others included
LIMA dissection, 2 (13.3%); wrong vessel grafted, 2 (13.3%); ventricular ﬁbrillation and cardiac arrest, 1 (6.7%); equipment malfunction, 1 (6.7%); adhesions, 1 (6.7%); and other. Two underwent
emergent conversion. Six underwent multivessel bypass after conversion instead of hybrid coronary revascularization. No mortality
occurred among converted patients. Two patients had postoperative
myocardial infarction and one had a superﬁcial sternal wound infection. Conversion rate was relatively stable among the four different
time quartiles (range, 3.0%Y7.4%), although the reasons for conversion were different.
Conclusions: Conversion to sternotomy is an infrequent complication of robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass, most commonly

because of technical difﬁculties during the LIMA harvest and the
LIMA to left anterior descending anastomosis. Anatomic and patient
variables as well as inherent technical problems with minimally invasive procedures make conversion unavoidable in some patients.
Key Words: Robotic-assisted CABG, Minimally invasive cardiac
surgery, CABG, Technical difﬁculties.
(Innovations 2012;7: 323Y327)

M

Address correspondence and reprint requests to Michael E. Halkos, MD, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Emory University School of Medicine, 550
Peachtree Street, NE, Medical Ofﬁce Tower, 6th Floor, Emory University
Hospital-Midtown, Atlanta, GA 30308 USA. E-mail: mhalkos@emory.edu.
ISSN: 1556-9845/12/0705-0323

inimally invasive robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass
graft (CABG) surgery is an alternative approach to traditional CABG via sternotomy. Multiple variations of minimally invasive CABG procedures exist. Minimally invasive
direct coronary artery bypass (MIDCAB) is a sternal sparing
procedure that involves anterolateral thoracotomy to allow for
direct harvesting of the left internal mammary artery (LIMA).
Once the LIMA is harvested, the heart is stabilized to allow
for anastomosis of the LIMA to the left anterior descending
(LAD). This technique has been modiﬁed further to include the
use of robotic technology to facilitate harvesting of the LIMA
via a closed-chest approach. Robotic technology may allow
for a more complete LIMA harvest and minimize chest wall
retraction necessary for harvest. In addition, it allows for the
LIMA-LAD bypass to be performed through a small incision
because the incision can be tailored directly over the site of
the planned anastomosis. The preferred approach at our institution is an off-pump robotic-assisted CABG. After robotic
LIMA harvest and pericardiotomy, a hand-sewn, off-pump
LIMA-LAD anastomosis is then performed via a 3-cm anterolateral thoracotomy. Totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass (TECAB) takes minimally invasive CABG a step further
by performing the entire procedure endoscopically by using
the robotic technology for harvesting the LIMA and grafting the LIMA to the diseased vessel. Potential beneﬁts of all
minimally invasive CABG procedures include improved cosmetics, less disability, quicker recovery, and the potential avoidance of the morbidity associated with sternotomy. Since the
initial use of thoroscopic instruments in a minimally invasive
nature for heart surgery in the mid 1990s,1Y3 many advances
have been achieved using the da Vinci Surgical System
(Intuitive Surgical, Inc, Sunnyvale, CA USA) for minimally
invasive CABG. As with any new technology, there is a

Innovations & Volume 7, Number 5, September/October 2012

From the Clinical Research Unit, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA USA.
Presented at the Annual Scientiﬁc Meeting of the International Society for
Minimally Invasive Cardiothoracic Surgery, May 30YJune 2, 2012, Los
Angeles, CA USA.
Disclosures: Michael E. Halkos, MD, is a consultant to Intuitive Surgical,
Inc, Sunnyvale, CA USA. William T. Daniel, BS, John D. Puskas, MD, Kim
T. Baio, MSN, Henry A. Liberman, MD, Chandan Devireddy, MD, Aloke
Finn, MD, declare no conﬂict of interest.

Daniel et al

Innovations & Volume 7, Number 5, September/October 2012

learning curve associated with its implementation. The purpose of this study was to examine the reasons for conversion to
sternotomy and to evaluate the learning curve associated with
the number of cases performed by comparing conversion rates
over time.

dissection in the LIMA; in another 13.3% (2/15), the LIMA
was grafted to the wrong vessel (diagonal). In the other ﬁve
patients, conversion to sternotomy was required because of
LIMA bleeding during harvest, ventricular ﬁbrillation, right
ventricular injury during port placement, technical problems
with the robot, and left chest adhesions in 1 (6.7%) patient
each, respectively.
Emergent conversion was required in two of these patients, one because of right ventricular injury during port
placement and the other because of ventricular ﬁbrillatory arrest that developed after minimal manipulation of the heart
during pericardiotomy with electrocautery. The ﬁrst patient
did not require cardioversion or cardiopulmonary resuscitation
but did require emergent sternotomy because of hypotension
caused by pericardial tamponade identiﬁed by transesophageal
echocardiography. The second required cardiopulmonary resuscitation and cardioversion before being stabilized and then
underwent conversion to sternotomy.
After intraoperative completion angiogram, three patients
underwent conversion. One showed LIMA anastomosed incorrectly to the diagonal and the other two showed poor distal ﬂows in the LAD (described above). For the other patient
who had inadvertent diagonal grafting, this error was identiﬁed after completion of the anastomosis. She underwent
conversion to sternotomy for graft revision because of the
technical difﬁculties associated with grafting an intramyocardial LAD.
There was no mortality among the patients who were
converted to sternotomy. However, two had postoperative myocardial infarctions (the two patients with poor distal ﬂows on
completion angiography) and one patient had a superﬁcial
sternal wound infection. In the cohort of patients that did
not undergo conversion, 30-day mortality occurred in 4 of
256 (1.6%) patients and perioperative myocardial infarction

METHODS
From October 2009 to June 2012, a total of 271 consecutive robotic-assisted CABG procedures were performed at
Emory University by two surgeons. In all cases, isolated, offpump LIMA to LAD grafting was planned via a 3- to 4-cm
sternal-sparing thoracotomy after robotic LIMA harvest and
pericardiotomy. Operative notes were reviewed retrospectively
and data on the indications for conversion to sternotomy were
collected. Each surgeon’s total case number was divided into
four quartiles and organized based on the date the procedure
was performed. Both surgeons’ conversion rate was compared for each time quartile. The total case number overall and
per quartile was also compared. This study was reviewed
and approved by the institutional review board at our university and was performed in compliance with government
privacy regulations.

RESULTS
Conversion to sternotomy occurred in 15 of 271 (5.5%)
patients undergoing robotic-assisted CABG. In 6 of 15 patients
(40.0%), the reason for conversion was technical difﬁculty
with LIMA-LAD anastomosis. This included two patients
with poor distal LAD ﬂow on completion angiography, two
patients with small target vessels, one patient who required
LAD endarterectomy, and one with an intramyocardial LAD.
In 2 of 15 (13.3%) patients, conversion occurred because of

FIGURE 1. Rate of conversion to sternotomy for each surgeon by time quartiles.

Innovations & Volume 7, Number 5, September/October 2012

Conversions During Robotic-Assisted CABG

occurred in 3 of 256 (1.2%) patients. For the entire cohort,
there were no postoperative myocardial infarctions, and renal
failure requiring dialysis occurred in 3 (1.1%) patients.
Rates of conversion were compared by dividing the total
number of cases performed by each surgeon into time quartiles and comparing the two surgeons. Surgeon 1 performed 207
cases with conversion rates of 7.7% (4/52), 1.9% (1/52), 7.7%
(4/52), and 2.0% (1/51) for the ﬁrst through fourth quartiles,
respectively. Surgeon 2 performed 64 cases with conversion
rates of 0.0% (0/16), 18.8% (3/16), 6.3% (1/16), and 6.3% (1/16)
for the ﬁrst through fourth quartiles, respectively (Fig. 1). At
the time this article was written, only one conversion occurred
in 2012 for the 58 cases that had been performed between the
two surgeons. The lowest combined conversion rate, 3.0%, occurred in the fourth quartile, with each surgeon having one
conversion (Fig. 2).
For the ﬁrst 136 cases (both surgeons), technical difﬁculty with the anastomosis was the reason for conversion in
only two of eight patients. During this early period, the two
LIMA dissections and the two inadvertent LIMA diagonal
grafts occurred. Ventricular ﬁbrillation and technical problems
with the robot also occurred in the initial 136 patients. For the
second half of the study, or 137 patients, four of seven conversions occurred because of technical difﬁculty with the
LIMA-LAD anastomosis. In one patient, bleeding occurred
from a branch off the LIMA, which could not be controlled or
repaired robotically. One patient had left chest adhesions precluding safe entry into the left chest, and one patient had a right
ventricle injury as described above.

minimally invasive cardiac surgery have always been obtaining
adequate visualization and achieving a level of dexterity that
open procedures afford. Advances in endoscopic equipment
and robotic devices have overcome much of the limitations
encountered early in the evolution of less invasive cardiac
surgery. The largest remaining difﬁculty associated with minimally invasive cardiac surgery is the learning curve associated
with integrating this new technology. Starting with traditional,
on-pump CABG, coronary surgery has progressed to offpump, beating heart surgery, to minimally invasive approaches,
and ﬁnally to TECAB.
Several reports have examined the time required to attain
proﬁcient technical skills, the technical challenges, and the
outcomes associated with endoscopic robotic techniques.5Y7
The purpose of our study was to examine the outcomes, learning curve, and technical difﬁculties associated with roboticassisted CABG by two surgeons at one institution over 2 years
with the principal outcome measure being conversion to
sternotomy.
There are many difﬁculties and obstacles to overcome
when learning a new surgical technique or incorporating new
technology. From the beginning, with off-pump CABG to the
incorporation of TECAB, surgeons have had to adapt and
modify their techniques. Another option for patients is hybrid
coronary revascularization, which involves surgical grafting
with the LIMA to the LAD and percutaneous coronary intervention for non-LAD vessels. Off-pump CABG may be beneﬁcial to patients because it avoids the risks associated with
cardiopulmonary bypass and minimizes the risk associated
with aortic manipulation. The ﬁrst minimally invasive surgical option available to patients with coronary disease was
MIDCAB, which involves the use of an anterolateral thoracotomy for LIMA takedown and anastomosis of the LIMA
to LAD under direct vision. With the incorporation of the da
Vinci robotic telemanipulation system, robotic-assisted CABG
is another option that facilitates exposure during LIMA

DISCUSSION
Since Loulmet et al4 ﬁrst attempted a robotic-assisted
MIDCAB in 1998, robotic-assisted CABG has continued to
evolve both with regard to improvements in clinical outcomes
and incorporation of new technology. The major obstacles to

FIGURE 2. Overall rate of conversion to sternotomy by quartile.

Daniel et al

Innovations & Volume 7, Number 5, September/October 2012

harvest. In this procedure, the da Vinci robot is used to harvest
the LIMA and open the pericardium as well as identify the
LAD. Robotic-assisted CABG has been shown to be safe and
effective with minimal morbidity when compared with MIDCAB, which may be associated with greater postoperative pain
due to chest retraction.8
Complications associated with the minimally invasive
CABG procedures are caused mainly by technical difﬁculties that occur during mobilization of the LIMA or during the
anastomosis of the LIMA to the LAD. Bonatti et al6 found
that during the early part of their study, damage to the LIMA
and bleeding occurred more frequently. Two studies showed
a conversion rate of 13% and 15%, respectively.5,6 Both of
these studies analyzed TECAB, whereas our study included
only patients undergoing a robotic-assisted CABG or robotic
MIDCAB. In a similar study, Mishra et al9 examined 268
patients who underwent robotic-assisted CABG, including 12
TECAB cases, and found that 7 underwent conversion, 5 because of dense pleural adhesions and two for hemodynamic
instability.
Surgeon experience has often been cited as a reason for
conversion to sternotomy. ‘‘Stages of experience’’ have been
identiﬁed in a previous study looking at the cumulative experience of eight surgeons, with the ‘‘learning phase’’ corresponding to fewer than 50 operations, the ‘‘intermediate phase’’
corresponding to between 50 and 100 cases, and the ‘‘expert
phase’’ corresponding to more than 100 cases.10 Perioperative
mortality was shown to drop from 1.1% to 0.4% after the
learning phase and complication/reintervention rate dropped
from 12.7% to 7.1% after the intermediate phase.10 Conversion to sternotomy dropped from 2.7% to 0.2% after performing 150 cases.10
With regard to the learning curve associated with this
new technology, Bonatti et al5 showed a decrease in the time
required for ITA takedown from 90 minutes to approximately
50 minutes after performing the procedure on 35 patients.
This is similar to the previously reported idea of the learning
phase and indicates an improvement in technical skill as
the experience is gained and supports the idea of a learning
curve. Wiedemann et al11 found that over an 8-year period,
they were able to improve operative time in complex TECAB
cases by starting out with low-risk patients and then slowly
attempting more complex cases over time. They also concluded
that longer procedures had a greater incidence of technical
difﬁculties and conversion to sternotomy.11 Earlier cases had
longer operative times in part because of lack of surgical
experience.
Based on current literature and our own experience, conversion to sternotomy is to be expected in a certain number
of patients undergoing robotic-assisted CABG. Although the
learning curve associated with these procedures is crucial to
be aware of, it was not a clear factor in our study. Surgeon 1
had performed more operations at each quartile than surgeon 2 had and showed a conversion incidence between 2.0%
and 7.7%. Surgeon 2 showed no conversions during the ﬁrst
quartile and then had a decreasing rate of conversions from
the second to fourth quartiles (Fig. 1). Overall, the conversion
rate was relatively stable (Fig. 2). Not only did the surgeons
become more proﬁcient over time, but also the entire team

became more experienced, which has been crucial for our
robotic CABG program. Possible explanations for the fourth
quartile conversion rate include certain intangibles such as
patient-speciﬁc variables and coronary anatomy. This is evident in the breakdown of reasons for conversion. Technical
errors such as LIMA dissection and inadvertent diagonal grafting occurred exclusively in the ﬁrst half of the study, whereas
problems with the LIMA-LAD anastomosis occurred more
frequently in the second half. This may also reﬂect greater
experience among the surgeons, understanding that it may be
safer to proceed with LIMA-LAD grafting via sternotomy in
patients with small, calciﬁed, intramyocardial, or poor distal
LAD targets. Nonetheless, these results also highlight that
unanticipated technical problems will continue to occur, albeit
more infrequently, in patients undergoing robotic-assisted
CABG. The lower incidence of conversions in the fourth quartile of this study suggests that greater technical expertise is
obtained with experience. However, it is also likely that this
experience carries over into better patient selection, with
patients having difﬁcult coronary anatomy or unfavorable
patient-related variables for minimally invasive CABG more
likely to undergo CABG via sternotomy. It is our current practice that conversion to sternotomy should not be viewed as a
failure but as a safety and quality measure. Patients who display hemodynamic instability or arrhythmia during any portion of the procedure, as well as those with difﬁcult LAD
anatomy that is identiﬁed at the time of minithoracotomy, are
quickly converted to sternotomy to avoid complications related to hemodynamic compromise or technically inferior anastomoses. Maintaining these criteria for conversion will ensure
excellent clinical and angiographic outcomes for patients undergoing robotic-assisted CABG.
