Masters of Cardiothoracic Surgery

Robotic aortic valve replacement and aortic root enlargement for
optimal prosthesis selection
Ali Darehzereshki, Lawrence Wei, J. Hunter Mehaffey, Goya Raikar, Vinay Badhwar
Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. Email: ali.darehzereshki@wvumedicine.org.
Keywords: Robotic aortic valve replacement (RAVR); aortic root enlargement (ARE); patient-prosthesis mismatch (PPM)

Clinical vignette
A 67-year-old female presented with severe aortic stenosis
and New York Heart Association Class III symptoms. She
had a body mass index (BMI) of 36 kg/m2 and a history of
long-standing persistent atrial fibrillation and left atrial
thrombus on oral anticoagulation, permanent pacemaker
implantation for sick sinus syndrome with high grade
atrioventricular (AV) block, stage 3 chronic kidney disease,
insulin-dependent diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia,
obstructive sleep apnea and moderate right carotid
stenosis with recurrent transient ischemic attack (TIA).
Echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction
of 60%, severe aortic stenosis and a small aortic root with
an annulus measuring 18 mm. Cardiac catheterization
showed non-obstructive coronary artery disease. Her
calculated Society of Thoracic Surgery (STS) predicted
risk of mortality was 4%. Despite several comorbidities,
she was still independent and cared for her grandchildren.
Concomitant robotic aortic valve replacement (RAVR)
with aortic root enlargement (ARE) and biatrial Cox-maze
cryoablation with left atrial appendage obliteration was
recommended.
Surgical techniques
Preparation
Prior to induction of double lumen endotracheal anesthesia,
patient received upper extremity arterial monitoring and
intra-thecal injection of 0.1 mg morphine sulfate. The

patient was positioned supine with a bumper under the right
shoulder to facilitate a right lateral trans-axillary approach.
Exposition
The development, implementation and technical details
of RAVR have been described previously (1). In summary,
RAVR was approached through a 3 cm minimally invasive
rib sparing right lateral thoracotomy at the level of the
axillary line in the fourth intercostal space facilitated by
the DaVinci Xi robot (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA,
USA). Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was initiated via
peripheral cannulation established through right common
femoral artery and vein and right internal jugular vein, as
well as a 5-French distal perfusion catheter in the superficial
femoral artery connected to the ipsilateral arterial cannula.
An aortic root vent was then placed through the 3 cm
working incision followed by a left ventricular vent through
the right superior pulmonary vein via a separate chest wall
stab incision. The DaVinci Xi robot was used with the
camera port through the working incision (arm 2). Three
additional ports included DeBakey forceps (arm 1), long-tip
grasping forceps (arm 3) and scissors/needle driver (arm 4).
A transthoracic aortic cross-clamp was then applied and
antegrade cardioplegia solution was delivered via the aortic
root.
Under full robotic assistance, a slightly modified
transverse aortotomy at the sinotubular junction was
extended down to the midpoint of the non-coronary sinus
to provide excellent visualization of the aortic valve. The

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):238-240 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-ravr-0183

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 14, No 3 May 2025

aortic valve was then excised robotically. The steps for
implantation of prosthetic valve include placement of
circumferential interrupted 2-0 braided polyester sutures,
valve sizing using conventional surgical aortic valve
replacement (SAVR) sizers, passing the sutures through the
sewing ring of the prosthesis, delivery of the valve through
the working incision and securement using suture fasteners
(Cor-Knot; LSI Solutions, Victor, NY, USA).
Operation
ARE was performed through a modified Nicks technique
by extending the aortotomy through the mid-point of
the non-coronary sinus to the aortic annulus. Following
implantation of a 23 mm prosthesis, and similar to
conventional open techniques, the ARE was commenced
with a single pledgetted 4-0 polypropylene suture anchoring
a Dacron patch in a horizontal mattress fashion (Video 1,
case 3). The patch was then sewn to the aorta, proximally
and distally, in a single running layer, to replace the noncoronary sinus and the entire anterior aorta as a gusset
patch augmentation. Alternatively, a pericardial patch
can be fashioned to facilitate this full augmentation. Less
commonly, as shown in our initial series (2), a diamond
shaped pericardial or Dacron patch is used to augment the
non-coronary sinus with a transition suture at the mid-point
of the aortotomy (Video 1, cases 1 and 2).

(range, 18–43 kg/m2) and the mean prosthesis size was
23 mm (range, 21–27 mm). There were no mortalities,
readmissions or reoperations for bleeding. Transthoracic
echocardiogram at one month showed normal hemodynamics
with physiologic valve gradients in all patients.
Advantages
PPM after SAVR has been well documented to be
associated with worse outcome (3-5). Furthermore, the
growing application of valve-in-valve transcatheter aortic
valve replacement (TAVR) after SAVR underlines the
importance of avoiding a 19 mm prostheses. This highlights
the potential increased role of ARE during SAVR,
particularly for patients at risk for PPM. Robotic ARE
follows the same open surgical principles and could serve
as a valuable complement to the well-established RAVR
technique. Our standard approach to ARE is a modified
Nicks root enlargement with full gusset patch augmentation
of the non-coronary sinus and entire anterior aorta using
Dacron or pericardium. A diamond shaped pericardial or
Dacron patch with a transition suture at the mid-point of
the aortotomy was used in our initial experience to augment
the non-coronary sinus (2). Our series demonstrate robotic
ARE at the time of RAVR is feasible, safe and may mitigate
PPM in patients with small or complex aortic root anatomy.
Caveats

Completion
After completion of aortotomy closure, the repair and ARE
patch were tested for hemostasis with antegrade cold-blood
cardioplegia. In concomitant surgery for atrial fibrillation,
a biatrial Cox-maze cryoablation and left atrial appendage
obliteration is typically completed prior to RAVR ARE. The
heart was then reanimated, the cross-clamp was released,
the robot undocked and the patient was weaned from CPB,
decannulated and closed.

Robotic-assisted ARE requires technical proficiency in
RAVR and careful patient selection. The modified Nicks
technique applied in our series enlarges the aortic root,
which allows for a one to two size larger valve to be
inserted. An inverted Y-incision with rectangular patch may
be performed to upsize the annulus by two to three sizes.
Acknowledgments
None.

Comments
Clinical results

Footnote

Since the initiation of RAVR in January 2020, approximately
12.3% of patients underwent robotic ARE, which is similar
in frequency to open SAVR ARE in our institution. Robotic
ARE was performed due to a small or calcified aortic root,
but most commonly to avoid patient-prosthesis mismatch
(PPM) by valve upsizing. The average BMI was 30.9 kg/m2

to declare.

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):238-240 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-ravr-0183

Darehzereshki et al. ARE concomitant to RAVR

distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

2.

4.

5.
