Special Issue: Mitral Valve Repair: Invited Case Videos

Complex robotic mitral valve redo repair after failed
transcatheter edge-to-edge repair
Kurt DeLay, MD,a Clifton Lewis, MD,b Richard Stephens, PA,b and Panos N. Vardas, MD,b Ann Arbor,
Mich, and Birmingham, Ala
From the aDepartment of Cardiac Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Mich; and bDivision of Cardiothoracic Surgery, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Ala.
Received for publication July 12, 2023; revisions received Aug 29, 2023; accepted for publication Sept 16, 2023;
available ahead of print Sept 21, 2023.
Address for reprints: Kurt DeLay, MD, Department of Cardiac Surgery, University of Michigan, 1500 E Medical
Center Dr, Ann Arbor, MI 48104 (E-mail: thde@med.umich.edu).
JTCVS Techniques 2023;22:99-100
2666-2507
Surgery. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

Echocardiography of ﬂail leaﬂet with clip; intraoperative view of leaﬂet and clip.

CENTRAL MESSAGE

Video clip is available online.

Robotic technology has become increasingly widespread in
cardiac surgery for procedures such as coronary artery
bypass grafting, valve procedures, and septal defect closure
among others. Mitral valve repair is a mainstay of minimally invasive robotic cardiac surgery. Robotic-assisted
repair has become a preferred method of mitral valve repair
due to exceptional outcomes.1
Transcatheter edge-to-edge repair (TEER) is another
increasingly popular minimally invasive intervention for
mitral regurgitation in those not eligible for surgical intervention. The American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association 2022 guidelines assigned a class 2A
recommendation for mitral TEER (M-TEER) for patients
with “persistent symptoms despite guideline-directed medical therapy, appropriate anatomy on transesophageal echocardiography and with left ventricular ejection fraction
between 20% and 50%, left ventricular end-systolic diameter 70 mm, and pulmonary artery systolic pressure
70 mm Hg” not undergoing concomitant coronary artery
bypass grafting.2
Single-leaflet device attachment (SLDA) is an infrequent but serious complication of M-TEER. Multiple
clinical trials have shown a progressive decrease in the
incidence of SLDA since TEER’s inception, from
the
Endovascular
Valve
Edge-to-Edge
REpair
STudy (EVEREST) (11.0%) to the MitraClip Experience
of Performance and Safety for the Next Generation of
MitraClipÒ Devices (EXPAND) study (1.9%) and
EXPAND Fourth Generation (G4) study (1.7%).3 The

Robotic mitral valve surgery is a
feasible option in the setting of
failure of recent TEER, both in
retrieval of the clip and repair of
the valve.

majority of SLDAs occur within 30 days, and many are
noted during the procedure and are corrected with repeat
M-TEER.3,4 Most of those not corrected acutely require
surgical intervention. Chikwe and colleagues5 noted in
a review of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons database,
that 15,000 patients received M-TEER between 2014
and 2020, and 524 patients underwent first-time mitral
surgery after TEER in that timeframe.5 Ninety-five
percent of these patients received mitral valve replacement over repair. Only a small fraction of mitral valve
surgeries are performed robotically. This case provides
valuable insight into the technical nuance of a complex
and infrequent procedure.
PRESENTATION OF CASE
An 83-year-old woman presented with heart failure
symptoms 6 weeks post-TEER. Transesophageal echocardiography showed mitral regurgitation with flail posterior
leaflet and a mitral clip attached only to the anterior leaflet.
The decision was made to pursue mitral clip removal and
mitral valve repair and mitral valvuloplasty via minimally
invasive robotic surgery. This report was waived from institutional review board approval; consent was obtained at the
time of this case on the condition that it contain no personal
health identifiers and be used for educational purposes.
JTCVS Techniques c Volume 22, Number C

Special Issue: Mitral Valve Repair: Invited Case Videos

running GoreTex suture and with strong suction on both
vents the crossclamp was removed. See Video 1.

VIDEO 1. Operative technique. Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.org/
article/S2666-2507(23)00364-4/fulltext.

OPERATIVE TECHNIQUE
Three 8-mm retractor ports were placed in the second,
sixth and fifth intercostal spaces. The patient was heparinized and cannulated with a 25 Edwards through the left
femoral vein and side-arm Edwards cannula through the
right femoral artery. Through the side-arm, a balloon occlusion device was prepositioned in the ascending thoracic
aorta. After pericardiotomy, diaphragmatic pericardial stays
were placed. Working through the transverse sinus, a
35-mm AtriClip (AtriCure) was deployed at the base of the
left atrial appendage. The crossclamp balloon then occluded
the aorta with echocardiography confirmation. The heart was
arrested with cold blood cardioplegia. Vertical left atriotomy
was made, and the remnant atrial septal defect was oversewn
with 2-layer running Ethibond. The clip was removed from
the anterior mitral leaflet, leaving the leaflet intact. We resected a triangular section of P2 and repaired at the base
with 4-0 GoreTex (W. L. Gore & Associates). A 34-mm
ATS annuloplasty band was then secured to the posterior
annulus, trigone to trigone, with interrupted horizontal nonpledgeted sutures of Ethibond seated and secured with a CorKnot (LSI Solutions). Saline check was performed and found
to be satisfactory. After completion of the mitral valve repair,
the left atriotomy was closed over a left ventricle vent with

JTCVS Techniques c December 2023

DISCUSSION
The patient was successfully extubed on the day of surgery without complication. The patient was discharged uneventfully on postoperative day 4. At a single institution, we
identified 5 similar cases of SLAD in a 3-year period that
were treated with robotic surgical replacement (3 out of
5) and repair (2 out of 5). Many factors may influence which
patients are eligible for repair versus replacement, including
amenability of native valve pathology to repair, extent of
post-TEER fibrosis and sclerosis of the valve, and technical
familiarity of the surgeon with advanced mitral reconstructive techniques. This case illustrates that mitral valve repair
after failed percutaneous mitral valve clip can be performed
safely and effectively by those with relevant expertise in
eligible patients.
The authors reported no conflicts of interest.
The Journal policy requires editors and reviewers to
disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling manuscripts for which they may have a conflict of interest. The
editors and reviewers of this article have no conflicts of
interest.
