Editorial

Patient selection in robotic mitral valve surgery
Marc Gillinov1, Tarek Malas1, Daniel J. P. Burns2, Stephanie L. Mick3, Per Wierup1

Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA; 2Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of Toronto,

Toronto, Canada; 3Weill Cornell Medicine, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY, USA
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. Email: gillinom@ccf.org.
Keywords: Mitral valve; robotic; cardiac surgery

In recent years there has been increased application of
robotic mitral valve surgery (1). Advantages to robotic
surgery include smaller incisions, quicker recovery, less
blood loss and, perhaps, a reduced risk of infection (1-4).
Patients prefer the shorter recovery and cosmetic result, and
surgeons benefit from enhanced visualization and dexterity.
However, the key factors governing the choice of a robotic
approach are patient safety and procedural success. Both
mitral valve repair and replacement can be completed with
the surgical robot. Of note, in patients with degenerative
mitral valve disease, expectations include exceedingly low
mortality (<1%) and a high rate of valve repair (>95%).
We have previously described a conservative screening
algorithm based on patient history, computed tomography
(CT) scanning and echocardiography that enabled us to
achieve these goals; in our first 1,000 robotic mitral valve
operations, we had no mortality and a repair rate of 99% (4).
In our subsequent 1,600 cases, based upon increased
experience and facility with the robotic platform, we have
extended this approach to a wider group of patients. Herein
we present our current screening algorithm—focusing on
those factors that “alert” us to the possibility that we must
alter our robotic approach or perform a sternal incision—
and strategies to mitigate/safely work around factors in the
patient history, CT scan or echocardiogram that would
have previously led us to perform a sternotomy. While
concomitant tricuspid valve surgery, patent foramen ovale
(PFO)/atrial septal defect closure and ablation of atrial
fibrillation are all feasible during robotic mitral valve
surgery, we do not employ the robotic platform in patients

who require concomitant coronary artery bypass grafting,
aortic valve repair/replacement or aortic surgery.
Patient history
In our practice, a previous right thoracotomy represents a
contraindication to robotic mitral valve surgery. If a patient
has had a previous sternotomy, robotic surgery is feasible
in experienced hands. When operating on the patient who
has had a previous sternotomy, it is advantageous to employ
balloon occlusion of the ascending aorta, and a combination
of antegrade and/or retrograde cardioplegia delivered via
the ascending aortic balloon catheter and a coronary sinus
catheter placed via the internal jugular vein, respectively.
Though fibrillatory arrest is a possible alternative, we do
not favor this approach.
Echocardiography
Aortic regurgitation
Aortic regurgitation that is greater than mild in degree often
jeopardizes myocardial protection by rendering antegrade
cardioplegia unpredictable and ultimately less effective. In
this setting, a retrograde coronary sinus catheter placed via
the internal jugular vein facilitates a safe procedure. Before
removal of the aortic cross-clamp/deflation of the ascending
aortic balloon, a vent should be placed across the mitral
valve to prevent left ventricular distension and aid deairing
in all robotic cases, and this maneuver is particularly
important if there is aortic regurgitation.

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2026;15(1):13 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2025-dmv-0114

Kar and Avedikian. Equipoise in DMR

Severe mitral annular calcification

Femoral arterial diameter <7 mm

Severe mitral annular calcification substantially increases
the complexity and risk of mitral valve surgery. While
some have reported success addressing this challenge with
the surgical robot (5), we prefer a full sternotomy in this
setting.

Small femoral arteries should not be cannulated directly.
In the setting of an artery that is of borderline size (i.e.,
6 mm), we prefer to sew an 8-mm graft to the femoral
artery to enable adequate systemic flow and ensure distal
limb perfusion. If the femoral vessels are less than 6 mm
in diameter, we generally pursue a sternal approach.
Alternatively, the surgeon may choose to cannulate both
femoral arteries.

Severe left ventricular dysfunction
This is a relative contraindication to robotic mitral valve
surgery, particularly early in the surgical team’s experience.
In patients with severe left ventricular dysfunction, optimal
myocardial protection and a short myocardial ischemic time
are critically important. When approaching these patients
with the robotic platform, we employ both antegrade and
retrograde cardioplegia and ensure a short aortic crossclamp time.
Pulmonary hypertension
Many patients with mitral valve disease have pulmonary
hypertension. While we still consider severe, fixed
pulmonary hypertension (i.e., near systemic or greater
pulmonary artery pressure) a contraindication to robotic
surgery, lesser degrees of pulmonary hypertension are
acceptable; in such cases, our standard routine of systemic
cooling to 30 ℃ is important.
CT scan

All patients should undergo CT scanning of the chest,
abdomen and pelvis, with and without contrast, before
planned robotic surgery. Uncommon and unexpected
findings, including type B aortic dissection, discontinuous
inferior vena cava, and presence of an inferior vena cava
filter have led us to pursue a sternal approach. Other CT
findings require careful consideration before pursuing a
robotic approach.

In general, it is ideal to have a distance of at least 10 cm
between the posterior sternal table and the anterior spine
to facilitate exposure of the right pulmonary veins and left
atrium. Simply put, there needs to be adequate space for
left atrial retraction and mitral valve visualization. If this
distance is 7–10 cm, we determine feasibility of the robotic
approach by inserting a camera into the right chest and
directly assessing the anatomy. If the distance is less than
7 cm, we generally pursue a sternal incision.
Comments
Most patients with isolated mitral valve pathology are
suitable for a robotic approach. As with all cardiac surgical
procedures, patient selection is paramount to success. When
considering use of the surgical robot, the surgeon must
ask himself/herself a simple question: “Can I do exactly
the same operation, with the same safety and effectiveness
if I employ the robot?” If the answer is “Yes”, a robotic
approach is appropriate.
Acknowledgments
None.
Footnote

Aortoiliac atherosclerosis
Significant aortoiliac atherosclerosis contraindicates
femoral arterial perfusion due to the increased risk of
cerebrovascular events (6). The definition of “significant” is
subjective; however, in the presence of soft plaque or diffuse
hard/calcified plaque, we choose axillary artery cannulation
for arterial inflow.

Severe pectus excavatum

with Edwards Lifesciences, Medtronic, Abbott, Artivion,
ClearFlow, Johnson and Johnson, Baxter, AtriCure and
Corcym. S.L.M. reports consulting relationships with
Medtronic, Artivion and Johnson and Johnson. The other
authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2026;15(1):13 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2025-dmv-0114

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 15, No 1 January 2026

distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

3.

4.

5.
