ADULT: MITRAL VALVE: SURGICAL TECHNIQUE

Robotic mitral valve surgery in the very thin patient: Tips
and tricks
Ali Hage, MD, MPH, Tarek Malas, MD, MPH, and Marc Gillinov, MD, Cleveland, Ohio
From the Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio.
Received for publication Sept 8, 2024; accepted for publication Oct 1, 2024; available ahead of print Oct 11, 2024.
Address for reprints: Marc Gillinov, MD, Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and Vascular
Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Ave, Desk J4-1, Cleveland, OH 44105 (E-mail: gillinom@
ccf.org).
JTCVS Techniques 2025;29:9-11
2666-2507
Surgery. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

The success of a robotic-assisted mitral valve procedure
depends on multiple factors, 1 of which is the correct position of side/working ports. In most cases, the left robotic
port is placed in the second intercostal space (ICS); the
working incision (a right mini antero-lateral thoracotomy)
through the fourth ICS; the left atrial retractor also in the
fourth ICS just medial to the mini-thoracotomy; and the
right robotic port through the sixth ICS (Figure 1). This
standard port placement creates the usual triangle of
attack. However, in very small and thin patients, a challenge arises because of the close proximity of the ports/incisions, resulting in overcrowding of the chest and
collisions of the robotic arms. To overcome this challenge,
we have adopted a modified strategy that we describe here
that allows us to maintain a triangle of attack that is more
zoomed-out (Figure 2).
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
Right Mini-Thoracotomy Incision
In a typical patient, it is a 3- to 4-cm incision in the
fourth ICS that begins just lateral (about 1 cm) to the anterior axillary line and extends medially toward the sternum
(Figure 1). In a very small and thin patient, the incision is
made more laterally, such that two-thirds of the incision is
lateral to the anterior axillary line, and one-third is medial
to it (Figure 2). The incision can be also kept small
because the absence of significant subcutaneous tissue
will not result in the typical tunnel effect that we see in
obese patients and also because the ribs can be easily
spread with a soft tissue retractor. Palpating and marking
the ICSs and the incision on the chest wall is particularly
easy in thin patients and will facilitate their correct
position.
Left Robotic Arm
It is also done in the second ICS, just medial to the anterior axillary line. However, the point of entry through the

Modiﬁed strategy with a triangle of attack that is
more zoomed-out.

CENTRAL MESSAGE

We have adopted a modiﬁed
strategy in robotic-assisted mitral
valve surgery in very small and
thin patients that allows us to
maintain a triangle of attack that
is more zoomed-out.

skin is much higher than normal (around the first ICS),
which allows the port to enter the second ICS much flatter
(ie, less of a perpendicular angle), therefore optimizing
and increasing the range of motion of the robotic arm inside
the chest cavity (Figure 2).
Left Atrial Retractor
Usually, this is placed in the fourth ICS just medial to/
above the mid-clavicular line, avoiding going directly
through the breast (Figure 1). In a small and thin patient,
it is placed much more medially toward the sternum
(Figure 2). We begin by looking inside of the chest
through the minithoracotomy and identifying the right
internal thoracic vessels, with the plan of inserting this
port about 2- to 3-cm lateral to them. This might end
up being medial to the nipple and also going through
the breast, neither of which is necessarily problematic
given the limited volume of breast tissue in very small
and thin patients. We also use the short atrial retractor
in these cases.
Right Robotic Arm
Instead of going through the sixth ICS, we enter the chest
through the seventh ICS just lateral to the anterior axillary
JTCVS Techniques c Volume 29, Number C

Adult: Mitral Valve: Surgical Technique

FIGURE 1. Ports placements and incision in a standard patient. MCL, Mid-clavicular line; AAL, anterior axillary line.

line and also at a very acute angle to the skin, with the skin
incision performed over the eighth ICS (Figure 2). This
again allows us to increase/zoom-out the area of the triangle
of attack. It is particularly important to first inspect the position of the diaphragm from inside the chest to avoid any
iatrogenic injury given the lower-than-usual position this
port. Table 1 provides a comparison between the ports’
placement and the incision in a standard patient versus a
very thin and small patient.
Other Tips
These patients tend to have smaller and more fragile
femoral vessels, so extra care is required during their

manipulation and might necessitate the use of smaller cannulas. Also, for venous drainage, there is usually no need to
cannulate the neck/superior vena cava because a wellpositioned femoral venous cannula provides adequate
drainage. Finally, the diaphragm in these patients is usually
not elevated (given the absence of abdominal weight pressing up from below the liver) so a diaphragmatic retraction
stitch is usually not necessary.
CONCLUSIONS
Using a modified setup for ports placements and incisions, robotic mitral surgery in very thin and small patients
is safe and can be performed without additional challenges.

FIGURE 2. Ports placements and incision in a very thin and small patient. MCL, Mid-clavicular line; AAL, anterior axillary line.

JTCVS Techniques c February 2025

Adult: Mitral Valve: Surgical Technique

TABLE 1. Comparison of ports placements and incisions between a standard patient and a very thin/small patient
Ports/Incision

Standard patient

Very thin/small patient

Left robotic arm

Second ICS, just medial to anterior axillary line

Second ICS, just medial to anterior axillary line, with skin
entry at first ICS with a very shallow angle

Right robotic arm

Sixth ICS, just lateral to anterior axillary line

Seventh ICS, just lateral to the anterior axillary line, with
skin entry at eighth ICS with a very shallow angle

Left atrial retractor

Fourth ICS, just above the mid-clavicular line

Fourth ICS, right parasternal and lateral to the right internal
thoracic vessels

Mini-thoracotomy
incision

3-4 cm incision in the fourth ICS that begins just lateral
(about 1 cm) to the anterior axillary line and extends
medially toward the sternum

3 cm incision in the fourth ICS that begins more laterally,
such that two-thirds of the incision is lateral to the anterior
axillary line, and one-third is medial to it

ICS, Intercostal space.

The authors reported no conflicts of interest.
The Journal policy requires editors and reviewers to
disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling or

reviewing manuscripts for which they may have a conflict
of interest. The editors and reviewers of this article have
no conflicts of interest.

JTCVS Techniques c Volume 29, Number C
