0003-4975/$36.00

Published by Elsevier Inc.

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

Developing Proﬁciency in Robotic Cardiac
Surgery
Michael E. Halkos, MD, MS,1 Amalia Jonsson, MD,1 Vinay Badhwar, MD,2
Husam H. Balkhy, MD,3 Eugene A. Grossi, MD,4 Joseph A. Dearani, MD,5
Arnar Geirsson, MD,6 Marc Gillinov, MD,7 Serguei Melnitchouk, MD, MPH,8
Didier Loulmet, MD,4 and Douglas A. Murphy, MD1

ABSTRACT

BACKGROUND The purpose of this review is to provide recommendations for cardiac surgeons
interested in adopting a robotic platform into their programs.
METHODS The recommendations are based on the experience of the authors and cover a diverse
array of cardiac surgical procedures that are currently performed with robotic assistance. The focus,
as with any innovative surgical approach, is to ensure patient safety, maximize quality and efﬁcacy,
and set realistic expectations about what is required to achieve proﬁciency in robotic cardiac surgery.
RESULTS Even though there may be steady growth in robotic cardiac procedures, it is possible that
these procedures will be concentrated in higher-volume programs that already offer expertise in
mitral valve or coronary surgery. Once success and proﬁciency with robotic cardiac approaches to
coronary or valvular heart disease is achieved, as outlined in this review, surgeons may wish to
embark on more complex robotic procedures, such as reoperative mitral valve surgery, totally
endoscopic coronary artery bypass, or aortic valve replacement.
CONCLUSIONS Maintaining the same principles and techniques for coronary surgery or intracardiac
procedures and maintaining the fundamentals of myocardial protection and cardiopulmonary bypass
are essential to ensure excellent technical and clinical outcomes and to optimize patient safety.
(Ann Thorac Surg 2025;119:523-34)

R

obotic technology has inﬁltrated nearly
every surgical discipline over the last 2 decades. Driven by the desire to minimize
the morbidity associated with traditionally larger
surgical incisions and to facilitate an earlier return
to an active lifestyle, robotic approaches have
been adopted to improve the quality of surgery
as well as meet patient expectations for less invasive therapies. These efforts have also extended
into cardiac surgery. This is evident in our own
thoracic surgery training programs, where most
residents, whether they are in an integrated

cardiothoracic program or have completed a general surgery program before cardiothoracic surgery training, have already received training and
performed robotic surgical procedures before being exposed to cardiac surgery. Practicing cardiac
surgeons have been slower to adopt this technology for reasons including concerns about safety,

The Supplemental Tables and Videos can be viewed in the online
version of this article [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.athoracsur.2024.07.
049] on http://www.annalsthoracicsurgery.org.

Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Emory Heart and Vascular Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; 2Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, WVU Heart and Vascular Institute, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia; 3Division of Cardiac
Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; 4Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, New York University, New York, New York; 5Division of
Cardiovascular Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota; 6Division of Cardiac, Thoracic, and Vascular Surgery, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York; 7Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio; and 8Division of Cardiac Surgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard University, Boston, Massachusetts
Address correspondence to Dr Halkos, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Emory University School of Medicine, 550 Peachtree St NE, Atlanta,
GA 30308; email: mhalkos@emory.edu.

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

HALKOS ET AL

Ann Thorac Surg

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

Abbreviations and Acronyms
CABG [ coronary artery bypass grafting
CT [ computed tomographic
HCR [ hybrid coronary revascularization
LAD [ left anterior descending (coronary artery)
LIMA [ left internal mammary artery
MICS [ minimally invasive cardiac surgery
MIDCAB [ minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass
OPCAB [ off-pump coronary artery bypass
RAVR [ robotic aortic valve replacement
STS [ The Society of Thoracic Surgeons
TECAB [ totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass

efﬁcacy, proﬁciency, critical resources, and the
impact on overall hospital costs and revenue.
Nonetheless, increasing numbers of surgeons
have continued to adopt the robotic platform
into their cardiac programs to meet patient demands and improve the quality of surgical results,
as well as participate in leading innovative approaches to cardiac surgical practice.
The proportion of robotic mitral valve repair for
degenerative mitral regurgitation increased from
10.9% of cases in 2015 to 14.6% in 2021.1 For
robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass grafting
(CABG) procedures, which include roboticassisted CABG or robotic minimally invasive
direct coronary artery bypass (MIDCAB) and
totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass
(TECAB), the adoption rate is much lower. A previous report of The Society of Thoracic Surgeons
(STS) Adult Cardiac Surgery Database published in
2016 showed that robotic-assisted CABG procedures comprised less than 1% of total CABG procedures.2 An additional study, also using the STS
database, evaluated the volume outcome
relationship among new adopters performing
robotic-assisted CABG procedures from 2014 to
2019.3 Even in this more contemporary cohort,
there were fewer than 25 new robotic-assisted
surgeons who performed more than 20 total procedures during this period. Simultaneously, the
overall number of robotic cardiac procedures in
Europe doubled from 435 procedures in 2016 to
923 in 2019.4 Although these volumes and
changes may appear slow and subtle, there is a
trend showing gradual adoption of robotic
cardiac surgical procedures.
There have been several publications documenting the volume-outcome relationship for
complex cardiac procedures, not limited to robotic
surgery. These include lower mortality and higher
repair rates for degenerative mitral regurgitation
among higher-volume surgeons and hospitals.5 It
is also important to understand that mitral repair

2025;119:523-34

procedures for primary mitral regurgitation are
performed in an increasing number of centers,
with many procedures done robotically, but
when compared with all hospitals performing
cardiac surgery, the median number per hospital
remains less than 10.6 For example, a hospital
performing more than 50 mitral valve repairs
annually for primary mitral regurgitation places
them higher than the 95th percentile across the
United States.
This review does not attempt to reassess the
training curriculum or volume requirements
because these issues were recently published and
provide contemporary consensus recommendations
to address robotic cardiac surgery training.7 In that
review by Badhwar and colleagues,7 the minimum
requirements to initiate a robotic revascularization
or mitral program are clearly stated, and we
endorse those current recommendations. Instead,
we provide recommendations to develop
proﬁciency in speciﬁc areas of robotic cardiac
surgery with an initial focus on robotic
revascularization and mitral valve procedures.
Throughout this review, we hope that surgeons
will appreciate that there are a multitude of
pathways to achieve proﬁciency. However, we
also hope to stress that to develop proﬁciency
and then mastery in robotic cardiac procedures
requires an extraordinary commitment and focus
on this cardiac surgical subspecialty.
MATERIAL AND METHODS

Institutional Review Board approval was not
requested for this project because of the absence
of individual patient data. A systematic search of
“robotic cardiac surgery” or “robotic heart surgery” was performed, yielding 4837 publications.
Of these, 28 papers were found to be relevant and
related to the topic of proﬁciency for robotic heart
surgery.
TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES

For early career or midcareer surgeons already in
practice who are interested in developing robotic
cardiac skills, several opportunities exist. STS
currently holds an annual course (STS Workshop
on Robotic Cardiac Surgery) at the Intuitive Surgical training facilities in Norcross, Georgia (Intuitive Surgical). This course provides both a
didactic format and hands-on laboratory-based
training for both revascularization and mitral
valve procedures. Additionally, there are

Ann Thorac Surg
2025;119:523-34

cadaveric training opportunities at several sites
offered by Intuitive Surgical so that surgeons can
practice this technique on cadavers or animal
models before clinical implementation. The
Thoracic Surgery Foundation in conjunction with
STS offer an advanced robotic cardiac surgery
fellowship,8 and The American Association for
Thoracic Surgery Foundation offers a cardiac
surgery robotics fellowship.9 These awards
provide a stipend to support the initiation of a
robotic cardiac surgery program, and the
recipient is paired with an experienced proctor
who provides on-site support during the initial
cases at the surgeon’s institution. Importantly,
these training opportunities include team-based
training, incorporating bedside surgeons or assistants, surgical technicians, operating room nurses,
perfusionists, and anesthesiologists.
For residents and trainees, several fellowship
opportunities exist at robotic cardiac surgery
programs for those who want to pursue training
the end of their American College of Graduate
Medical Education cardiac surgery training. These
programs are offered at Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center (Los Angeles, CA), Cleveland Clinic
(Cleveland, OH), Emory University (Atlanta, GA),
New York University Langone Medical Center
(New York, NY), University of Chicago (Chicago,
IL), and West Virginia University (Morgantown,
WV), among others.

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

HALKOS ET AL

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

ROBOTIC-ASSISTED CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS
GRAFTING AND ROBOTIC MINIMALLY INVASIVE
DIRECT CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS

Perhaps the simplest introduction to robotic cardiac surgery is the robotic left internal mammary
artery (LIMA) harvest. Unlike robotic intracardiac
procedures such as mitral repair, which require
expertise in mitral repair surgery as well as
expertise in alternative access for perfusion and
myocardial protection, robotic LIMA harvesting
allows the surgeon to become facile with robotic
instrumentation without the time pressure associated with cardiopulmonary bypass or ischemia
time. For practicing surgeons, robotic-assisted
CABG can and should be an evolutionary process. The technical aspects of the case have been
described in detail.10 CABG is still the most
commonly performed heart operation in the
United States, and therefore most surgeons
interested in robotics can evolve their practice to
incorporate robotics into their coronary surgical
programs. There are several pathways for this to
occur, as well as several prerequisites for
surgeons (Figure 1). Robotic-assisted CABG procedures can be broken down into 2 procedures: (1)
robotic LIMA harvest (Video 1); and (2) off-pump,
hand-sewn LIMA to left anterior descending (LAD)
coronary artery bypass through a left anterolateral
thoracotomy. For surgeons who perform most of
their CABG procedures on an arrested heart,

FIGURE 1 Prospective pathway for developing proﬁciency in robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
procedures. (BIMA, bilateral internal mammary arteries; LAD, left anterior descending (coronary artery); LIMA, left internal
mammary artery; MIDCAB, minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass; MICS, minimally invasive cardiac surgery;
OPCAB, off-pump coronary artery bypass; TECAB, totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass.)

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

HALKOS ET AL

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

expertise and proﬁciency should be obtained with
off-pump LIMA to LAD artery anastomoses
through a sternotomy before they perform these
procedures through a small left anterolateral
thoracotomy. For those surgeons who already
perform MIDCAB or minimally invasive cardiac
surgery (MICS) CABG, the learning curve can be
focused on robotic LIMA harvesting. The advantages of a robotic approach for revascularization
compared with conventional MIDCAB include the
following: (1) exposure during the LIMA harvest is
superior to a direct vision or endoscopic approach
with MIDCAB; (2) chest wall retraction with LIMA
harvest during MIDCAB is avoided completely;
and (3) the anastomosis can be performed with
little to no rib spreading. Before embarking on a
robotic LIMA harvest, we recommend at least 2 to
3 case observations of different surgeons to
appreciate subtle differences in this technique.
Patients who are possible candidates for roboticassisted CABG procedures are those with isolated
LAD artery disease and those with less complex
multivessel disease in whom the LAD artery can
be treated with LIMA to LAD artery grafting and
the other lesions can be treated percutaneously

Ann Thorac Surg
2025;119:523-34

with a hybrid coronary revascularization (HCR)
approach. For patients undergoing HCR, it is
important that these cases be discussed using a
multidisciplinary heart team approach and that
patient selection is conservative early on. For
early-career surgeons who received training in
robotic LIMA harvest in their thoracic surgical
residency programs or during a robotic cardiac
surgical fellowship, the robotic LIMA portion of
the procedure may be more easily mastered than
the surgical anastomosis through a small left
anterolateral thoracotomy. In this case, it is most
practical to rely on and partner with a senior
surgeon with more experience in CABG, especially
if the senior surgeon has expertise in off-pump
coronary artery bypass (OPCAB) or MICS/MIDCAB.
Although some reports have shown that competency can be achieved with 10 to 50 cases,4 a
more recent report suggests that mastery,
deﬁned as no signiﬁcant improvements in
outcomes or efﬁciency, usually requires between
250 and 500 cases11 (Figure 2). With experience,
several surgeons have evolved to bilateral
internal mammary harvest and multiarterial
grafting of the left-sided vessels with excellent

FIGURE 2 Cumulative sum (CUSUM) analysis curve for observed minus expected mortality for robotic-assisted coronary
artery bypass grafting. A CUSUM plot shows how an outcome of interest changes over time and provides continuous
monitoring of the trend. Two important characteristics of the curve include the height of the curve and the slope. If the
height is greater than 0, this represents worse than expected outcomes, if less than 0 zero, it represents better than
expected outcomes. A downward slope represents continued improvement in outcomes. Reprinted from Jonsson A,
Binongo J, Patel P, et al. Mastering the learning curve for robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass surgery. Ann Thorac Surg.
2023;115:118-126, with permission from The Society of Thoracic Surgeons.

Ann Thorac Surg
2025;119:523-34

results, but our recommendation is that this
should be attempted only after extensive experience is achieved.11
Early in the robotic coronary surgeon’s experience, quality control measures are essential to
ensure not only excellent clinical outcomes but
also angiographic patency assessment. This
assessment can be achieved with an intraoperative angiogram in a hybrid room if available
or with postoperative catheterization or coronary
computed tomographic (CT) angiography. Angiographic assessment during HCR procedures is
routine; however, even in the setting of a singlevessel bypass, it is essential to have comparable,
if not better, patency results that will ensure
quality for a novel procedure performed in your
hospital environment and provide the surgeon
with direct feedback for improvement of the
anastomotic technique.10
Although this is not as critical as with robotic
intracardiac procedures, our recommendation is
to develop proﬁciency with 1 to 2 dedicated teams
for at least the ﬁrst 25 to 50 cases. After proﬁciency is achieved, additional team members can
be trained. Although routine use of an intracoronary shunt is recommended in all cases, there
will be occasional periods where temporary occlusion is necessary. An astute anesthesia team
will recognize subtle ST-segment changes as well
as any early dysrhythmias that can alert the surgeon to conﬁrm that the shunt is working properly
or to restore perfusion transiently to avoid hemodynamic collapse or arrhythmias. Roboticassisted CABG procedures do not usually involve
a dedicated bedside surgeon or a specialized scrub
technician. Therefore, including the scrub technician and nurse in the initial training is important from a safety standpoint. The scrub
technician will routinely need to change out instruments, deliver clip appliers, clean the endoscope, and exchange different instruments. If this
procedure is done blindly on the left side of the
chest, a penetrating injury can easily occur in the
beating heart. The best way to prevent this error is
to perform all instrument exchanges under direct
endoscopic vision. Scrub technicians should not
insert instruments unless the port is visible on the
monitors, so insertion is always done under direct
vision. The camera should be pulled back into the
camera port before withdrawing the camera.
During the initial 20 to 30 cases, the time that is
required to harvest the LIMA robotically will be
much longer,11 and the conversion rate to
sternotomy will be higher. It is important to be
realistic about how much time is required, to

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

HALKOS ET AL

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

provide realistic expectations to the patient
about the risks for conversion to sternotomy,
and to set time limits or guardrails for when to
convert the procedure. If chest wall anatomy is
difﬁcult, if LIMA branch bleeding is encountered
that is difﬁcult to control, or if there are any
concerns about LIMA injury, it is much safer to
convert to sternotomy than compromise the
LIMA graft. Jonsson and colleagues11 reported a
conversion rate of 4.4% in the ﬁrst 500 cases
compared with 1.6% in the second 500 cases.
Although
this
ﬁnding
likely
represents
experience with the technical aspects of the
procedure, it also includes unmeasurable
variables such as patient selection.
During the early experience, there are 3
important criteria for patient selection. First is
LAD artery anatomy. Ensure that the target vessel
on the angiogram is an adequately sized vessel
(>1.5 mm), free from calciﬁcation in the distal
one-half of the LAD artery, and that no concerns
are raised about the patient’s intramyocardial
anatomy. There are often subtle clues to an
intramyocardial course such as a straight LAD artery in the middistal one-third that becomes
curved only toward the apex. The second important consideration is body habitus. Obese patients, female patients with larger breasts, or male
patients with a signiﬁcant amount of chest adipose tissue can be very difﬁcult because of the
challenges with exposure through a deep incision.
Although a discrete cutoff for body mass index is
not routinely used, we recommend caution in the
early experience for patients with a body mass
index >30 to 35 kg/m2. Even modest obesity in a
patient with a smaller chest size can create difﬁculties with robotic LIMA harvest because of
conﬂict with the robotic arms, whereas a greater
degree of obesity may be relatively easy to
manage in a patient with a larger chest cavity size.
Some surgeons have recommended the routine
use of preoperative chest CT scanning with
intravenous contrast material or even coronary CT
angiography to deﬁne the coronary anatomy and
epicardial or intramyocardial course more precisely. Third, patient comorbidities and hemodynamic status are critical. Patients with signiﬁcant
comorbidities usually are more challenging, and
although a less invasive approach with robotic
CABG may provide signiﬁcant beneﬁt, that beneﬁt
will be realized only when the procedure is performed efﬁciently and without any complications.
Furthermore, we still avoid this procedure in
general in any patient who has an unstable presentation, such as ongoing or intermittent chest

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

HALKOS ET AL

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

pain or ischemia, hemodynamic instability, or any
mechanical support. Patients who cannot tolerate
single-lung ventilation should also be avoided in
the early experience with this procedure. Patients
with chronic total occlusion of the LAD artery may
represent good candidates for this procedure
because the risk of any hemodynamic complication is rare; however, the distal LAD artery should
be well visualized from collateral vessels to
ensure a suitable target vessel. As experience is
gained, the criteria can be modiﬁed to include
patients with more challenging LAD artery anatomy or a more challenging body habitus. The
main point is that patient selection is critical for
success of this procedure.
ROBOTIC TOTALLY ENDOSCOPIC CORONARY ARTERY
BYPASS

The term TECAB is used to describe the procedure
in which robotic technology is applied in coronary
bypass surgery not only to harvest the conduits
but also to perform the distal coronary anastomoses endoscopically. This can be done either off
pump or on pump with a beating or arrested heart
approach. When performed off pump, robotic
TECAB is the least invasive form of coronary
bypass grafting; however, it is also the most
challenging to master (Video 2).
Gaining proﬁciency in this procedure should be
predicated on extensive experience in coronary
surgery. This will likely involve expertise in
advanced coronary surgical techniques including
OPCAB, all arterial grafting using bilateral internal
thoracic artery grafts, and robotic MIDCAB surgery.12 A dedicated and consistent surgical team
including the tableside assistant is vital to
execute these procedures safely. As with most
surgical techniques, arriving at fully endoscopic
robotic coronary surgery for a surgeon and team
can occur by multiple pathways depending on
previous experience. The most successful
pathway consists of gradual mastery of the
various components discussed earlier and
integration of these elements into a safe and
successful program (Figure 1). We believe that
the technical skills associated with a successful
TECAB program occur within a multispectrum
robotic practice.13
A simple and inexpensive simulator for TECAB
has been described,14 and it entails using a pig
heart inside of a box for repetitive and frequent
endoscopic robotic anastomosis training. One of
the most important challenges in TECAB is the
absence of a ﬁrst assistant to help with suture

Ann Thorac Surg
2025;119:523-34

management; therefore, extensive simulation
training on endoscopic suturing is a prerequisite
before performing the ﬁrst case.
Depending on the surgeon and team’s comfort
level, the ﬁrst cases should be single-vessel LIMA
to LAD artery procedures performed either on
pump or off pump. At least 5 to 10 proctored cases
are necessary in our view, in which the proctor
reviews the case with the surgical team and goes
over the operative plan in detail. If the surgeon
and team are experienced in OPCAB, these cases
can be performed off pump by using standard
techniques. If the team is more comfortable with
arrested-heart CABG and is facile with peripheral
perfusion and myocardial protection (IntraClude
balloon, Edwards Lifesciences), then this should
be the initial approach. An approach consisting of
dividing the procedure into separate segments
(eg, conduit harvesting, pericardiotomy and target
preparation, anastomosis)15 and assessing mastery
of each segment is a good way to evaluate
progress in proﬁciency. Gradually widening the
inclusion criteria (eg, obesity, higher risk) can be
safely done only after mastering the entire
procedure in ideal candidates.
TECAB is a demanding procedure, especially
without a robotically controlled surgical stabilizer
for off-pump procedures (Da Vinci Xi system,
Intuitive Surgical). Calls for subspecialization in
coronary surgery with a dedicated fellowship at
an experienced center to achieve proﬁciency
safely in this procedure are not without merit. For
junior surgeons who know that this is the path
they would like to pursue, this is an excellent
option. For the more senior surgeon with expertise in MIDCAB or MICS CABG, adopting robotics
and achieving proﬁciency in robotic TECAB are
attainable provided some of the principles discussed previously are followed.16
BARRIERS TO ADOPTION. Common complications
associated with robotic-assisted CABG procedures
have been well described and are listed in
Supplemental Table 1, along with methods to
prevent these complications. Even though CABG
is the most commonly performed operation by
cardiac surgeons in the United States, adoption
of robotics has been slower than for intracardiac
procedures. The reasons for this are likely
multifactorial but include the challenges
associated with LIMA to LAD artery grafting
through a small thoracotomy incision without
cardiopulmonary bypass. At all centers, isolated
CABG outcomes are meticulously scrutinized,
and for all surgeons, the LIMA to LAD artery

Ann Thorac Surg
2025;119:523-34

bypass is the hallmark of coronary surgery.
Additionally, it is imperative that interventional
cardiologists are supportive of a minimally
invasive coronary program, are willing to avoid
or reduce percutaneous intervention of the LAD
artery, and are willing to partner with cardiac
surgeons on an HCR program. The robotic
conduit harvest may be the more easily learned
portion of this procedure. Setting up the LAD
artery for anastomosis and ensuring a perfect
hand-sewn anastomosis through a smaller
thoracotomy incision require experience to
obtain proﬁciency and then mastery. For TECAB
procedures, the barriers are even greater because
the technical demands are greater. Therefore, we
recommend that surgeons ﬁrst gain proﬁciency
in robotic LIMA harvesting, followed by handsewn anastomoses through a left thoracotomy
incision.
ROBOTIC MITRAL VALVE SURGERY

Unlike noncardiac robotic procedures such as
prostatectomy or hysterectomy, robotic mitral
surgery involves the complex repair of an intracardiac valve and requires cardiopulmonary
bypass with aortic occlusion and meticulous
attention to myocardial preservation. Several
pathways exist to achieve proﬁciency (Figure 3).
The most expeditious pathway is to join an
existing robotic mitral program in an apprentice
role to gain on-the-job training and experience
from an experienced robotic surgeon or mitral
surgeon. Alternatively, the practicing surgeon or

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

HALKOS ET AL

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

senior trainee can pursue a 1- to 2-year fellowship
at an experienced program as described earlier.
The most common pathway is the development of
a robotic program de novo by a surgeon at an
institution with a predominantly sternotomy or
right thoracotomy mitral surgery experience. The
goal of the surgeon and the institution should be
to establish a robotic mitral program performing
state-of-the-art mitral surgery with an outlook to
training and continuous organic growth on the
basis of efﬁcacy and safety and without sacriﬁcing
repair rates and quality.7 Initiating robotic mitral
surgery only for marketing purposes rarely
succeeds in the absence of a substantial and
continuous volume and experience.
First, it is mandatory that the surgeon have a
thorough understanding of mitral valve disease
and surgical options for treatment. The exposure
and technical capabilities afforded the surgeon by
robotics will increase this knowledge base, but an
understanding of basic conventional repair techniques is a prerequisite. Regardless of the training
pathway taken, the surgeon must acquire expertise in several systems or technical building
blocks. These include standard and preferred approaches for mitral valve repair that must be
practiced in porcine models to achieve basic proﬁciency in the robotic maneuvers. The surgeon
must have a well-established background in conventional mitral repair and replacement techniques. Common concomitant operations that are
readily performed robotically include left atrial
appendage closure, surgical ablation of atrial
ﬁbrillation, mitral valve replacement, and

FIGURE 3 Prospective pathway for developing proﬁciency in robotic mitral valve and concomitant intracardiac
procedures.

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

HALKOS ET AL

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

tricuspid valve repair. These are opportunities for
program expansion after the initial mastery of
robotic mitral repair surgery.
Second, the surgeon needs to develop proﬁciency in analyzing CT angiograms of the chest,
abdomen, and pelvis, including 3-dimensional
reconstruction. Two critical bodies of information
are gleaned from these scans: (1) the analysis of
arterial and venous anatomy is critical for determining safe and effective perfusion strategies;
and (2) study of the right side of the chest and
cardiac location determines accessibility of the
heart from the right side of the chest, including
appropriate port positioning. Although formal
interpretation by radiology is important, only the
surgeon can discern subtle ﬁndings that affect
perfusion and right-sided chest access challenges.
Third, the surgeon needs to be competent in
the technical options for peripheral cardiopulmonary bypass and aortic occlusion. Both femoral
and axillary arterial perfusion options should be
available to the robotic team. Common contraindications for standard femoral perfusion include
the presence of an atheroma in the descending
thoracic or abdominal aorta or the presence of
iliofemoral arteries that are not suitable for cannulation or perfusion. In these cases, alternative
perfusion options such as direct aortic or axillary
artery cannulation should be considered. The
surgeon initiating a robotic team may opt for
clamp occlusion of the aorta with cannulation of
the aorta for cardioplegia delivery.17,18 Acquisition
of endoaortic balloon occlusion technology may
be useful, but not mandatory, for subsequent
organic growth of the service and for more
advanced cases such as redo operations.19
Fourth, the console and bedside surgeons need
to understand both the augmented capabilities
and the potential limitations of the robotic
instrumentation. In addition to basic instrument
controls, the surgeon must understand and practice the rules of engagement established to prevent inadvertent injury resulting from a lack of
proprioception and haptic feedback. In distinct
contrast to conventional instruments, which can
pass into and out of the chest, robotic instruments
are captive in the chest, and this feature creates a
very different paradigm for surgical tasks. The
goal of the robotic surgeon is the exact replication
of known conventional mitral procedures. Hence,
the robotic surgeon must learn to reengineer the
conventional steps of mitral procedures with robotic instrumentation. This reengineering can be
performed by the console surgeon using the active
assistance of the patient-side assistants or by the

Ann Thorac Surg
2025;119:523-34

surgeon performing the tasks by using only the
active robotic instruments. The surgeon may use a
blend of both approaches. Regardless of the
approach taken by the robotic surgeon, the key
aspect of robotic instrumentation is the replication of conventional procedures of known efﬁcacy
and durability. One of the common misconceptions about robotic mitral valve surgery is
that surgeons will have to use repair techniques
that are different from how they would approach
the valve through a sternotomy or nonrobotic
right-sided chest approach. Our philosophy is that
the conduct of the repair should not require any
modiﬁcation with a robotic approach. If surgeons
prefer complete rings or partial bands, these approaches should and can be applied with robotics.
Whether or not interrupted or running suture
annuloplasty techniques are preferred, these also
do not have to be modiﬁed (Figure 4). Similarly,
both resectional and neochordal approaches, as
well as other approaches to leaﬂet disease,
should remain consistent for mitral repair
surgeons adopting robotics into their program
(Video 3). However, the robotic approach does
allow enhanced exposure and performance of
subvalvular procedures, which may be more
challenging through a sternotomy.
When the systems of peripheral perfusion and
robotic instrumentation have been chosen and
studied by the surgeon, they must be discussed in
detail with all team members, especially anesthesia and perfusion members. This preparation
includes rehearsing team member roles, ensuring
that all cannulas and disposable devices are
available, and conﬁrming that contingency plans
are in place. With robotic instrumentation, it is
critically important that the surgical team practices the replication of conventional instrument
maneuvers with robotic instruments by using
inanimate or porcine models to the point of proﬁciency. Attempting to compensate for the
captive nature of robotic instruments in the
arrested heart may result in prolonged ischemic
times.
When the appropriate perfusion systems, rightsided chest approach, and robotic instrument
techniques have been adequately established and
practiced, the robotic program can be initiated
(Figure 5). With initiation of a robotic mitral team,
it is prudent to apply the approach to patients
with more predictable mitral valve disease,
normal
arterial
vasculature,
and
fewer
comorbidities.7,18,20 Assembly of the multiple
building blocks of a robotic program into an
actual surgical procedure requires discipline.

Ann Thorac Surg
2025;119:523-34

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

HALKOS ET AL

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

FIGURE 4 Examples of different robotic mitral annuloplasty techniques that can be achieved with a robotic platform. (A)
running annuloplasty technique; (B) interrupted annuloplasty technique.

Establishing a stepwise sequence or adopting the
steps of a successful team is critical.21-25 The
team then rehearses the steps multiple times
before the ﬁrst actual procedure. Procedures
should be initiated with a detailed brieﬁng of the
patient’s condition and the planned perfusion,
right-sided chest approach, and robotic instrumentation. There are various methods during

robotic mitral procedures that can be adopted.
Several programs exist in which the entire procedure, including pericardiotomy and traction
suture placement in the diaphragm and pericardium, is performed robotically. Other programs
commonly perform these procedures in the same
manner as they would for traditional right thoracotomy mitral procedures and dock the robot only

FIGURE 5 Protocols and processes required for successful initiation of a robotic mitral program applied to robotic approaches for valve repair. (2D, 2-dimensional; 3D, 3-dimensional; CTA:CAP, computed tomographic angiography chest,
abdomen, pelvis; TEE, transesophageal echocardiography.)

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

HALKOS ET AL

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

for the mitral repair portion of the procedure.
Either of these approaches is acceptable during a
surgeon’s adoption and development. Prospective
robotic teams should study the room ergonomics,
communication techniques, even the checklist
use of existing teams. For those intracardiac programs that use a surgical ﬁrst assistant instead of a
second bedside surgeon, special attention must be
focused on the middle portion of the procedure,
when the robotic surgeon shifts position to the
console. In addition to using the robotic instruments to perform complicated mitral tasks,
the single surgeon must maintain the stability and
protection of the patient during cardiopulmonary
bypass with the heart arrested from the conﬁnes
of the robotic console. This aspect requires
communication with all team members and situational awareness of the patient’s status. For the
surgeon, this is a departure from the conventional
cardiac operation and requires that all members of
the team be empowered to raise even the most
minor but potentially serious concerns during the
procedure. This philosophy, in which any team
member feels comfortable and safe voicing concerns during the procedure, is critical to the success of the operation.26 Although communication
is essential in any cardiac procedure, its
importance during robotic procedures is
magniﬁed because the surgeon is not necessarily
at the bedside. Communication protocols should
be adopted and practiced by the entire operative
team to prevent errors, ensure patient safety,
and avoid conﬂict. Similarly, the procedure
should be ﬁnished with a team debrieﬁng, which
will result in continuous improvement.
Once proﬁciency with robotic mitral valve surgery is obtained, additional intracardiac procedures can also be successfully completed with a
robotic approach, either as stand-alone procedures or as concomitant procedures with mitral
valve repair or replacement (Figure 3). These
operations include concomitant tricuspid valve
repair and replacement, repair of simple
congenital heart defects, septal myectomy, and
atrial ﬁbrillation ablation. Before incorporating
these procedures, it is imperative that
developing surgeons have achieved excellent
outcomes with robotic mitral repair surgery and
that ischemia and bypass times are relatively
efﬁcient. If these procedures are the sole
indications for surgery, such as left atrial
myxoma resection, these are good cases to
approach robotically even in the early
experience because they should be relatively
uncomplicated. Among the major challenges for

Ann Thorac Surg
2025;119:523-34

new programs are complications related to
inadequate myocardial protection and prolonged
ischemia and cardiopulmonary bypass times.
Therefore, patient safety must always be
considered when moving into this next phase for
robotic intracardiac procedures. It is our
recommendation that simpler procedures, such
as repair of posterior leaﬂet prolapse or left atrial
myxoma resection, be mastered before taking on
concomitant procedures or more complex repairs
or replacements.
Additionally, we have found that the robotic
approach can be very useful for carefully selected
patients who have undergone previous sternotomy. A right-sided chest approach, whether performed with robotic assistance or conventionally
can obviate the need for extensive mediastinal
dissection, and this can be useful in patients with
a history of cardiac surgery, including coronary
bypass surgery, aortic valve replacement, aortic
surgery, or previous mitral surgery. In these cases,
expertise with the IntraClude balloon may be
required to eliminate the need to dissect out the
aorta for clamping and direct antegrade cardioplegia. Patients with patent grafts, especially
the LIMA, require careful consideration and
alternative myocardial protection techniques
including the use of retrograde cardioplegia,
deeper systemic hypothermia, or ﬁbrillatory arrest
may be considered.27
BARRIERS TO ADOPTION. Complications associated
with robotic mitral valve procedures have been
well described and are included in Supplemental
Table 2, along with methods for prevention.
Robotic mitral valve surgery has seen steady
growth over the last decade, especially compared
with robotic-assisted revascularization. One of
the main reasons is that robotics facilitates
mitral valve procedures because of the enhanced
exposure, high deﬁnition optics, and the
added ﬂexibility and instrumentation with
multidimensional robotic instrumentation. Among
the main barriers to adoption are the relatively
lower volumes of mitral procedures performed
across cardiac surgery programs. With limited
volumes, it may not be possible for surgeons and
operative teams to achieve signiﬁcant growth and
adequate case volumes to attain proﬁciency with
these procedures. Therefore, even though there
may be steady growth in robotic intracardiac
procedures, it is possible that these procedures
will be concentrated in higher-volume programs
that already have established mitral valve surgical
volumes.

Ann Thorac Surg

INVITED EXPERT REVIEW

2025;119:523-34

FUTURE ROBOTIC ADVANCES: ROBOTIC AORTIC VALVE
REPLACEMENT

Once success with intracardiac robotic approaches
to valvular heart disease is achieved as outlined
earlier, surgeons may wish to embark on replicating traditional open or minimally invasive surgical aortic valve replacement. Badhwar and
colleagues28 and Wei and collegues29 from the
same group of investigators have developed the
technique of robotic aortic valve replacement
(RAVR) through a right mini–lateral thoracotomy
endoscopic approach. This novel technique uses
the identical platform, working incision, and port
placements as for robotic mitral valve surgery, but
it enables the surgeon to perform aortic valve
replacement using conventional biologic or mechanical prostheses without the need for sutureless
valves. An aortotomy is performed, the valve is
excised and the annulus debrided with the robotic
scissors, sutures are placed in the annulus, the
prosthesis is delivered and secured, and the aortotomy is closed, all performed robotically and all
in a fashion nearly identical to that of open aortic
valve replacement. RAVR is the next possible step
in the evolution of an established robotic program
with experience in robotic mitral valve replacement and repair. Because this procedure requires
additional choreography between the console surgeon and the table-side team for the management
of calciﬁc debris, suture management, and coordinated efforts for aortotomy closure, additional
team training is recommended. Currently, more
than 200 RAVR procedures have been performed
since the ﬁrst launch of RAVR in January 2020,
several cases in international institutions, according to the technique established by Badhwar and

HALKOS ET AL

ROBOTIC CARDIAC SURGERY TRAINING

colleagues.28 As of November 2023, 10 centers in
the United States, Spain, Saudi Arabia, Czech
Republic, Brazil, and Australia have actively
commenced RAVR programs.
In conclusion, with adequate preparation and
planning, as well as expertise and experience with
traditional cardiac surgical procedures, incorporating a robotic platform into a cardiac surgery
program can be accomplished on the basis of the
principles described in this review. Maintaining
the same principles and techniques for coronary
surgery, or intracardiac procedures, and maintaining the fundamentals of myocardial protection and cardiopulmonary bypass are essential to
ensure excellent technical and clinical outcomes
and to optimize patient safety.
FUNDING SOURCES
The authors have no funding sources to disclose.

DISCLOSURES
Michael E. Halkos reports a relationship with Medtronic that includes:
board membership, consulting or advisory, and speaking and lecture
fees. Husam H. Balkhy reports a relationship with AtriCure that includes:
consulting or advisory; with Edwards Lifesciences that includes:
consulting or advisory; and with Intuitive Surgical that includes:
consulting or advisory. Eugene A. Grossi reports a relationship with
Medtronic that includes: board membership and consulting or advisory;
and with Edwards Lifesciences that includes: consulting or advisory.
Arnar Geirsson reports a relationship with Medtronic Cardiac Rhythm
and Heart Failure Management that includes: consulting or advisory; and
with Edwards Lifesciences that includes: consulting or advisory. Marc
Gillinov reports a relationship with Edwards Lifesciences that includes:
consulting or advisory; with Medtronic that includes: consulting or
advisory; with Artivion that includes: consulting or advisory; with Abbott
that includes: consulting or advisory; with ClearFlow that includes:
consulting or advisory; with AtriCure that includes: consulting or advisory; and with Johnson & Johnson that includes: consulting or advisory.
Serguei Melnitchouk reports a relationship with Medtronic that includes:
consulting or advisory. Douglas A. Murphy reports a relationship with
Intuitive Surgical that includes: consulting or advisory. All other authors
declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.
