Special Issue: Mitral Valve Repair: Invited Case Videos

Tricks and tips to facilitate robotic approach for mitral
valve repair
Hugo M. N. Issa, MD, Syed Rehman, MD, Daniel Burns, MD, Marc Gillinov, MD, and Kevin Hodges, MD,
Cleveland, Ohio
From the Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Cardiac Surgery, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
Ohio.
Read at The American Association for Thoracic Surgery Mitral Conclave, New York, New York, May 4-5, 2023.
Received for publication July 30, 2023; revisions received Aug 30, 2023; accepted for publication Sept 16, 2023;
available ahead of print Sept 26, 2023.
Address for reprints: Hugo M. N. Issa, MD, Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Cleveland
Clinic, 9500 Euclid Ave, Cleveland, OH 44195 (E-mail: hugocardiaca@gmail.com).
JTCVS Techniques 2023;22:84-5
2666-2507
Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of The American Association for Thoracic Surgery. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Video clip is available online.

The robotic approach for degenerative mitral repair is safe
and effective.1,2 Nevertheless, transitioning from sternotomy
to the robotic approach requires training and adaptation
involving clinical and technical aspects (Figure 1). Patient selection and surgical technical aspects of the robotic approach
are essential to achieve excellent results.2 This video aims to
demonstrate a robotically assisted mitral valve repair for Barlow’s disease. The video (Video 1) will focus on critical steps
and helpful tricks for a robotic approach to complex repairs.
CASE VIDEO SUMMARY
A 29-year-old man presented with symptomatic severe
mitral regurgitation. The patient’s informed consent was
obtained for this publication; institutional review board
approval was not required.
Transesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated diffuse
bileaflet prolapse. Based on these findings, a repair was

MITRAL VALVE REPAIR
VIA STERNOTOMY

MITRAL VALVE REPAIR
VIA STERNOTOMY

ADAPTATION
TRAINING

MITRAL VALVE REPAIR
ROBOTICALLY ASSISTED

Transitioning from sternotomy to robotically assisted mitral surgery requires adaptation
and training that involves patient selection, clinical experience, surgical technique, and
team synergy. Herein, we present a video that shows several key steps and helpful tricks
to facilitate a robotic approach to complex mitral repairs.

Transition from sternotomy to robotic mitral repair
requires adaptation and training.

CENTRAL MESSAGE

There are a number of key steps
and helpful tricks that facilitate a
robotic approach to complex
mitral repairs.

planned to consist of anterior neochords, posterior leaflet
resection, sliding valvuloplasty, and annuloplasty. The patient was brought to the operating room. General anesthesia
was performed with double-lumen endotracheal tube intubation to allow single left lung ventilation.
The setup for the robot approach is shown in Video 1. The
right femoral vessels are exposed first. After assessment of
the femoral vessels, a small lateral minithoracotomy is
made in the fourth intercostal space (ICS), starting from
the anterior axillary line and extending anteriorly. The robotic atrial retractor is placed in the fourth ICS, in the midclavicular line. The left instrument port is placed in the
second ICS, approximately halfway between the midclavicular and the anterior axillary lines. The right instrument port
is placed in the sixth ICS below the anterior axillary line.
Two angiocatheters are placed in the midaxillary line for
posterior pericardial traction sutures. We routinely use a
detachable clamp to crossclamp the ascending aorta and antegrade root cardioplegia to arrest the heart.
The repair begins by placing 2 sets of artificial chordae to
the anterior leaflet. In cases where the likelihood of needing
anterior neochords is high, it is best to insert there before

ADAPTATION
TRAINING

MITRAL VALVE REPAIR
ROBOTICALLY ASSISTED

FIGURE 1. Transitioning from sternotomy to robotically assisted mitral surgery requires adaptation and training that involves patient selection, clinical
experience, surgical technique, and team synergy. Herein we present a clinical case that portrays several key steps and helpful tricks to facilitate a robotic
approach to this complex mitral repair.

JTCVS Techniques c December 2023

Special Issue: Mitral Valve Repair: Invited Case Videos

performed. In this case, we decided to perform a medial
commisuroplasty due to a residual P3 prolapse.
Postoperative transesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated no residual mitral regurgitation and a mean gradient
of 2 mm Hg. The patient’s hospital course was uncomplicated.
CONCLUSIONS
Successful repair of Barlow’s disease often requires multiple techniques and can be complex. Several key steps and
helpful tricks are shown in Video 1 that facilitate a robotic
approach to these complex repairs.
VIDEO 1. Demonstration of a robotically assisted mitral valve repair for
Barlow’s disease. Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.org/article/S26662507(23)00366-8/fulltext.

completing a posterior leaflet resection because the reconstructed posterior leaflet can obstruct the surgeon’s view
of the papillary muscles. Next is performed resection of
P2 and detachment of the P1 and P3 scallops from the
annulus for sliding repair. A key step is identifying the location on the annulus where the 2 halves of the leaflet will
meet to achieve perfect symmetry. The posterior leaflet is
reconstructed using a modified interrupted suture technique.3 Next an annuloplasty using a flexible band is performed, which allow us to use a running suture technique.3,4
In most cases, the need for a commisuroplasty is assessed
on static testing after the annuloplasty is performed. This
suture is easy to place, even after annuloplasty, and is occasionally unnecessary after other repair techniques have been

The authors reported no conflicts of interest.
The Journal policy requires editors and reviewers to
disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling manuscripts for which they may have a conflict of interest. The
editors and reviewers of this article have no conflicts of
interest.
