Editorial

How to start a robotic coronary bypass grafting program:
suggestions from an experienced robotic-assisted coronary
surgeon
Amalia A. Jonsson, Michael E. Halkos
Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA
Dunwoody Rd, Ste 200, Atlanta, GA, USA. Email: mhalkos@emory.edu.
Keywords: Program development; robotic cardiac surgery; coronary bypass

Robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is
a less-invasive option for patients with isolated left anterior
descending (LAD) disease or selected, less-complex multivessel coronary disease providing the benefits of the left
internal mammary artery (LIMA) to the LAD graft while
avoiding the morbidity of a sternotomy. For patients with
multivessel coronary artery disease (CAD), this technique
can be combined with percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI) for a hybrid revascularization strategy (1). We have
previously published our results from our first 1,000
consecutive robotic-assisted CABG cases demonstrating
the learning curve for this technique with a threshold for
mastery, defined as no further improvement in outcomes,
at approximately 250 cases (2). However, even early in our
experience safety and efficacy were demonstrated.
Our robotic-assisted CABG program evolved from other
minimally-invasive techniques at Emory. In the 1990’s,
several Emory surgeons adopted minimally invasive direct
coronary artery bypass. Adoption and subsequently, growth,
was slow and limited by post-thoracotomy pain and the
challenges associated with this approach, which included
exposure for LIMA harvesting and expertise with offpump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB). In the late 1990’s,
Emory surgeons developed expertise in OPCAB (3). In
the early 2000’s, endoscopic atraumatic coronary artery
bypass (endoACAB) became the primary minimally-invasive
CABG approach (4). With the first purchase of the da Vinci
robotic system in 2008–2009, endoACAB was abandoned

for robotic LIMA harvesting. Unlike shafted instruments
and low fidelity visualization with the endoscopic LIMA
harvest, robotic technology introduced magnified and highdefinition visualization and instrumentation with multiple
degrees of motion which simplified the LIMA harvest. The
transition from a small minimally invasive CABG program
to a destination reference center required collaboration
from multiple disciplines. The initiation and subsequent
growth of our program was largely driven by our Emory
interventional cardiology colleagues, who appreciated the
superiority of the LIMA-LAD graft but also recognized
the shortcomings of vein grafting the non-LAD territories,
especially for patients with less complex CAD. In our earlier
experience, a majority of these patients presented with acute
coronary syndromes (ACS) and were inpatients at the time
of consultation. We continue to perform these procedures
on this patient population, but the majority of recent
growth has been in patients seen first in the ambulatory
setting. These are patients with stable CAD or those
that are referred from outside our healthcare system that
presented with an ACS due to a non-LAD culprit lesion
that was treated percutaneously. Our hospital administration
and nursing leadership committed to dedicated robotic
operating room teams until expertise was obtained prior to
educating other staff members with this procedure.
Adopting any new procedure in cardiac surgery is
often met with skepticism and quality concerns. One of
the critical steps for the early success of our program, and

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):436-438 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2023-rcabg-10

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

to ensure quality with this approach, was our insistence
to document LIMA-LAD patency after the procedure.
This was either done with postoperative catheterization
prior to discharge or when feasible, with completion
angiography in a hybrid room. This was done routinely
in the first 100–200 patients and is still done selectively in
isolated LAD patients and routinely in all hybrid patients
that have PCI after LIMA-LAD bypass. Today, CT
angiography is widely available and acceptable and can be
done postoperatively in the hospital or outpatient setting.
Postoperative or completion angiography accomplished
three goals for our program: (I) it ensured graft patency
and quality; (II) it provided confirmation of the approach
and instilled confidence with our referring cardiologists
inside and outside the Emory system; (III) we learned a
lot about our anastomotic techniques and were able to
make subsequent modifications in our evolution to perfect
anastomoses, from the length and tortuosity of our LIMA
grafts to the heel and toe suture techniques to ensure a
patulous anastomosis. The postoperative or completion
angiograms, in our opinion, were the single quality control
factor that led to the success of our program. The other
critical factor was appropriate patient selection. In our early
experience, we required that patients have an appropriate
body habitus, adequate chest cavity size to facilitate robotic
LIMA harvesting, hemodynamic stability without ongoing
ischemia signs or symptoms, and a good LAD target for the
anastomosis. Currently, we will offer this procedure if one
of these criteria are not met but in general patients need to
have either favorable body habitus or a good LAD target for
anastomosis. We still routinely avoid this procedure for any
patients that are unstable or with ongoing ischemia.
A multidisciplinary endeavor like this requires
engagement and commitment from all members of the
team. An example of this is our fast-track protocol lead
by cardiac anesthesiology, where selected robotic CABG
patients bypass the intensive care unit. This protocol
was developed to identify certain patients that could be
recovered in a postoperative anesthesia care unit and if
specific criteria were met, these patients could then be
transferred directly to the telemetry unit avoiding an
intensive care unit stay altogether. This protocol in addition
to decreasing hospital length of stay resulted in a 15%
net reduction in inpatient costs. Importantly, there were
no deaths or strokes reported in this analysis, and rates of
adverse events were unchanged among the groups (5).
Capitalizing on the widely accepted advantages of

LIMA-LAD grafting, robotic-assisted CABG procedures
can be adopted by coronary surgeons, provide the benefits
to patients with either isolated LAD disease or less complex
multivessel disease that may have otherwise been treated
with multivessel PCI, and lead to increase coronary surgical
volumes for a cardiac program. The intent of this procedure
is not to deny traditional sternotomy CABG for patients
with complex CAD or even a multi-arterial grafting strategy
for patients that may benefit from additional arterial grafts.
Instead, the goal is to ensure that all patients with LAD
disease get treated with the best option available, which
in many, or even most cases, is the LIMA graft. Having
this option available ensures that the best treatment will
be provided to each individual patient in a collaborative
approach with interventional cardiology.

Acknowledgments
Footnote
to declare.
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
