Masters of Cardiothoracic Surgery

Robotic endoscopic aortic valve replacement with rapid
deployment valve: technique and outcomes
Hiroto Kitahara, Sarah Nisivaco, Yazan Al Jamal, Husam H. Balkhy
Department of Surgery, Section of Cardiac and Thoracic Surgery, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Maryland Avenue, MC5040, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Email: hbalkhy@surgery.bsd.uchicago.edu.
Keywords: Robotic aortic valve replacement (robotic AVR); rapid deployment valve; endoscopic aortic valve replacement (endoscopic AVR)

Clinical vignette
We present a case of a 71-year-old man with aortic valve
insufficiency who underwent robotic endoscopic aortic
valve replacement (AVR) using a rapid deployment valve.
Transesophageal echocardiography showed preserved
ejection fraction and severe aortic valve insufficiency. A
computed tomography scan was performed, and the aortic
valve size was estimated using three-dimensional imaging
software.
Surgical technique
Preparation
The patient was placed supine with a vertical roll under the
right scapula. General anesthesia was induced with a singlelumen endotracheal tube. External defibrillator pads were
placed on the chest and back.
Operation
With the lungs deflated, a Veress needle was inserted in
the 3rd intercostal space to insufflate carbon dioxide. An
8-mm camera port was placed in the 3rd intercostal space
in the anterior axillary line. An 8-mm port for a dynamic
atrial retractor was placed in the 5th intercostal space
parasternally. All ports except for the first were placed under
direct camera vision. An 8-mm right arm port was placed in
the 6th intercostal space in the posterior axillary line, and an
8-mm left arm port in the 2nd intercostal space in the midclavicular line. The original camera port was removed, and

the incision was extended slightly to accommodate the rapid
deployment valve sizer. An XXS-size soft tissue retractor
was placed at the site and used as a working port. A new
8-mm camera port was placed anterior to the working port
in the 3rd intercostal space. The robot was docked from
the patient’s left side. Cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated
with percutaneous femoral arterial and venous cannulation.
The pericardium was opened 2 cm above the phrenic
nerve. An epicardial pacemaker lead was placed on the right
ventricle. The aorta was gently retracted using the dynamic
retractor, and careful dissection was carried out between the
aorta and the pulmonary artery. The aorta was completely
separated from the pulmonary artery. A trans-thoracic
aortic clamp was inserted in the 2nd intercostal space and
gently advanced into the space between the aorta and the
pulmonary artery. An aortic cross-clamp was applied, and
an antegrade needle was inserted in the aorta. Del Nido
cardioplegia was delivered. The left atrium was opened
using monopolar scissors, and a percutaneous drain was
inserted. A transverse aortotomy was made at the antegrade
needle site. The aortic valve was exposed using the dynamic
retractor. Aortic valve leaflets were sharply excised with
monopolar scissors under excellent visualization. The rapiddeployment valve sizer was inserted through the working
port, and the annulus was sized. A size ‘medium’ valve
was chosen. Three stay sutures were placed at the nadir
of each cusp and brought out through the working port.
The sutures were placed in the rapid deployment valve.
The valve was introduced through the working port and
deployed after its correct position was confirmed. The valve
was balloon expanded for 30 seconds. The left atriotomy

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):244-246 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2025-ravr-10

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 14, No 3 May 2025

was closed with a 4-0 Prolene running suture, leaving the
drain for deairing. The aortotomy was closed with a 4-0
Prolene double-layer running suture. The aortic crossclamp was released. After extensive de-airing the drain was
removed, and the left atrium was closed. Cardiopulmonary
bypass was discontinued. The femoral cannulas were
removed using pre-closure devices.
Completion
Postoperative transesophageal echocardiography showed
a well-seated rapid deployment valve with no paravalvular
leakage. The mean pressure gradient was 6 mmHg. The
patient was extubated within 24 hours and discharged home
on postoperative day 2.
Comments
Clinical results
We have progressively developed our robotic endoscopic
AVR technique, transitioning from a right anterior minithoracotomy approach to a robotic totally endoscopic
approach (1). Robotic assistance was increasingly utilized
for key steps of the procedure, including antegrade
needle insertion, aortotomy, valve excision, and valve
suture placement. Since transitioning fully to the robotic
endoscopic approach, we have performed a total of 61
robotic AVR cases. Our first robotic endoscopic AVR
using a rapid deployment valve was performed in 2019 (2).
Since then, we have completed 33 cases (20 stenosis, 13
insufficiency). The mean age was 71 years old. The mean
STS score was 2.3. Four patients (12%) had previous
cardiac surgery. The valve sizes included small [3],
medium [9], large [11], and extra-large [10]. Concomitant
procedures were performed in 11 patients, including five
mitral valve repairs, two totally endoscopic coronary artery
bypasses, and four atrial fibrillation ablations. There were
no conversions to sternotomy. The mean length of hospital
stay was 4.5 days. No perioperative mortality or stroke was
observed.
Advantages
Rapid deployment valves have become one of the options in
surgical AVR, offering equivalent outcomes to conventional
surgical sutured or trans-catheter valves (3). The rapid
deployment valve is primarily used in minimally invasive
surgeries, benefiting from its small size and ability to reduce

operative time compared to conventional sutured valves,
especially in cases involving concomitant procedures (4,5).
In our cases, the rapid deployment valve enables a truly
totally endoscopic approach without mini-thoracotomy,
taking full advantage of the benefits of robotic technology
which minimizes surgical invasiveness. Moreover, both
robotic technology and rapid-deployment valves allow
variable concomitant procedures to be performed while
maintaining an endoscopic approach, thereby broadening
the patient population eligible for minimally invasive
AVR options, such as those with aortic valve plus mitral or
coronary disease.
Caveats
Several centers have initiated mini-thoracotomy or
endoscopic robotic AVR programs (6). We believe that
the use of rapid-deployment valves in endoscopic robotic
AVR maximizes the advantages of robotic technology
facilitating early functional recovery while achieving longterm outcomes comparable to those of the conventional
approach.
Acknowledgments
None.
Footnote
other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
