Editorial

Tackling MAC and other complex mitral valve repair scenarios
through the lens of robotics
Didier F. Loulmet, Ali Hage
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, USA
Program, NYU Langone Health, 530 First Avenue, Suite 9V, New York, NY 10016, USA. Email: loulmetd@aol.com.
Keywords: Robotic mitral valve repair; mitral annular calcification (MAC); mitral valve repair (MV repair)

In the spectrum of degenerative mitral valve (MV) diseases,
mitral annular calcification (MAC) can manifest as the
primary and sole cause of MV stenosis, or as one of several
lesions, such as those found in Barlow’s disease, leading to
MV regurgitation. The first scenario offers bleak chances
of repair due to insufficient pliable leaflet tissue. Moreover,
MAC extending to the leaflets and left ventricular (LV)
wall may reduce both the MV orifice and the LV cavity
size. MV replacement often necessitates MAC removal
to create adequate space for implanting a typically small
prosthetic valve. The second scenario is significantly more
favorable for achieving MV repair. The deciding factor for
proceeding with MV repair is not the mere presence of
MAC, but the quantity of pliable leaflet tissue remaining
after the removal of the most dystrophic portion of
the valve. The inherent increase in leaflet size found in
Barlow’s valves usually allows enough tissue for MV repair.
Complete MAC excision and proper atrioventricular (AV)
groove reconstruction are essential for achieving a secure
zone for annuloplasty device attachment, resolving MV
orifice distortion, and terminating further calcification
growth and extension. These are important considerations
for the quality and durability of MV valve repair. Due to
the increased complexity of MV surgery in the presence of
MAC, we believe robotics is “the right tool for the right
job” (1,2).
While complete MAC resection and AV groove
reconstruction have become our standard approach, a few
MV repair or replacement techniques that involve leaving
MAC in place and working around it have been developed

in the past and used again recently (3). The understandable
rationale behind these techniques is to keep surgery simple
and avoid the risk of postoperative AV groove disruption.
To perform proper MAC removal and AV groove
reconstruction, we abide by ten technical principles:
(I)
Unobstructed visualization of the calcific bar,
including its extension along the annulus, onto
the leaflets, the LV wall, and the left atrium (LA),
is required during valve analysis.
(II)
The calcium bar is typically surrounded by a
reactive fibrous layer. The ideal dissection plane
lies between the calcification and the fibrous layer.
Electrocautery, as a dissection tool, allows for the
preservation of as much fibrous tissue as possible
on the myocardial side to reinforce the suturing
zone and preserve the base of the posterior leaflet
(PL). En bloc resection of the MAC is preferable
to minimize the risk of debris dispersion.
(III) The PL tertiary chordae are excised, and the
papillary muscle attachments to the myocardium
are divided. This facilitates repositioning the PL
against the interventricular septum with a dualblade retractor, thereby enhancing visualization of
the AV groove and the posterior wall of the LV.
(IV) AV groove dissociation is diagnosed when the
epicardium is visible between the LA and LV
myocardial edges. For narrow defects with good
myocardial edges, primary repair with horizontal
mattress sutures on a pledget is appropriate.
Otherwise, the use of a patch is recommended

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2026;15(1):10 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2025-dmv-0164

Loulmet and Hage. Tackling MAC with robotics

when the myocardial edges are separated by more
than 10 mm, appear fragile, or when the LV cavity
or MV orifice dimensions are small.
(V)
Precision is paramount when placing stitches on
the LV edge for either primary or patch repair of
the AV groove. We consistently use 2-0 Ethibond
horizontal mattress sutures with pledget. These
sutures should be placed deep enough to engage
compact muscle without becoming transmural or
including the AV groove epicardium. We do not
rely on myocardial trabeculations.
(VI) To ensure proper patch attachment to the LV edge
using the Cor-Knot system, the bedside surgeon
must individually visualize each knot as the
console surgeon simultaneously holds the patch
firmly against the LV edge during tightening.
This process is essential to achieve sufficient
compression of the patch on the myocardial edge
without tearing it.
(VII) When performing a direct closure of the AV
groove, the mattress sutures placed at the LV edge
are also passed through the LA edge and then
reserved for anchoring the annuloplasty device.
Thus, AV groove closure becomes effective
when the annuloplasty stitches are tied. To avoid
any tearing on the LV side when tightening the
annuloplasty knots, the console surgeon holds and
pushes the annuloplasty device deep towards the
LV base to release tension on the LV edge.
(VIII) When performing patch closure of the AV groove,
a second line of mattress sutures (2-0 Ethibond
without pledget) is needed to attach the patch to
the LA edge. The distance between the LA and
LV suture lines should be kept proportional to the
AV dissociation; however, this distance should be
kept as small as possible to avoid a postoperative
drop in LV ejection fraction, since patches do
not contract. The LA sutures will be reserved for
anchoring the annuloplasty device.
(IX) The rim of the patch left above the LA suture
line is used to reattach the PL. This rim can be
made higher in areas where the height of the PL
is considered too small.
(X)
The successful conduct of this process depends
on the presence of more than one experienced
surgeon, each critically analyzing and approving
the repair strategy and its execution.
While complex MV surgical techniques, including MAC

excision and AV groove reconstruction, are performable via
a sternotomy approach, we believe that robotics facilitates
their execution according to the principles stated above.
The near-microscopic visualization and superior dexterity
offered by robotics make it the ideal tool for effectively
performing complex techniques. Based on comprehensive
valve analysis, the surgical sequence is collaboratively
planned and agreed upon by the console and patientside surgeons. The AV groove defect is visualized and
assessed with unparalleled clarity, enabling collaborative
reconstruction between both surgeons. Avoiding transmural
stitches or LV edge tearing during AV groove repair is
critical for successful outcomes. The ability of robotic
instruments to achieve the balance between depth and
careful tissue handling contributes to the overall safety and
effectiveness of the procedure. This approach should be
reserved for a dedicated team with advanced experience in
robotics and MV surgery (1,2,4,5).
Acknowledgments
None.
Footnote
to declare.
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
