ADULT: MITRAL VALVE: INVITED EXPERT OPINION

Two decades of experience with robotic mitral valve
repair: What have we learned?
Didier F. Loulmet, MD,a,b and Eugene A. Grossi, MDa,b

Video clip is available online.

What challenges come with repairing the degenerative
mitral valve (MV)? What insight into this condition have
we gained from our dedicated robotic practice? When performing robotic MV repair, optimal visualization of the
entire MV apparatus allows for a more precise and comprehensive valve analysis compared with any other surgical approaches or imaging modalities. Enhanced visualization has
made us aware of some pathologic features that we find
important to address for perfecting MV repair strategies
and outcomes. The purpose of this editorial is to discuss
the most common ones.
SAM (systolic anterior motion) was the first serious
adverse effect of MV repair to be recognized.1,2 A ratio of
[posterior leaflet height] to [anteroposterior orifice diameter] greater than 1 to 3 after annuloplasty was found to
be the main risk factor. Therefore, it was advised to decrease
the height of the posterior leaflet (PL) and avoid excessive
reduction annuloplasty to maintain the normal 1:4 ratio.3
This has been one of the core principles in MV repair. In
the last 2 decades, earlier indications for MV repair have
given rise to operating on patients with smaller and hyperdynamic LVs (left ventricles), which has been recognized
as a new risk factor for postoperative SAM.4,5 This led us
to think more globally and 3 dimensionally about LV topology. We have become more attentive to preserving the balance between the LV inflow and outflow spaces. Inflow and
outflow must be understood as 2 virtual spaces obtained by
dividing the LV cavity according to a plane passing through
the 2 trigones and the LV apex point. On the arrested heart,
the dividing plane corresponds to the anatomic continuity
From the aNYU Grossman School of Medicine and bDepartment of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY.
Received for publication Oct 24, 2023; revisions received Jan 5, 2024; accepted for
publication Jan 18, 2024; available ahead of print Jan 23, 2024.
Address for reprints: Didier F. Loulmet, MD, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery,
NYU Langone Health, 530 First Ave, Suite 9V, New York, NY 10016 (E-mail:
didier.loulmet@nyulangone.org or loulmetd@aol.com).
JTCVS Techniques 2024;24:76-81
2666-2507
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

JTCVS Techniques c April 2024

Robotic mitral valve repair is the less-invasive and
most-precise surgical approach.

CENTRAL MESSAGE

Robotics-enhanced vision allows
for precise and comprehensive
mitral valve analysis. Better understanding of the pathologic
details enables performing individualized/tailored repairs.

formed by the anterior leaflet (AL), its marginal chordae,
and the PMs (papillary muscle). Via conventional sternotomy, the LV inflow is visualized through the MV orifice
and the outflow through the aortic orifice. Alternatively, robotics allows for complete access and exploration of both
the inflow and outflow through the mitral orifice just by lifting the AL margin with dynamic retraction. A septal myomectomy can be done through the mitral orifice without
detaching the AL (Video 1 @14min 35sec). We are performing septal myomectomy routinely in case of prominent
sigmoid septum, particularly when the angle between the
aortic and mitral orifice plane nears 90 .6 Likewise, we
commonly remove all structural anomalies present in the
LV outflow that predispose to SAM. These include muscle
bands originating from the LV apex that attach directly to
the AL without chordal intermediary, large accessory PM
supporting a short AL secondary chorda, large trabeculations located between the septal knuckle and LV apex, and
anteriorly displaced PM bases obliterating the LV apex.
These different configurations tend to restrict AL motion
into the outflow during early systole and initiate SAM.7 Robotics makes all these contributory anatomic features accessible to complete or partial excision through the mitral
orifice. We have found these outflow enlargement techniques very efficient in preventing the occurrence of

Loulmet and Grossi

Adult: Mitral Valve: Invited Expert Opinion

entirely and reconstructing the MV annulus whenever
possible (Video 1 @3min).

VIDEO 1. Robotic mitral valve repair in a case with MAC and a high risk
of postoperative SAM. Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.org/article/
S2666-2507(24)00043-9/fulltext.

postoperative SAM in the setting of smaller and hyperdynamic LVs.
MAC (mitral annular calcification) is a common degenerative finding evolving along PL hinge; it will become more
frequent with our aging population. MV repair complexity
rises significantly when MAC involves more than one
annular segment. MAC recognition on preoperative imaging is inconsistent. There are no imaging modalities that
can precisely and unfailingly render MAC location, shape,
and extension. Ultrasound scans have low sensitivity and
specificity in detecting annular calcifications. Ultrasound
scans are only useful for evaluating MAC extension to the
PL—the length of residual leaflet determines the possibility
of MV repair. Radiographs are more sensitive in detecting
calcifications. MAC can be seen on regular radiographs of
the chest, cardiac catheterization, or computed tomography.
Gated computed tomography angiography with 3dimensional reconstruction gives the most informative
MAC representation; it is used more commonly as part of
our preoperative robotic MV repair workup. However, no
preoperative imaging technique will reach the precision of
valve analysis obtained with robotic vision. MAC is intuitively misconceived as a bent cylinder with regular edges
evolving along the mitral annulus. It seems innately
possible to safely cast needle bites around it as it were a
solid anchor to fix annuloplasty devices or artificial valves.
Some authors still recommend leaving it in place and working around it, although this approach has shown substandard
results in past reports.8 Monobloc excision with enhanced
visualization has made us more knowledgeable about
MAC frequency, location, shape, and extension.9 Experience has shown us that MAC can develop haphazardly
into wildly diverging configurations like a rhizome. Its parts
have different consistency owing to variable degree in
mineralization or core liquefaction. Overall, MAC is an unpredictable heterogeneous structure upon which we cannot
rely as a tissue for suturing either around or through it.
Therefore, our practice has evolved towards removing it

SEMANTICS
Let’s examine another important finding consequent to
enhanced visualization. The anatomic region separating
the PL scallops is commonly called the “cleft” (eg, the
P1-P2 or P2-P3 cleft). Originally, the word “cleft” was
used in valve pathology to describe the AL slit found in
AV canal malformations. In AV canal, an AL cleft can be
complete (from the margin to the hinge) or partial and
does not have any specific chordal system other than
some secondary chordae. “Cleft,” a pathologic connotation,
makes it an erroneous term to name the normal segmentation area between the PL scallops. Robotic visualization
of a normal PL shows a continuity between PL scallops consisting of a leaflet pleat supported by an organized chordal
system, whose configuration recapitulates those of the anterior or posterior commissure (Figure 1). A commissure is a
complex and highly differentiated structure, therefore prone
to developmental defects. Failure to differentiate into a
proper commissural configuration generates a spectrum of
various anomalies: (1) partial or complete chordal fusion
(Figure 2); (2) calcified band linking the MV annulus to a
PM head and supporting some commissural chordae
(Figure 3); and (3) complete failure of commissural delamination resulting in a fibrous or calcified band plastered to
the LV wall (Figure 4). Such conditions most often cause
leaflet tethering by restricting commissural motion. Occasionally, a prolapse can result from a laterally bound PM
slewing towards the mitral orifice. In our experience with
degenerative MV diseases, the commissures (either between the AL and PL or between the PL scallops) are often
subject to these malformations. A triangular or quadrangular excision of the pathologic commissure followed by
suturing the corresponding segments together is our
preferred approach to restore normal leaflet motion and prevent calcification in these cases.
PLASTY OR PLASTIC?
There are radically different ways of performing a MV
repair today. Differences are reflected in sharp divides between the adherents and defectors of the classic excision
techniques.10,11 The long-term results of MV repair were
established with the classic excision and reconstruction
techniques.12 Excisions are justified by Barlow’s most
distinctive macroscopic features, namely, excessive leaflet
tissue. Excision concerns the most prolapsed and dystrophic
leaflets segments, which may include leaflet ulcerations,
fibrotic and myxoid thickening, cartilaginous and calcific
transformations, calcification liquefaction. Reconstruction
consists in detaching, relocating, and suturing some of the
remaining segments with the aim of obtaining a configuration that conforms to the native MV structure and function.
JTCVS Techniques c Volume 24, Number C

Adult: Mitral Valve: Invited Expert Opinion

Loulmet and Grossi

FIGURE 1. A normal P1-P2 commissure.

From an execution standpoint, the classic excisionreconstruction techniques present special challenges. A
need for simplification was fostered by the emergence of
the less invasive approaches in the mid-1990s. Reduced access and visualization led some surgeons to avoid excising.
The use of artificial chordae became an alternative technique accepted by less invasive as well as conventional surgeons. Nevertheless, the classic excisional techniques have
remained our preferred way for repairing the MV notably in
younger patients for following reasons. First, as opposed to
the less-invasive approaches, robotics allows for complete
thoracoscopic MV repair without any compromise in access
or visualization. Robotics facilitates MV repair execution
whether using excisional or nonexcisional techniques. Second, we believe excising advance degenerative lesions stabilizes the degenerative process as shown by the low
incidence of long-term failure caused by disease progression after excisional repair.13 Third, as a reminder, artificial
chordae are made of Gore-Tex sutures (W. L. Gore & Associates, Inc), a material mainly composed of air (70%).
Gore-Tex material is porous, stretchable, and vulnerable
to calcification as observed during reoperations by their
transformation into rigid twigs. Gore-Tex sutures were not
engineered or tested for flexing every second and staying
pliable for a lifetime. Last, the use of artificial chordae requires the proper selection of stable implantation sites to
provide durable leaflet coaptation. The frequency of subvalvar anatomic variations makes this difficult. “The MV

JTCVS Techniques c April 2024

apparatus, including the PMs, is as unique to each individual as one’s own fingerprints” as stated by the late great MV
anatomist Dr Solomon Victor.14 Robotic vision has shown
us that PMs are inconsistent in length, texture, elasticity,
trunklets arrangement, and quality of attachment to the
LV wall. At the end of the spectrum, PM noncompaction
can result into multiple small myocardial stems instead of
well-structured PM trunks. If not fully appreciated, these
common anatomic variants may derail an apparently standardized and deceptively simple technique.
VISUALIZATION, FOCUS, AND TECHNICAL
POSSIBILITIES
The figure-ground principle of Gestalt theory states that
people instinctively perceive objects as either being in the
foreground or the background. Visual objects stand out
prominently in the front (the figure) or recede into the
back (the ground). Figure-ground lets us know what we
should be focusing on and what we can safely ignore in a
representation. The focal point principle states that whatever stands out visually will capture and hold the viewer’s
attention first. In traditional surgery, surgeons’ eyes are
distant from the MV. The MV orifice and leaflets become
the foreground while the subvalvar region the background.
Surgeons focus on the most visible part missing some
important aspects of the sub-valvar apparatus. Valve analysis is often reduced to hydrostatic testing. Valve reconstruction turns into a simple dichotomy: what is found

Loulmet and Grossi

Adult: Mitral Valve: Invited Expert Opinion

FIGURE 2. A P1-P2 commissure with chordal fusion.

prolapsing above the MVorifice plane is either removed using some basic excision-suture technique or tethered into
the LV with artificial chordae. Conversely, in robotic

surgery the visual sensor can be moved near the MV orifice
and further into the LV. Remote sensing permits the delocalization of the point of view of the observer at the center of

FIGURE 3. A P1-P2 commissure with a calcified band.

JTCVS Techniques c Volume 24, Number C

Adult: Mitral Valve: Invited Expert Opinion

Loulmet and Grossi

FIGURE 4. A P2-P3 commissure plastered to LV wall. R, Right; L, left; LV, left ventricle.

the heart cavities. The MV structure can be comprehended
in its entireness and more 3-dimensional reality. A deeper
sense of perception and immersion helps repair accuracy
by allowing recognition of a variety of pathologic conditions that would have otherwise been deemed uniform. It inspires specific correction of each lesion with a
corresponding technique without any limitation.15
SYNERGISM
“There is no greater solitude than that of the samurai unless it is that of the tiger in the jungle... Perhaps...” (from the
Code of Bushido and quoted in Jean-Pierre Melville’s
movie “The Samurai”). The comparison could be extended
to the present-day cardiac surgeon. It is sometimes dispiriting to experience the solitude of a MV repair surgeon while
hybrid rooms are not large enough to accommodate the
crowds required to replace a valve. MV reconstruction is
unique, as it demands conceptualizing the potential effect
of a combination of techniques on a complex structure
with the aim of restoring functional normality. It requires
judgment and experience. More than traditional surgery, robotics requires the cooperative efforts of several people
working closely together. The surgical field has become
visible and accessible by more than one experienced surgeon enabling collaborative decision-making and techniques execution. A surgical team approach provides
balance in the operating room. We have found the resulting
synergy a great antidote to the otherwise increasing cardiac
surgeon lonesomeness.

JTCVS Techniques c April 2024

ENLIGHTENMENT
It has been commented before that the median sternotomy approach for MV repair has the mindset of being the
“gold standard” status, as well as its tolerated complications
such as bleeding, transfusions, rib fractures, or sternal
infections and dehiscence. Centers with expertise in robotic
MV repair have obtained equal results (quality) with
less morbidity (cost), and therefore more value
(value ¼ quality/cost) for their patients.16-22 However, as
illuminated by the aforementioned points, there are more
subtle benefits from robotics fostering a more enlightened
approach to MV reconstruction.23
The authors reported no conflicts of interest.
The Journal policy requires editors and reviewers to
disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling or reviewing manuscripts for which they may have a conflict
of interest. The editors and reviewers of this article have
no conflicts of interest.
