SPECIAL ISSUE: MITRAL VALVE REPAIR: INVITED VIDEO ATLAS

Robotic mitral valve repair: The steps to success
Stephanie L. Mick, MD,a Brian Kohlbacher,b and A. Marc Gillinov, MDb

Video clip is available online.

PATIENT SELECTION
Patient selection is a critically important step in robotic
mitral valve repair. Technically, nearly all mitral patients
can have robotic surgery, yet not all should. The highest priority is to provide a safe, effective operation. To that end, we
recommend adherence to a strict selection algorithm. As
experience grows, some patients with relative contraindications to a robotic approach may be undertaken, as long as
excellent outcomes are maintained (Video 1).1,2
ECHOCARDIOGRAPH ASSESSMENT
The surgeon and cardiologist review the intraoperative
transesophageal echocardiograph to confirm that no contraindication to robotic surgery is present, make final
assessment of need for concomitant procedures, fully

Examination of mitral valve before repair using
robotic assistance.

CENTRAL MESSAGE

A successful robotic mitral valve
repair depends on patient selection and an organized, stepwise
approach in the operating room.

characterize the mitral pathology, and estimate the risk of
systolic anterior motion (Video 2).
GENERAL SETUP
The patient is intubated with preparations for single-lung
ventilation. The right internal jugular vein is doubly accessed with central line and micropuncture access to allow
for percutaneous venous cannulation. The right side is
elevated slightly, and the right arm is flexed. Landmarks
are marked (Video 3).

VIDEO 1. Patient selection and dangerous traps. Video available at:

INCISIONS
The femoral vessels are initially exposed to provide final
confirmation of suitability for peripheral cannulation. Once
confirmed, the access incision is made in the fourth

From the aDepartment of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York,
NY; and bHeart and Vascular Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
Received for publication July 31, 2023; revisions received Aug 24, 2023; accepted for
publication Aug 31, 2023; available ahead of print Sept 12, 2023.
Address for reprints: Stephanie L. Mick, MD, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery,
Weill Cornell Medicine, 525 E 58th St, Suite M404, New York, NY 10065 (E-mail:
slmick@med.cornell.edu).
JTCVS Techniques 2023;22:49-52
2666-2507
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

VIDEO 2. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram assessment.
Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.org/article/S2666-2507(23)00303-6/
fulltext.

JTCVS Techniques c Volume 22, Number C

Special Issue: Mitral Valve Repair: Invited Video Atlas

Mick, Kohlbacher, Gillinov

VIDEO 3. Marking and positioning with diagram. Video available at:

VIDEO 5. Preparation for bypass. Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.
org/article/S2666-2507(23)00303-6/fulltext.

interspace and trocars are placed about the access incision.
A soft tissue retractor is placed. Either 1 or 2 14-gauge angiocaths are placed to allow for the exteriorization of pericardial stay sutures (Video 4).

aorta and secured and the Chitwood clamp is passed
into the thoracic cavity (Video 6).

CANNULATION
Purse-string sutures are placed in the vessels and after
heparinization, the patient is peripherally cannulated using
transesophageal guidance. Once on bypass, the pericardiotomy will be created, either via direct vision through the
working port or with robotic instruments (Video 5).

EXPOSURE
After cardioplegic arrest, a left atriotomy is made. The
atrial lift is placed and positioned to expose the valve and
valve analysis is carried out (Video 7).

PERICARDIOTOMY
The pericardium is incised and pericardiotomy is
created. Pericardial stay sutures are placed. The inferior
stay sutures are exteriorized through angiocaths to allow
for pericardial retraction. Care should be taken not to
place excessive tension on these sutures to avoid phrenic
nerve palsy. If a Chitwood clamp is used, a long antegrade cardioplegia cannula is placed in the ascending

REPAIR
A triangle is excised that includes the prolapsing free
edge of the posterior leaflet right to the middle of P2. An interrupted suture aligns the free edges of the leaflet. After
this interrupted suture, 1 or more sutures are run down to
the annulus then back up to the free edge. The final step
is to ensure that there is a smooth surface of coaptation at
the free edge.3
For neochords, we use preknotted CV-4 GoreTex sutures
(W. L. Gore & Associates) buttressed with a felt pledget on
the papillary muscle. In general, we use 2 sets of neochords
for posterior leaflet prolapse, particularly when it is

VIDEO 4. Femoral exposure and chest incisions. Video available at:

VIDEO 6. Atriotomy and valve examination. Video available at: https://
www.jtcvs.org/article/S2666-2507(23)00303-6/fulltext.

JTCVS Techniques c December 2023

Mick, Kohlbacher, Gillinov

Special Issue: Mitral Valve Repair: Invited Video Atlas

VIDEO 7. Repair with triangular resection. Video available at: https://
www.jtcvs.org/article/S2666-2507(23)00303-6/fulltext.

VIDEO 9. Robotic annuloplasty. Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.
org/article/S2666-2507(23)00303-6/fulltext.

VALVE TESTING
After the repair is completed, antegrade cardioplegia is
given and a power injector used to fill the ventricle with
normal saline to test the valve. The ventricle is filled under
pressure, and the valve is assessed to ensure no leak and
robust coaptation (Video 10).

FINAL STEPS
The atriotomy is closed with running CV-4 GoreTex3
over a basket suction placed into the left ventricle. The
left side of the heart is preliminarily de-aired, aortic
perfusion is restored, and the patient is weaned from
bypass. Once the transesophageal echocardiograph
shows that there is minimal residual air in the left
ventricle, the basket suction is removed. Final de-airing
takes place via the antegrade cardioplegia cannula (if a
Chitwood clamp was used) or via the vent port on the
endoballoon. After weaning from bypass completely,
the repair is assessed on transesophageal echocardiograph. After this, the patient is briefly returned to
bypass, the atriotomy suture is tied, and the atriotomy
is reinforced (Video 11).
Following this, the patient is weaned from bypass, deairing is complete, the antegrade cardioplegia cannula is
removed, the aortic site is oversewn (in cases where the
Chitwood is used), the patient is decannulated, hemostasis
is assessed, and a chest tube is placed generally at the site
of the right trocar.

VIDEO 8. Repair with chords. Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.org/
article/S2666-2507(23)00303-6/fulltext.

VIDEO 10. Robotic repair valve testing with power injector. Video
available at: https://www.jtcvs.org/article/S2666-2507(23)00303-6/
fulltext.

extensive. The second chord is left initially secured only
with a surgeon’s knot to allow for final adjustment of
chordal length after the annuloplasty and valve test
(Video 8).
ANNULOPLASTY
A flexible annuloplasty band is placed with a running
horizontal mattress technique. Three preknotted sutures
are placed: 1 from the medial trigone to the middle of the
posterior annulus, 1 from here up to the lateral trigone,
and 1 at the lateral trigone itself (Video 9).3

JTCVS Techniques c Volume 22, Number C

Special Issue: Mitral Valve Repair: Invited Video Atlas

Mick, Kohlbacher, Gillinov

for Medtronic, AtriCure, Edwards Lifesciences, Abbot,
Artivion, Johnson & Johnson, and ClearFlow.
The Journal policy requires editors and reviewers to
disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling manuscripts for which they may have a conflict of interest. The editors and reviewers of this article have no conflicts of interest.
