ADULT: CARDIAC TUMORS: SURGICAL TECHNIQUE

Robotic myxoma resection using an ultrasonic
aspirator system
Yoshitsugu Nakamura, MD, PhD, Miho Kuroda, MD, Yuto Yasumoto, MD, and
Taisuke Nakayama, MD, PhD, Chiba, Japan
From the Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Chibanishi General Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
IRB No. 002482; August 22, 2024.
The 3 patients provided informed written consent for publication of study data.
Received for publication Sept 12, 2024; revisions received Sept 27, 2024; accepted for publication Oct 1, 2024;
available ahead of print Oct 16, 2024.
Address for reprints: Yoshitsugu Nakamura, MD, PhD, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Chibanishi
General Hospital, 107-1 Kanegasaku, Matsudo, Chiba 270-2251, Japan (E-mail: ystgnkmr@gmail.com).
JTCVS Techniques 2025;29:100-2
2666-2507
Surgery. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync-nd/4.0/).

The myxoma was debulked with an ultrasonic aspirator system in robotic myxoma resection.

CENTRAL MESSAGE

Video clip is available online.

Performing myxoma resection through right minithoracotomy is reported to be less invasive and more efficient, with or without robot-assistance.1-3 Left atrial
myxomas can be seen directly through right-side left atriotomy, but because myxomas are gelatinous and friable, they
are easily damaged during surgical manipulation, potentially causing embolism or metastasis in the pulmonary
veins or left ventricle. Therefore, resection of the tumor
and its attachment to the endocardium as a single mass is
recommended. However, this is difficult for large myxomas,
especially when using robot assistance and small skin incisions. We report a novel technique in robot-assisted myxoma resection that uses the Sonopet iQ Ultrasonic
Aspirator System (Stryker) (Figure 1, A) (institutional review board No. 002482; August 22, 2024). The 3 patients
provided informed written consent for publication of study
data.
SURGICAL TECHNIQUE
Under general anesthesia using single-lung ventilation, a
3-cm working port also used for the robotic camera port was
created in the fourth intercostal space on the left anterior
axillary line. See Video 1. The left- and right-hand ports
and robotic arms were placed in the third and sixth intercostal spaces, respectively. A retractor port was placed
through an areola incision. Cardiopulmonary bypass was
established through the right femoral artery and femoral
and jugular vein cannulation. Vacuum assistance was used

JTCVS Techniques c February 2025

Using an ultrasonic aspirator
system for robotic myxoma
resection is simple, safe, and
reliable.

for venous drainage (40-60 mm Hg). The ascending aorta
was crossclamped using a Cygnet flexible clamp (Vitalitec
Inc) with antegrade crystalloid cardioplegia delivery.
The myxoma was exposed with a robotic dynamic
retractor through right side left atriotomy (Figure 2, A). A
flexible sucker was inserted into the left atrium to achieve
a bloodless field. A small sample of the myxoma was resected for immediate pathology confirmation. The patientsite surgeon inserted the Sonopet through the working
port, positioning it against the myxoma with robotic assistance (Figure 1, B). The Sonopet’s outputs were set to
50% ultrasound power, 70% suction pressure, and
15 mL/minute irrigation rate. The myxoma was gradually
fragmented and aspirated from the camera side. After
most of the myxoma was debulked, a roughly 1-cm core
of the elastic hard tumor core remained (Figure 2, B)
attached to the left atrial endocardium. The entire thickness
of the left atrial endocardium at the myxoma attachment site
was excised with a 5-mm margin. If there was concern
about the margin size, an additional circular excision was
made around the resected area. When removing the excised
myxoma, we used the EndoCatch specimen retrieval pouch
(Medtronic) to prevent accidental dropping in the left
atrium or the left pleural cavity. However, its use is based
on surgeon’s preference and is not essential. If the atrial

Adult: Cardiac Tumors: Surgical Technique

FIGURE 1. A, Sonopet iQ Ultrasonic Aspirator System 205 mm soft tissue tip (Stryker). B, Intraoperative photograph, a patient-site surgeon applies Sonopet through a 3-cm working port.

septum of the attachment area was thin or communication
arose with the right atrium, the hole was closed with 40 monofilament sutures. Because vacuum-assisted venous
drainage is being used, small communications are not an
issue. However, if a large communication occurs, there is
a risk of air block or hypercapnia. Therefore, it is advisable
to snare the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava in
advance when the atrial septum of the attachment site is
large and thin like the foramen ovale. The atriotomy was
closed with continuous sutures. The crossclamp was
released, transesophageal echocardiography was performed, and cardiopulmonary bypass was terminated.
We employed this method in 3 cases of cardiac myxomas,
all of which had favorable outcomes. Average crossclamp
time and cardiopulmonary bypass time were 58 and 109 minutes, respectively.
DISCUSSION
The advantages of the technique described are its
simplicity; the tumor is not grasped, reducing the risk of
leaving parts behind; the endocardial attachment site

VIDEO 1. Intraoperative robotic endoscopic video. 23 speed. Video available at: https://www.jtcvs.org/article/S2666-2507(24)00437-1/fulltext.

becomes visible after aspiration, leading to adequate resection; and the small skin incision sites remain small.
Sonopet Mechanism and Application
Sonopet generates ultrasonic vibrations creating longitudinal and torsional forces. The handpiece of the device provides simultaneous irrigation and suction. Sonopet has been
used in neurosurgery, liver, and orthopedic surgery for aspirating and removing tumors safely for more than 20 years,4,5
but in cardiac surgery it has been limited to removal of calcifications from the aortic valve during aortic valve replacement surgery. We know of no reports using Sonopet for
cardiac tumors.
Output levels can be matched to tumor density, allowing
for efficient tumor fragmentation and aspiration while preserving surrounding tissues, which have higher density. We
optimized our Sonopet output settings based on consultation with the manufacturer and intraoperative adjustments
during our 3 cases. The large, soft outer portion of the myxoma was easily fragmented and aspirated at this setting,
whereas the firm and elastic core was harder to fragment.
Instead, it was excised robotically with the left atrial endocardium was attached. The mitral valve leaflet and left atrial
endocardium are not damaged by brief contact with the Sonopet, but there is a risk of injury if contact is sustained for
more than a few seconds. Therefore, it is necessary to apply
the Sonopet while continuously monitoring its placement
with the robotic camera.
Considerations for Robot-Assisted Tumor Resection
In robot-assisted left atrial tumor resections, the camera
typically sees only the front of large tumors; its attachment
site is hidden. As the myxoma is aspirated, the left atrial
wall becomes visible. By the time only the core remains,
the attachment site is clearly visible, allowing for safe and
secure resection of the remaining tumor and endocardium.
JTCVS Techniques c Volume 29, Number C

Adult: Cardiac Tumors: Surgical Technique

FIGURE 2. A, Myxoma before aspiration with Sonopet iQ Ultrasonic Aspirator System (Stryker). B, Only the core of the myxoma remains after aspiration.

CONCLUSIONS
Using Sonopet for robotic resection of cardiac myxomas
is simple, safe, and reliable.
The authors reported no conflicts of interest.
The Journal policy requires editors and reviewers to
disclose conflicts of interest and to decline handling or reviewing manuscripts for which they may have a conflict
of interest. The editors and reviewers of this article have
no conflicts of interest.

JTCVS Techniques c February 2025
