Review

Simulation Training in Video-Assisted and Robotic-Assisted
Cardiac Surgery: A Narrative Review
Fatemeh H. Nameghi 1

and Jason M. Ali 1,2, *

*

Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Royal Papworth Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0AY, UK;
fatemeh.nameghi@nhs.net
School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SP, UK
Correspondence: jason.ali@nhs.net; Tel.: +44-1223-638000

Abstract
Minimal access cardiac surgery (MACS) can mitigate the increasing risk profile of cardiac
surgery patients and is associated with improved postoperative outcomes. One of the ways
to manage the steep learning curve of MACS is the use of surgical simulation training.
We conducted a narrative review to identify the relevant literature discussing MACS
simulation training. We identified 20 studies using our search strategy. Various platforms
were represented: high-fidelity (n = 8), low-fidelity (n = 6), and animal studies (n = 6).
Virtual reality (VR) appeared in two wet-lab studies as an adjunct. The surgical approach
was video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) in 11 and robotic-assisted thoracoscopic
surgery (RATS) in nine. The most simulated procedure was minimal access mitral valve
(MV) repair (n = 16). Most studies (n = 16) evaluated the impact of simulation training on the
surgical skill of participants with varying baseline MACS experience. A small proportion
of included studies (n = 4) carried out only fidelity testing. While some standardised
assessment tools were used, there was considerable variation in how surgical skill and
fidelity were assessed. There are an increasing number of publications on MACS simulation
training, with equal focus on bench and animal models. MV procedures were the most
simulated, suggesting a drive towards increasing the scope of minimal access MV training.
Keywords: minimal access cardiac surgery; simulation; training

1. Introduction

Academic Editors: Ahmet Kilic, Alain
J. Poncelet and Martin Schweiger
Received: 18 November 2025
Revised: 9 March 2026
Accepted: 8 April 2026
Published: 26 April 2026
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

Despite the increasing risk profile of patients, outcomes following cardiac surgery
continue to improve worldwide. This is related to improvements in preoperative optimisation, surgical practice, and perioperative management. As has been seen for all surgical
specialties, there has been a move towards more minimal access approaches to undertaking
cardiac surgery—with both video-assisted (VATS) and robotic (RATS) techniques being
increasingly adopted as an alternative to the traditional median sternotomy. The reported
advantages of these techniques include reduced surgical trauma and postoperative pain,
lower infection risk, superior cosmesis, and possibly, reduced length of stay [1]. These
factors are contributing to increasing patient and referring physician demand for minimal
access cardiac surgery (MACS) [2].
As has been seen in other surgical specialties transitioning to minimal access techniques, there is a steep learning curve, and new skills must be learnt by surgeons used
to operating open. There are different skills required by surgeons performing VATS procedures. This is due to having a restricted two-dimensional field of view, reduced tactile

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

2 of 16

sensation and feedback, and requiring familiarity with long-shafted, straight instruments.
For RATS, there are again additional skills required.
For various reasons, including reduced resident doctor working hours, simulation has
become an integral part of surgical training, allowing surgeons and surgical trainees to
develop surgical skills outside of the operating theatre. There are many advantages of this
approach to surgical training, including the opportunity to acquire surgical dexterity in
safe environments, minimising potential risk to patients. In addition, there is opportunity
to make objective assessment and gain individualised feedback of simulated surgical skills.
Over recent years simulators of various fidelity have been developed in open cardiac
surgery, from simple coronary anastomosis simulators using rubber tubes, through to live
operating on porcine models [3,4]. Fidelity here refers to the degree to which the simulator
and surrounding environment resemble operating room conditions, and it can be broadly
split into high-fidelity simulation (HFS) and low-fidelity simulation (LFS). HFS may be
perceived by some to be superior to LFS due to its closer resemblance to reality in terms of
anatomical accuracy, as well as how real it feels to use, i.e., psychological fidelity.
With the increasing trend towards minimal access techniques, a demand has developed
for MACS simulators. In this review, we aim to describe the current scope of simulation
training in robotic-assisted and video-assisted MACS through a discussion of the range
of simulation models and assessment tools reported in the literature, also considering
trainee perspectives.

2. Materials and Methods
A narrative review was conducted. We searched PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science
using MESH terms and keywords. Full search criteria is provided in Supplementary
Tables S1–S3. Studied discussing VATS or RATS simulation in adult cardiac surgery for
training purposes were included. Full exclusion criteria are provided in the adapted
PRISMA diagram in Supplementary Figure S1. Articles were limited to those in the
English language and published between 1995 and 2026. We identified 20 studies using
the search strategy. Tables 1 and 2 summarise the findings of studies simulating VATS
and RATS procedures, respectively. The details of included models, including materials
used, assessment tools, and simulation cost, is provided in this section to supplement
the methodology.
Table 1. The literature on simulation of video-assisted cardiac surgery.
Author

Methods

Simulation Platform

Primary Outcome

Results

•
Verberkmoes
and
VerberkmoesBroeders,
2013 [5]

•
•

Low-fidelity simulator
for MV and tricuspid
surgery
N/A participants

•
•

•

•
Nia et al.,
2019 [6]

•

High-fidelity simulation
of MV surgery
99 participants (12
experts, 87 other senior)

•

•

MV valvular apparatus
created using a baby bottle
MV leaflets and orifice
created using dental dams

Suture tensions, cost,
tactile response,
dimensions

Main body consisted of
hollow aluminium box and
thoracic representation
with minimal access port
MV, LA, LV, and papillary
muscles created from
polyurethane foam and
cast in silicone
Inbuilt software algorithm
to differentiate between
new and already-placed
sutures

Custom Likert scale
questionnaire on
experience with MV
repair and realism of
simulator appearance
and tactility

•

•

•

Model is very similar to
actual anatomical
dimensions of the MV
Simulation of complete
range of Type I and II
valve dysfunctions
possible (type III
simulation limited to IIIa)

Participants agreed that
the simulator was a good
method for training in
minimal access MV
surgery
The MV and suture
placement looked and felt
realistic

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

3 of 16

Table 1. Cont.
Author

Methods

•

Jebran et al.,
2019 [7]

•

•
Nia et al.,
2020 [8]

•

Low-fidelity simulation
of ring annuloplasty,
leaflet plasty procedures,
neochord implantation,
and MV replacement
20 participants
(10 residents,
10 students)
High-fidelity simulation
of MV annuloplasty
102 participants
(83 consultants,
12 finished residency,
5 residents)

Simulation Platform

•

•
•

•
•
Sobbi et al.,
2024 [9]

•

High-fidelity simulation
of MV repair
46 participants
(18 experienced,
23 fellows, 5 residents)

•

•
•
Sobbi et al.,
2024 [10]

•

•
Wang et al.,
2024 [11]

•

•
En Yean et al.,
2024 [12]

•

3D-printed simulation
and telesimulation of
MV surgery
11 surgeons

High-fidelity simulation
of MV repair with
patient specific replicas
25 participants (medical
students)

Low-fidelity simulation
of MV and AV repair
and MVR
10 participants
(5 trainees and
5 consultants)

•

•

Azmi et al.,
2024 [13]

•

Low-fidelity beating
heart simulation of
OPCAB and MICA
2 participants
(intermediate trainee
and junior consultant)

Results

Main body aluminium box
with fabric
dummy/3D-printed
alternative representing
the valves

Self-reported skill
scores and duration of
procedures

Model thoracic torso main
body with minimal access
and robotic access
Disposable silicone MV
apparatus with a
computer-based feedback
system

Theoretical pre- and
post-assessment, time
to place sutures,
accuracy of posterior
and anterior annular
sutures

3D-printed telesimulator
with central chest plate
with central opening and
surrounding guides for
suture placement
3D-printed LV and LA
with fittings for disposable
mitral and papillary
muscles

Anatomical
correctness and time
taken to place a suture
on posterior mitral
valve annulus

3D-printed telesimulator
with central chest plate
with central opening and
surrounding guides for
suture placement
3D-printed LV and LA
with fittings for disposable
mitral and papillary
muscles

5-point Likert scale
questionnaire on
visual and tactile
realism of simulator,
suturing experience,
overall experience,
and confidence
pre-and
post-telesimulation

Commercially available
simulator from Fehling
Instruments GmbH & Co.
KG, Karlstein, Germany

•

Members of both groups
(residents and students)
could significantly
improve the time needed
for each procedure through
the course of the training

•

Participants could work
with long-shafted
instruments more
accurately (suture accuracy
43% vs. 99%) after
simulator training

•

There was significant
improvement in time taken
and accuracy to place a
suture in the MV annulus
after completing
simulation training

•

There was a significant
improvement in the
accuracy of annular suture
placement and time to
place sutures after
simulation training

•

There was significant
improvement in the
post-assessment scores of
participants who carried
out neochorda
implantation and
annuloplasty sutures
The duration of knot tying
was shorter after
simulation training

Custom qualitative
and quantitative
questionnaires

•

•

•

•

Primary Outcome

•

Synthetic valve model
inside aluminium conduit
box

Modular benchtop
simulator using Lego®
classic blocks (Billund,
Denmark) and Lego®
Technic™ parts powered
by a Lego Powered UP™
motor and a wireless hub
(The LEGO Group)
1′′ × 60′′ modelling
balloons used as conduits
and coronaries and
immobilised on kitchen
sponge

•

The two groups had a
significant increase in
confidence level in terms
of suture placement,
ring/valve implantation,
and suture knotting using
a knot pusher

•

There were inverse
correlations between
anastomosis time and
number of practices on
simulator for both
non-beating and beating
anastomoses
Assessment score
increased on average by
26.6%

SSES and PCS

Anastomotic time and
score compared with
the junior consultant

•

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

4 of 16

Table 1. Cont.
Author

Methods

Simulation Platform

Primary Outcome

Results

•
•

(Ujihira et al.,
2017) [14]

•

Low-fidelity beating
heart simulation of
totally endoscopic
coronary anastomosis
1 trainee participant
performing
100 consecutive coronary
anastomoses

•
•

Silicone heart in a box
Aluminium plate in place
of thorax and endoscopic
ports

Anastomosis time and
number of sutures
placed

3D-printed MV apparatus
using silicon
Patient-specific 3D-printed
ring prosthesis

Self-reported 5-point
Likert scale for
usefulness of
simulator for different
applications, e.g.,
rehearsal of difficult
cases, theoretical
knowledge, and
practicing with
instruments

•

•

•
Engelhardt
et al., 2019
[15]

•

High-fidelity MIMVS
training simulator
12 participants (5 experts
and 7 trainees)
performed MIMVS

•
•

•

•

Significant decrease in
average anastomotic time
and incidence of vessel
injury when comparing
first 50 to latter
50 anastomoses by the
same trainee
Increase in number of
stitches placed and
average length of coronary
incision
Trainees were faster at
knot tying at the end of
simulation training
71% of surgical residents
felt better prepared for
operating this specific case
and associated MV
pathology in real-life
100% of experts felt it was
an extremely helpful
preparation for this
specific case

OPCAB, off-pump coronary artery bypass; MICA, minimally invasive coronary anastomosis; MICS, minimally
invasive cardiac surgery; MIMVS, minimally invasive mitral valve surgery; LV, left ventricle; LA, left atrium; USB,
universal serial bus; 3D, three-dimensional; VATS, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery; MV, mitral valve.

Table 2. The literature on simulation of robot-assisted cardiac surgery.
Author(s)

Methods

Simulation Platform

Primary Outcome

Results

•
•
Valdis et al.,
2015 [16]

•

RCT using VR and
animal (porcine)
simulation
20 participants
(trainees) completed
IMA harvest and MV
annuloplasty

•

(Heart in a box) porcine
chest wall and heart
docked onto the da Vinci
robot

GEARS

•

•
•

Valdis et al.,
2016 [17]

•

RCT using animal
(porcine), wet lab, dry
lab, and VR lab
40 participants
(trainees) carried out
IMA dissection and
placed MV
annuloplasty sutures

•

•
•

Atroshchenko
et al., 2023
[18]

•

Multicentre trial using
animal (porcine)
simulation
19 participants
(15 trainees and
4 experienced) carried
out LA closure, IMA
harvest, and MV
annular suturing

•

(Heart in a box) porcine
chest wall and heart
docked onto the da Vinci
robot

(Heart in a box) for the LA
closure and MV stitches,
isolated porcine hearts
were placed inside the da
Vinci simulator box, and an
atriotomy was created to
provide access to the MV
For IMA harvest, a porcine
anterior chest wall with
the intact sternum and
attached costae in a
reversed ‘V’ shape
was used

GEARS

•

•
TBS
mGEARS

Trainees randomised to the VR
group were faster than the
control group for both the IMA
harvest and MV annuloplasty
The VR group scored
significantly higher in the
intraoperative scoring tool
than those who did not
undergo VR training
Out of animal (wet lab), dry
lab, and VR lab, the trainees
randomised to wet lab showed
the greatest improvement in
TBS and the objective scoring
tool compared with the experts
The average duration of
training was shortest for the
dry lab and longest for the VR
simulation (1.6 h vs. 9.3 h;
p < 0.001)

mGEARS could distinguish
between novices and experts at
left atriotomy and MV annular
suturing but not IMA
harvesting

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

5 of 16

Table 2. Cont.
Author(s)

Methods

•
•
Atroshchenko
et al., 2025
[19]

Prospective cohort
study using animal
(porcine) simulation
15 participants
(7 cardiac surgeons
and 8 non-cardiac
surgeons) without
prior robotic
experience carried out
LA closure, IMA
harvest, and mitral
stitches

Simulation Platform

•

•

•
•

Ashraf et al.,
2024 [20]

•

•
Yamada et al.,
2017 [21]

•
•

•
Premyodhin
et al., 2018
[22]

•

Proof-of-concept study
using low-fidelity
simulator
2 participants (fellow
and consultant)
carried out P2 leaflet
foldoplasty and
annuloplasty

•

3D-printed heart and
thoracic cavity using
CT-derived data and
moulded using PVA

Rupture strength
Elastic modulus
Moisture content

•

Polyvinyl alcohol was used
to 3D print moulds that
were casted with liquid
platinum-cure silicone
Silicone-moulded MV
models were fabricated for
2 morphologies: the
normal MV and the P2 flail
The moulded valves were
plication- and
suture-tested in a
laparoscopic trainer box
with a da Vinci Xi robotic
surgical system

Suture feel, tensile
strength, and
anatomic realism of
the models
compared to real
mitral valve

(Heart in a box) steel
skewers used to suspend
pig hearts on a Styrofoam
board. This is housed
inside a cardboard box
with openings to mimic
minimal access, docked
onto a da Vinci Xi robotic
surgical system

TECAB
questionnaire

Dynamic simulator using
static setup with metallic
holder. In vitro mitral
valves 3D-printed
according to Engelhardt,

Regurgitant volume
(RVol) and fraction
(RF) before and after
repair using
simulator

•

•
•
Al Jamal et al.,
2023 [23]

•

•
Karl et al.,
2024 [24]

•

Proof-of-concept study
using animal (porcine)
simulation
7 participants (various
training levels)
performed CABG

Validity testing of a
dynamic high-fidelity
simulator
1 participant (cardiac
surgeon) performing
MIMVS after chorda
rupture induced

TBS
mGEARS

Confidence and
realism scales (0–10)
before and after
simulation

•

•

Results

•

Second- to third-trimester
foetal bovine calf thorax
model (skin removed) was
used. Using straps and
lumber obtained at a
hardware store, a brace
was developed to open the
calf thorax while
simultaneously securing it
to a freestanding table and
da Vinci Xi robot

Proof-of-concept study
using animal (calf)
simulation
50 participants
(42 attendings,
8 fellows and
residents) carried out
IMA harvest

Proof-of-concept study
using 3D-printed
hearts
N/A participants
MV repair

(Heart in a box) for the LA
closure and MV stitches,
isolated porcine hearts
were placed inside the da
Vinci simulator box, and an
atriotomy was created to
provide access to the MV
For IMA harvest, a porcine
anterior chest wall with
the intact sternum and
attached costae in a
reversed ‘V’ shape was
used

Primary Outcome

•

•
•

No significant difference in
baseline mean TBS between
cardiac and non-cardiac robotic
novices
13 out of 15 participants
achieved mastery learning
level in all 3 tasks on the TBS

Participants rated the realism
of the simulator as 8 out of 10
Participant confidence in
robotic IMA harvesting before
and after using the simulator
increased from a median of 5 to
9 out of 10

•

Replica bore tactile similarity
to the heart and simulated the
difficulty of the surgery as in
theatre

•

Evaluators agreed that there
was realistic material response
to sutures, similarity of tensile
strength to MV tissue, and
anatomical appearance
resembling that of real MVs.
Evaluators ‘somewhat agreed’
that the overall model
durability was appropriate for
training (4.0/5) due to the
mounting design.

•

•

Model was easy to set up;
anastomotic exercise was
realistic and helped to gain
confidence.

•

The RVol and RF decreased to
8 mL and 12% in the repaired
valve following simulation.
SVP and CO increased to 117
and 4.67, resembling
physiological state of valve
before chorda rupture was
induced

CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; TECAB, totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass; mGEARS, Modified
Global Evaluation Assessment of Robotic Skill; GEARS, Global Evaluation Assessment of Robotic Skill; VR, virtual
reality; PVA, polyvinyl alcohol; IMA, internal mammary artery; MV, mitral valve; TBS, time-based scoring; RVol,
regurgitant volume; RF, regurgitant fraction; SVP, systolic volume set by the pump; CO, cardiac output.

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

6 of 16

2.1. Simulation Materials
Many HFSs are 3D-printed from CT-derived anonymised patient data. The use of
3D models within MACS allows a tactile perception of complex pathologies which is
not possible through computerised 3D reconstructions, with higher anatomical accuracy
than is permitted by LFS [25]. The use of CT-derived data also permits simulation of
patient-specific anatomy, which can be valuable in the preoperative planning of complex
procedures. While the one-off cost of printers can be quite high, printing materials can be
relatively cheap. Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) is often used with injection moulding due to being
water-resistant and readily available. Unlike silicone, it does not require specialist printing
equipment. However, silicone can offer more realistic tensile strength and elasticity than
PVA where cardiac structures are concerned [26]. In the included studies, the 3D printing
approach was used primarily for simulating mitral valve (MV) procedures [7,9,10,21,22,24].
In contrast, the LFS models evaluated in Tables 1 and 2 used commonly found household items such as baby bottles and associated feeding teats [13], as well as Lego® (Billund,
Denmark) classic blocks and Lego® Technic™ parts (The LEGO Group), and kitchen
sponges [13]. Verberkmoes and Verberkmoes-Broeders [5] evaluated their baby bottle
model for video-assisted MV and tricuspid valve surgery, which cost $9 per simulator. The
baby bottle acted as a holder for the MV structures, while the feeding teat represented
the annulus and subvalvular apparatuses; a dental dam (commonly used in endodontic
surgery) was used to simulate the leaflets of the MV. The simulator’s fidelity was validated
by comparing the suture tension and tactile response to those of the human MV, which
were found to be adequately similar.
2.2. Assessment Tools
Simulation in MACS needs to be paired with fidelity testing and standardised tools to
assess surgical performance. Table 3 summarises commonly used tools within the included
literature to assess technical skill and perceived competence, as well as the structural fidelity
of simulators.
Table 3. Prevalent assessment tools for minimal access cardiac surgery simulation.

Type of Scale

Name

Components

Structural

N/A *

Spatial asymmetry index, tissue trauma events,
rupture strength, elastic modulus, moisture content

SEES

Variable based on assessed skill. Respondents rank
relevant skills on a scale of 1–5, with 1 being not at all
confident and 5 being extremely confident

PCS

Can be paired with technical scores, such as Objective
Structured Assessment of Technical Skills, for
self-reporting feelings of confidence and competence

Other

Perception of training
Simulation quality

GEARS

Depth perception, bimanual skill, efficiency, force
control, autonomy, robot control

mGEARS

GEARS with omission of depth perception component

Other

Anastomotic time, anatomical correctness of sutures

Psychological

Technical

SEES: surgical self-efficacy scale; PCS: perceived competence scale; GEARS: Global Evaluative Assessment of
Robotic Skill; mGEARS: modified GEARS. * There is no formal system of assessment for the structural fidelity
of surgical simulators as simulator needs vary widely, particularly in MACS. Structural fidelity is tested under
the discretion of respective authors as per the type of simulation e.g., elastic modulus in simulation of valve
leaflet procedures.

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

7 of 16

The GEARS scale was created by Goh et al. [27], who adapted the Global Assessment
of Laparoscopic Skills (GOALS) scale [28] for assessment of elements of robotic surgery.
GEARS has six elements, including depth perception, bimanual skill, efficiency, force
control, autonomy, and robot control. All of these elements, except depth perception,
are reported to differentiate between individuals based on their level of expertise (e.g.,
consultants and trainees) [29]. The 3D vision afforded by modern robotic systems may
compensate for the less experienced depth perception of trainees, therefore leading to
similar scores between trainees and consultants. This led to the adaptation of GEARS
into the modified GEARS (mGEARS), which excludes depth perception as a parameter.
The included studies used both GEARS and mGEARS in conjunction with animal and
virtual reality (VR) models [16–18], suggesting the adaptability of both scales to various
simulation platforms.
2.3. Simulation Cost
The included studies highlight a lack of economic transparency in MACS simulation
literature. While the approximate cost per-cadaver during wet-lab sessions is a well-known
premium, the same transparency is not afforded to bench models or VR interfaces. The cost
of well-known minimal access cardiac surgery platforms such as the Simurghy trainer, for
example, is not available to the public. From the included literature, seven explicitly stated
the cost of their simulation platforms (Table 4).
Table 4. Studies with inclusion of simulator costs.

Authors

Cost Per Simulator ($)

Verberkmoes and Verberkmoes-Broeders,
2013 [5]

$9

Jebran et al., 2019 [7]

$5000

Azmi et al., 2024 [14]

$179.16

Ashraf et al., 2024 [20]

$133–176

Premyodhin et al., 2018 [22]

$1200 (printer cost) + $2 (disposables)

Al Jamal et al., 2023 [23]

$20

Engelhart et al., 2019 [15]

$3500 (printer cost) + $30–100 (materials)

3. Results and Synthesis
3.1. Results Summary
We identified 20 studies using the search strategy. Tables 1 and 2 summarise the
findings of studies simulating VATS and RATS procedures, respectively. Various simulation
platforms were represented. HFS was used in eight studies, while LFS and animal models
(porcine and calf) both appeared in six studies each. VR was used as an adjunct to wet
labs in two studies. There were eleven studies simulating VATS procedures, and nine
simulating RATS. Valvular procedures were the most simulated, with 16 studies simulating
some aspect of MV replacement/repair. The number of papers published on VATS and
RATS simulation training in adult cardiac surgery appears to be rising in recent years as
per Figure 1.

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

8 of 16

Figure 1. Graph depicting the number of studies published in minimal access simulation training
(VATS and RATS) in adult cardiac surgery in the recent years.

3.2. Surgical Procedure Frequency
The representation of MV procedures in the literature may arise from a combination
of procedural difficulty (MV procedures may often involve intricate repair rather than
total replacement [30]) and the higher volume of minimally invasive MV surgery (MIMVS)
performed compared to other valves including aortic.
The technicalities of minimal access MV repair include, but are not limited to, maintaining a mini-thoracotomy incision of less than 5 cm, as well as the technique of aortic
occlusion within limited space. The success of surgical outcomes of minimal access MV
procedures is reported to directly correlate with hospital volume of minimal access MV
cases [31]. Cases with complex anatomical pathologies are often deemed high risk and
referred to experienced centres.
This creates a vacuum of opportunities for trainees at lower-experience centres to
increase their exposure to the true breadth of minimal access MV surgery. The frequency
of simulated minimal access MV operations in the literature may be reflective of the high
demand for out-of-theatre training opportunities.
The British and Irish Society for Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery (BISMICS) consensus statement on minimal access MV training in the UK states that compared to sternotomy, patients undergoing minimal access MV surgery experience lower wound sepsis
and postoperative bleeding. This is paired with higher patient satisfaction related to a
quicker return to activities of daily living due to a shorter postoperative recovery period [32]. BISMICS recommend team-based simulation and wet-lab sessions to increase
trainee familiarity with long-shafted instruments.
This can increase suture accuracy and, therefore, decrease the time taken for procedures
such as ring annuloplasty and leaflet plasty [7]. Several studies in the literature showed
that both time and accuracy in performing MV tasks could be significantly improved with
both LFS and HFS [7,8,18,20].
Robotic internal mammary artery (IMA) harvest was also commonly represented
(17–20). The prevalence of robotic IMA harvest in the literature may reflect increased
training in minimal access techniques for long-established procedures such as CABG.

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

9 of 16

3.3. Levels of Simulators
Simulation can be categorised based on fidelity and biological format/platform [33].
The fidelity of surgical simulation (low or high) is often correlated with its closeness to
reality. LFSs may be classed as those allowing simulation of only simple skills, while
HFSs allow a more realistic simulation of an operation from start to finish. This approach
to fidelity considers only physical fidelity, however. Fidelity, as a whole, also concerns
subjective operator-dependant measures such as how realistic a simulator feels to use:
psychological fidelity [34].
While none of the included studies directly compared HFS and LFS, it is generally
agreed that an increasing level of fidelity is associated with increasing cost but not necessarily with superior training value [35,36]. The ideal simulator should strike the perfect
balance between keeping costs low and training value high [34].
Simulation may utilise biological or non-biological platforms. Biological platforms
include animal models and human cadavers, while non-biological formats include bench
models and VR simulators. While human cadaveric training is considered the gold standard
simulation technique for surgical training [37], facility hire and cost per cadaver limit its
availability. These barriers, along with ethical considerations, make it extremely rare for
this training to be at the disposal of cardiac surgery trainees worldwide. This may, in
the near future, encourage a shift away from cadaveric training as the gold standard and
towards integrated surgical training programs which more readily utilise various types
of simulation.
Of the animal models appearing in the literature, models of porcine origin were the
most common [16–19,23], while one study utilised a foetal bovine calf model [20]. The
wider literature does not explicitly compare bovine and porcine models for simulation.
Most comparisons made between bovine and porcine hearts relate to their performance as
bioprosthetic valves [38,39] which is outside the remit of this review.
Animal models significantly reduced the sequential operating times of robotic IMA
harvest in a calf model in a study carried out by Ashraf et al. [20]. When comparing animal
models to other simulation platforms, in one randomised controlled trial (RCT) comparing
VR and porcine models for IMA robotic harvesting and MV annuloplasty, trainees were
randomised to one of the following simulation environments: wet lab (using a porcine
model), dry lab, or VR [17].
The wet-lab group showed the greatest improvement in time-based scoring (TBS)
assessment. Although the VR group did meet the levels of proficiency set by the study
experts for TBS and GEARS, this was not as high as the wet-lab group. In another RCT by
the same group, candidates assigned to practice with VR before assessment of IMA harvest
and MV annuloplasty on a porcine model performed significantly better than the control
group who did not undergo VR training beforehand [16].
VR as an adjunctive platform may ensure that trainees can make the most of expendable wet-lab materials by familiarising themselves with the procedure beforehand. VR
allows for repeated practice of focused skills without using up consumables (as with simulators) or altering the surgical anatomy of the simulation field (as in wet labs), allowing all
participating trainees to have an equal learning experience.
In a multi-centre evaluation of U.K.-based minimal access cardiac surgery courses by
Moorjani et al. [40], the courses with access to the live operating simulation models rated
highest in scoring for content and materials as well as for organisation and facilities.
High-fidelity bench models were often used in the literature for minimal access MV
surgery procedures [6,8–11]. As discussed in the previous section, the prevalence of such
models for minimal access MV surgery may arise from the lack of trainee access to MV
cases [41].

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

10 of 16

HFS improved the time taken and accuracy of annular sutures placed with longshafted instruments in two proof-of-concept studies [8,10], and the speed of knot tying
in another [15]. In a study by Nia et al. [8], consultants and residents improved their
time and anatomic accuracy in placing anterior and posterior annular sutures using longshafted instruments in a model thoracic torso for MIMVS. In a study using a 3D-printed
telesimulator including a printed valvular apparatus and left ventricle, Cheheili Sobbi
et al. [10], demonstrated that 100% of their MACS experts and trainees could place an
anatomically correct suture post-simulation training compared to only 48% before, with a
significant improvement in the time taken to place sutures as well.
In another study by Sobbi et al. [9], HFS improved the self-reported confidence levels
of both trainees and consultants in suture placement, valve implantation, and suture
knotting using a knot pusher. A group of 25 medical students in Wang et al.’s [11] study
also experienced significant improvement in neochorda implantation and annuloplasty
sutures and demonstrated shorter duration of knot tying after HFS training, suggesting the
educational value of simulation across all training levels.
3.4. Trainee Perception
In a country-wide survey of surgeons and trainees at 12 institutions in Canada, a
questionnaire was aimed at unveiling trainee perceptions and confidence levels when it
came to simulation training [42]. The survey saw that the majority of participants indicated
a desire for expanded simulation training at their centres [42]. There was a prevalent
belief that being able to practice the required skills before operating would improve theatre
confidence in residents. Similarly, seniors indicated they would feel more comfortable with
allowing residents to operate on patients if they knew residents had undergone simulation
training beforehand. This suggests that simulation training may act as a gateway towards
theatre opportunities for residents, not only through improvements in their own confidence
but also through that of their seniors’ in them. Using an LFS for MV and aortic valve (AV)
replacement in a study by En Yean et al. [12] and a calf model for IMA harvest in a study
by Ashraf et al. [20], participants experienced significantly increased scores on SSES and
PCS scales following simulator training.

4. Discussion
Simulation training in MACS provides budding surgeons with a safe environment
to practice requisite skills. The ideal simulation platform mirrors the real-life operating
environment while allowing repeated practice of both focused skills and whole procedures
under expert guidance. The included literature evaluates VATS and RATS simulation platforms for valvular and coronary procedures [43,44]. The methods used include assessment
of surgical performance and isolated fidelity testing. The various components of simulation
training in VATS and RATS adult cardiac surgery are summarised in Figure 2.
The main limitation of the included papers is the heterogeneity of assessment tools.
used. For example, both GEARS and mGEARS do not include any time-based parameters.
Cross-clamp and bypass times are important in contributing to cardiac surgery outcomes,
and therefore, time does matter in cardiac surgery. Atroshchenko et al. [18] carried out a
multicentre trial using porcine simulation where both trainees and experienced participants
carried out left atrial (LA) closure, IMA harvest, and MV annular suturing. They found
that mGEARS and TBS assessments could both discriminate between different levels of
competence in LA closure and MV annular suturing but not IMA harvest.
This raises an important point: technical scoring systems may not bear the same utility
in evaluating all surgical tasks. On two separate occasions, Valdis et al. [16,17] used GEARS
to evaluate the impact of simulation raining on IMA dissection skill in trainees and found a

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

11 of 16

significant improvement in the GEARS scores of participants who underwent adjunctive
VR and wet-lab training prior to assessment.

Figure 2. Concept map for simulation training in minimal access adult cardiac surgery. Our review
finds simulation training in minimal access cardiac surgery training to be defined by six major
components. These are: simulation platform i.e., animal or cadaveric; surgical approach i.e., robotic
or video-assisted; type of procedure simulated; fidelity of simulation; assessment tools used to
evaluate simulation users; as well as the logistics of both local and wide-spread implementation of
the simulation in question as a training tool. The fidelity of the platform is a multifactorial property
which is defined by haptics, the usability of long-shafted instruments within the simulation field,
depth perception, the realism of spatial limitations to those in theatre, as well as the structural
and physiological resemblance of the simulator to real-life. Figure created with Canva Visual Suite
2.0 and Procreate for iPad version 5.4.8 (Savage Interactive Pty Ltd., Tasmania, Auatralia). VATS,
video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery; RATS, robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery; CABG, coronary
artery bypass grafting.

In contrast, Atroshchenko et al. [18] suggest that there was insufficient validity evidence to support the assessment of IMA harvest using GEARS in their study. This cannot
be attributed solely to GEARS, and the simulation platform used may have a part to play
in the contrasting results of Valdis et al. [16,17] and Atroshchenko et al. [18].
One solution could be the pre-validation of scoring systems for the specific task being
assessed. This could be achieved by comparing the baseline scores of consultants and
trainees to validate the efficacy of the score in discriminating competence levels in that task.
Some studies paired technical scoring scales, such as the Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skills (OSAT), with psychological scales such as the perceived competence

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

12 of 16

scale (PCS) or surgical self-efficacy scale (SEES) [12]. While self-evaluation may not be
as reliable as senior evaluation, such hybrid assessment tools allow for the consideration
of trainee perspectives. This may shed light on the perceived educational value of these
platforms by those who are most likely to utilise and benefit from them.
In studies with structural data as their primary outcome, there was less consistency
in the type of scoring tools used, particularly where efficacy testing of bench models was
concerned [5,21,22]. As many of these bench models are newly designed, authors often used
customised scales to report on components which were relevant to the model being studied.
The studies with structural data as their primary outcome all concerned the simulation
of mitral or other valvular procedures. While there was no one standardised scoring system,
commonly assessed structural properties were rupture strength (relating to the chorda
tendinae) or elastic modulus (e.g., relating to the leaflets) [21,22] as relating to the real
value of these measures in the MV in vivo. Karl et al., 2024 [24] also investigated the ability
of their dynamic high-fidelity simulator to mimic real-world resolution of regurgitant
fractions and volumes following MV repair.

5. Future Directions
The scope of the discussed literature indicates several avenues for future work. It is
unclear if confidence levels and self- or senior-evaluated technical scores correlate with the
perceived realism of simulators (namely bench models). Such analyses would provide more
insight into apt directions for achieving the perfect balance between confidence-inspiring
realism and cost, which is often cited as the main barrier to HFS [29,34].
Trainee perception of HFS as superior to other learning strategies due to its novelty
may lead to the false deduction that they gain more from HFS than other types of simulation,
e.g., LFS, leading them to overestimate their abilities [45]. Therefore, it is essential that
levels of perceived realism, confidence level, and skill are interpreted in relation to each
other to achieve an ideal simulation which is equally economical and educational [43].
Addressing the barrier of economic transparency is an important step in this.
The reported scales for perceived confidence and skill related to simulation training in
minimal access cardiac surgery need to be standardised. One group who may bring this to
realisation are the expert workforces of MACS societies, both national and international.
Published expert consensus on the appropriate scales for simulation research could have
considerable utility in standardising the research in this field for analysis. While simulation
platforms are not yet the norm in medical and surgical education, increased interest in
simulation training is evidenced by the increase in publications in recent years. Their
widespread potential is especially topical given the increasing restrictions and ethical
concerns surrounding the use of animal tissue in scientific research [46,47].

6. Conclusions
Our review finds a steady increase in publications relating to minimal access cardiac
surgery in the past decade, with increasing awareness of novel simulation platforms,
including VR and HFS bench models. These models appear to predominantly pursue the
simulation of minimal access MV surgery, which may reflect the increasing number of
MIMVS cases being performed and a push towards increasing training scope in MIMVS
by recent national consensus statements. Technologically innovative platforms are not yet
equivalent to wet labs or cadaveric simulation both with regards to perceived utility and
conceptual realism. However, using technology as an adjunct may optimise both the time
and cost related to delivering gold-standard cadaveric training. With time, increased user
familiarity with and economic tailoring of these more novel platforms to surgical need may

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

13 of 16

transform the status quo of how we deliver MICS training: to maximise trainee educational
benefit and patient safety.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/jcdd13050180/s1, Figure S1: Adapted PRISMA diagram showing
inclusion and exclusion criteria for article selection during screening process; Table S1: PubMed
search strategy <1995 to 1 February 2026>; Table S2: Embase search strategy <1995–2026>; Table S3:
Web of Science search strategy <1995–2026>.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.M.A.; methodology, F.H.N. and J.M.A.; validation, F.H.N.
and J.M.A.; formal analysis, F.H.N. and J.M.A.; investigation, F.H.N. and J.M.A.; resources, F.H.N.
and J.M.A.; data curation, F.H.N. and J.M.A.; writing—original draft preparation, F.H.N. and J.M.A.;
writing—review and editing, F.H.N. and J.M.A.; visualization, F.H.N. and J.M.A.; supervision, J.M.A.;
project administration, F.H.N. and J.M.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published version
of the manuscript.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Ethical review and approval were waived for this study due
to this being a review article.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analysed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Acknowledgments: No further acknowledgements.

Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
AV
BISMICS
CABG
CO
GEARS
HFS
IMA
LFS
LVAD
MACS
mGEARS
MICA
MICS
MIDCAB
MIMVS
MV
MVR
OPCAB
OSAT
PCS
PVA
RATS
RF
RVOL

Aortic valve
British and Irish Society for Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery
Coronary artery bypass grafting
Cardiac output
Global Evaluative Assessment of Robotic Skill
High-fidelity simulation
Internal mammary artery
Low-fidelity simulation
Left-ventricular assist device
Minimal access cardiac surgery
Modified Global Evaluative Assessment of Robotic Skill
Minimally invasive coronary anastomosis
Minimally invasive cardiac surgery
Minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass
Minimally invasive mitral valve repair
Mitral valve
Mitral valve repair
Off-pump coronary artery bypass
Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skills
Perceived competency scale
Polyvinyl alcohol
Robotic-assisted thoracoscopic surgery
Regurgitant fraction
Regurgitant volume

J. Cardiovasc. Dev. Dis. 2026, 13, 180

14 of 16

RCT
SSES
SVP
TBS
TECAB
TV
VATS
VR

Randomised controlled trial
Surgical self-efficacy scale
Stroke volume set by pump
Time-based score
Totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass
Tricuspid valve
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery
Virtual reality
