Noda et al.
General Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Cases

(2024) 3:42

General Thoracic and
Cardiovascular Surgery Cases

CASE REPORT

Totally endoscopic robotic repair of coronary
sinus atrial septal defect with concomitant
tricuspid annuloplasty
Kazuki Noda1, Yosuke Takahashi1* , Akimasa Morisaki1, Yoshito Sakon1, Kenta Nishiya1, Goki Inno1,
Yukihiro Nishimoto1, Munehide Nagao1 and Toshihiko Shibata1

Abstract
Background The coronary sinus type of atrial septal defect is rare. Standard treatment typically involves intracardiac
repair using conventional sternotomy or thoracotomy incisions; however, robotic technology can offer a feasible
alternative due to its ability to provide a high-quality surgical view of this anomaly.
Case presentation A 72-year-old man presented with asymptomatic atrial septal defect. Echocardiography revealed
a direct communication between the left atrium and CS with left-to-right shunt flow and a Qp/Qs ratio of 2.1:1. The
coronary sinus type of atrial septal defect was indicated for the totally endoscopic robotic repair considering few
comorbidities. We present a successful robotic repair of coronary sinus atrial septal defect with concomitant tricuspid
annuloplasty via the right atrium, properly identifying the boundary between the mitral annulus and coronary sinus
through a high-quality surgical view.
Conclusion Robotic repair can serve as a viable and therapeutically effective alternative for cases of coronary sinus
atrial septal defect with concomitant tricuspid annuloplasty.
Keywords Unroofed coronary sinus, Atrial septal defect, Robotic surgery
Background
Coronary sinus atrial septal defect (CS-ASD) is a rare
type of ASD characterized by incomplete atrioventricular fold formation. This anomaly is a part of unroofed
CS syndrome, which may result in a partial or complete
defect in the roof of the CS with or without a persistent
left superior vena cava (PLSVC) [1]. The standard intracardiac repair approach for this anomaly has traditionally been median sternotomy or thoracotomy; however,
robotically assisted repair can be a feasible alternative,
*Correspondence:
Yosuke Takahashi
f21065u@omu.ac.jp
Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Osaka Metropolitan University,
1‑4‑3, Asahichou, Abenoku, Osaka 545‑8585, Japan

as reported in some studies [2, 3]. Herein, we present a
successful case of totally endoscopic robotic repair of CSASD via right atriotomy in an elderly person.

Case presentation
A 72-year-old man with a medical history of hypertension and dyslipidemia was found to have a heart murmur
during a periodic health examination. He then visited
a local doctor. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)
revealed an ASD. He was then referred to our hospital.
Further evaluation with transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed a direct communication between
the left atrium and CS with left-to-right shunt flow and
a Qp/Qs ratio of 2.1:1, as observed via color Doppler
imaging (Fig. 1a). Moreover, mild tricuspid regurgitation with annulus dilatation of 50 mm in diameter was
noted (Fig. 1b). Enhanced computed tomography (CT)

permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

Noda et al. General Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Cases

(2024) 3:42

Fig. 1 Transesophageal echocardiography revealed a direct communication between the left atrium and CS with left-to-right shunt flow,
as observed via color Doppler imaging (a). The annulus of tricuspid valve was dilated at end-diastole, 50 mm in diameter (b). LA, left atrium; RA,
right atrium; CS, coronary sinus

confirmed the communication between the left atrium
and CS (Fig. 2a), measuring approximately 18 mm × 22
mm (Fig. 2b), and excluded any anomalous pulmonary or
systemic venous return. Cardiac catheterization revealed
a 13% oxygen saturation step-up from the superior vena
cava to the right atrium and a Qp/Qs ratio of 1.9:1, and
selective coronary angiography confirmed normal coronary arteries. After discussing with the patient, totally
endoscopic robotic repair of the defect and concomitant
tricuspid annuloplasty, which was indicated for mild tricuspid regurgitation with annulus dilatation over 40mm,
was performed due to few comorbidities and optimal
anatomical proportions for the robotic approach.
The da Vinci Surgical System Xi (Intuitive Surgical,
Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was used for the procedure.

Briefly, the patient was intubated with a double-lumen
endotracheal tube, and the right internal jugular vein was
cannulated before draping. A 4-cm-long skin incision
was made in the third intercostal space which was suitable for approaching CS-ASD and tricuspid valve, guided
by preoperative CT. Then, da Vinci ports were inserted
in the second for the left arm, third for the retractor arm,
and fifth intercostal spaces for the right arm through lateral endoscopic approach using robotics technique [4].
Following systemic heparinization, cardiopulmonary
bypass was initiated through the right femoral and subclavian arteries because of the shaggy aorta, and vacuumassisted venous drainage was performed from the right
femoral and internal jugular veins. The da Vinci system was used from the pericardiotomy step. By pulling

Fig. 2 Enhanced CT showed a communication between the left atrium and CS (a). 3D reconstruction CT revealed that the defect was located
adjacent to the mitral valve annulus, measuring approximately 18 mm × 22 mm (b). LA, left atrium; RA, right atrium; CS, coronary sinus; CS-ASD,
coronary sinus atrial septal defect; MV, mitral valve; TV, tricuspid valve; CT, computed tomography; 3D, three dimensional

Noda et al. General Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Cases

(2024) 3:42

pericardial traction sutures out of the body, the sufficient
surgical space was available to perform the procedures.
A venting tube was inserted from the right upper pulmonary vein to the left atrium. Cardiac arrest was induced
by direct cross-clamping of the ascending aorta, and
tepid blood cardioplegia was infused into the aortic root.
After right atriotomy was performed, the femoral venous
cannula was repositioned and directly clamping the
superior and inferior vena cava by clips. Tricuspid valve
and CS-ASD exposure was achieved with the aid of a
dynamic atrial retractor controlled from the robotic console. The defect was located at the terminal portion of the
CS, which communicated with the left atrium. The defect
size was approximately 25 mm × 25 mm, and the annulus of mitral posterior leaflet could be confirmed through
the defect (Fig. 3a). Initially, tricuspid annuloplasty using
a flexible prosthesis ring was performed with CV4 polytetrafluoroethylene continuous wrapping sutures. Subsequently, after trimming the bovine pericardial patch,
patch repair of the defect was performed with 5-0 polypropylene continuous sutures, leaving the CS orifice on
the right by the insertion of suction tube (Fig. 3b, c and
Additional file 1). Using antegrade blood cardioplegia,
CS patency was confirmed by the return of cardioplegia,
and simultaneously there was no leakage from the defect
under the increased left atrial pressure without venting.
After atrial closure in the double layers, the patient was
weaned from bypass. The cardiopulmonary bypass and
aortic clamping times were 188 and 108 min, respectively.
Postoperative TTE demonstrated no residual shunt.
Because the patient had postoperatively episodes of
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, anticoagulation therapy
was introduced. He was discharged home at 12 days
after surgery and was determined to be clinically well
after a year.

Discussion
CS-ASD is a part of unroofed CS syndrome, which represents an abnormal communication between the CS
and left atrium. The morphological types of unroofed CS
syndrome have been classified into four groups based on
whether the defect is complete or partial and whether it
has a PLSVC or not [5]. Herein, the patient had a partially
unroofed terminal portion, which was classified as type 4.
Totally endoscopic robotic repair of ASD is safe and
feasible [6, 7]. The robotic approach provides not only
cosmetic benefits and patient comfort but also a highquality surgical view and precise suture/cut handling,
which are more suitable for complex intracardiac repairs
in adults than conventional sternotomy or thoracotomy
without robotic techniques. Also, compared to other
approaches, totally endoscopic robotic surgery provides
quicker postoperative recover thanks to limited skin
incision. Conversely, conventional sternotomy provides
the comprehensive access and direct visualization that
allowing extensive repairs and dealing with unexpected
complications. Thus, the approach should be carefully
considered taking each advantage into account.
Surgical correction of unroofed CS syndrome is determined by the presence of PLSVC. In cases of unroofed CS
syndrome with PLSVC, either direct ligation of PLSVC
or rerouting to the right atrium is required [8, 9]. In the
absence of PLSVC, as in the present case, defect correction by reroofing the CS or closure of the CS ostium with
a patch, if the defect is adjacent to the CS ostium, is indicated [10]. Although repairing an unroofed CS may be
challenging, a robotic approach can facilitate the procedure by providing clear visualization of the anatomy and
allowing accurate suturing. The key point in this case is
accurately identifying the boundary between the mitral
annulus and CS. Visualization of the mitral valve annulus and CS roof defect with a zero-degree scope via the
right atrium helped close the defect and preserve the CS

Fig. 3 Intraoperative findings showed that a the annulus of the mitral posterior leaflet could be confirmed through the defect. b Patch repair
of the defect was performed with continuous suture, leaving the CS orifice on the right. Finally, there was no residual shunt (c). CS-ASD, coronary
sinus atrial septal defect; CS, coronary sinus; MV, mitral valve; TV, tricuspid valve

Noda et al. General Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Cases

(2024) 3:42

orifice. To enhance the safety of this procedure, preoperatively evaluating pulmonary venous return anomalies,
atrioventricular septal defects, and valve abnormalities
using multiple modalities, such as TEE or multidetector
CT, is essential.

Conclusion
Robotic repair can serve as a viable and therapeutically
effective alternative for cases of CS-ASD with concomitant tricuspid annuloplasty.
Abbreviations
CS-ASD	Coronary sinus atrial septal defect
ASD	Atrial septal defect
CS	Coronary sinus
PLSVC	Persistent left superior vena cava
TTE	Transthoracic echocardiography
TEE	Transesophageal echocardiography
CT	Computed tomography

Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1186/​s44215-​024-​00167-1.
Supplementary Material 1. Robotic patch repair of a coronary sinus atrial
septal defect
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Steve V from Enago (www.​enago.​jp) for the English
language review.
Authors’ contributions
Writing, K.N.; critical review and revision, K.N., Y.T.; final approval of the article,
all authors; accountability for all aspects of the work, all authors.
Funding
Not applicable.
Availability of data and materials
The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from
the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for this case report.
Consent for publication
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and accompanying images.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 16 April 2024 Accepted: 30 August 2024
