Keynote Lecture Series

Complications and their management in robotic mitral valve
surgery from the surgical assistant’s perspective
Nirav C. Patel1,2, Aaron R. Macoskey3

Northwell Health, Lenox Hill Hospital, Heart and Lung, New York, NY, USA; 2Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead, NY,

USA; 3Northwell Health, Robotic Surgery, Manhasset, NY, USA
Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead, NY, USA. Email: nipatel@northwell.edu.

Robotic mitral valve (MV) repair is an alternative approach to traditional MV repair via median sternotomy.
There is a rich history of innovation embedded within robotic MV surgery. Since the inaugural robotic MV
repair performed in May 1998 by Carpentier, progressive techniques and expanding indications have given
surgeons the opportunity to offer an increasing number of their patients access to robotic MV surgery. This,
coupled with less cynicism surrounding robotic and minimally invasive surgery, has stimulated robotic cardiac
surgery program development and the number of robotic MV procedures performed annually. Utilizing
the robotic technology in MV surgery is far from the standard of care and must be approached modestly
by only well trained and experienced cardiothoracic surgeons and teams. Advanced surgical techniques
provide numerous opportunities for complications and adverse outcomes. It is essential for the entire robotic
cardiac surgery team to be aware of the additional risks during each step of the procedure. The fundamental
principle of robotic MV repair is to avoid complications with anticipation. No surgery is without risk, and
unfortunately, some of those risks are unavoidable. If a complication does occur, it is essential the surgeon
and robotic team understand their roles and how to triage the event. This keynote lecture will outline each
phase of the robotic MV repair surgery before, during and after the patient cart is docked to the patient.
Within each phase we will identify potential complications and their management.
Keywords: Robotic surgery; minimally invasive surgery; mitral valve (MV); complications

Introduction
Innovations in cardiothoracic surgery and surgical robotics
generated the opportunity for the two to merge and
produce an alternative to the traditional median sternotomy
approach. Intuitive Surgical originated as a start-up
company in 1995. After acquiring tele-presence surgical
technology from Stanford Research Institute, Intuitive
Surgical started developing the da Vinci Surgical System (1).
Subsequent acquisitions by Intuitive Surgical aided in the
development of their first surgical robotic system, da Vinci.
To date, Intuitive Surgical have developed five robotic
surgical systems: da Vinci, da Vinci S, da Vinci Si, da Vinci

Xi and da Vinci X.
Robotic assisted minimally invasive mitral valve (MV)
surgery is an innovative technique highly experience
surgeons utilize in lieu of an invasive median sternotomy.
Robotic assisted MV repair has been widely adopted
since the first case was performed by Dr. Carpentier and
Dr. Mohr in 1998. The first MV repair was performed
using a prototype of the da Vinci system, prior to the
first generation da Vinci receiving Food and Drug
Administration approval for intra-cardiac use in 2002 (2).
Robotic MV surgery has since evolved in both the
technology used and the surgical approach. To date, three

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 11, No 5 September 2022

Table 1 Absolute and relative contraindications to robotic mitral valve repair and replacement
Absolute

Relative

Prior right thoracotomy

Previous sternotomy

Severe pulmonary dysfunction

Moderate pulmonary dysfunction

Myocardial infarction or ischemia <30 days

Asymptomatic CAD (treated)

Coronary artery disease—requiring CABG

Coronary artery disease—requiring PCI

Severe generalized vascular disease

Limited peripheral vascular disease

Symptomatic CVD or stroke <30 days

Asymptomatic CVD

Poor right ventricular dysfunction

Poor left ventricular function (EF <30%)

Pulmonary hypertension (fixed >60 torr)

Pulmonary hypertension (variable >60 torr)

Significant aortic stenosis or insufficiency

Mild to moderate aortic stenosis or insufficiency

Severe annular calcification (repairs)

Moderate annular calcification

Severe liver dysfunction
Significant bleeding disorders
Chitwood (2). CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; CVD, cerebrovascular disease; EF, ejection fraction; CAD, coronary artery disease;
PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention.

surgical approaches for robotic MV repair have been
described: classic robotic MV repair, lateral endoscopic
approach with robotics (LEAR) and complete endoscopic
approach (3). This keynote lecture focuses on the classic
robotic MV repair approach.
The robotic assisted approach to MV repair creates
favorable intraoperative and postoperative advantages for
patients. Benefits of minimally invasive cardiac surgery
include less pain, less blood loss, decreased hospital length
of stay, improved cosmesis and quicker return to normal
activity (4). Conversely, robotic assisted MV repair is more
challenging from a technical standpoint and introduces risks
at each step of the procedure. The cardiothoracic surgeon
and every member of the robotic surgery team must be
aware of risks associated with robotic MV repair and be
prepared for the complications they may encounter.
Preoperative considerations
Risk prevention in robotic MV surgery begins before
the patient enters the operating room (OR). First,
creating a well-trained and dedicated robotic surgery
team is essential. This team consists of the cardiothoracic
surgeon, anesthesiologist, bedside assistant, perfusionist,
circulating nurse and surgical technician. Each robotic MV
surgery should be performed with only these individuals.

The cardiothoracic surgeon must be experienced and
proficient in minimally invasive non-robotic MV surgery.
It is recommended the cardiothoracic surgeon completes
a fellowship in minimally invasive surgery and attends
Intuitive Surgical’s practical training lab. Repetition
increases familiarity; therefore, the dedicated robotic
cardiac surgery team must practice “dry-runs” of robotic
assisted MV repair at a structured cadence.
Patient selection is one of the most essential steps in
robotic assisted MV repair and a predictor of potential
intraoperative and postoperative complication. Although
indications for robotic assisted MV surgery have expanded
since its adoption, careful patient selection will reduce
complications and adverse outcomes. Absolute and relative
contraindications to robotic MV surgery are described by
Dr. Chitwood (Table 1). Patient selection is a process that
should involve a multidisciplinary team to ensure favorable
outcomes.
Phases of surgery
Cardiothoracic surgeons must anticipate prolonged
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), aortic cross clamp and
intraoperative times during robotic cardiac surgery due
to the increased number of steps compared to traditional
median sternotomy (5). Figure 1 outlines the phases of

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Patel and Macoskey. Complications and management in robotic MV surgery

Patient
positioning

Port
placement

Decannulation

Cannulation

Weaning
from CPB

Pericardiotomy

De-Airing

Creating
exposure

Repair

Cardioplegia +
aortic root vent

Myocardial
protection

Aortic
occlusion

Left Atriotomy +
retractor + LV vent

Figure 1 Phases of robotic surgery. CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass; LV, left ventricle.

a robotic MV repair. It is important to understand the
phases of robotic surgery and anticipate when and how
complications may occur.
Patient positioning
After establishing intravenous access, arterial catheter(s),
intubation, central venous catheter (CVC), Foley catheter,
Swan-Ganz catheter if indicated and transesophageal
echocardiogram (TEE), attention will be focused on
positioning of the patient. Positioning for the classic robotic
MV repair will have subtle nuances from site-to-site. The
following steps are taken to ensure optimal functionality
with the da Vinci Xi patient cart and safety to the patient.
Defibrillator pads on right scapula and left anterolateral
chest wall. Bovie grounding pads should be placed on
bilateral buttocks unless surgical implant is present. Patient
is moved to align right flank with the right edge of the
operative table; 500 mL saline bag wrapped in a bed sheet to
serve as a “bump” is placed under the right scapula, anterior
to the heater-cooler blanket. This allows the chest to elevate
approximately thirty degrees and the right shoulder to drop
posteriorly to prevent collision with the robotic left arm.
Wrist restraint is placed on patient’s right wrist and passed
under patient and secured to the left side of operative table.
Left upper extremity is tucked in normal fashion using
multiple foam or gel pads to protect critical structures.
Right upper extremity will be suspended off the right side
of operative table. Both upper extremities are positioned in
a dependent position, avoiding abduction, external rotation
and shoulder displacement. Hips and lower extremities are
placed in anatomic position, ensuring no rotation of the
hips and five degrees of flexion at the patient’s knees. Feet
are protected with foam and secured to the operative table
to prevent shifting during the operation. Positioning of
the patient must be done meticulously to avoid injury to
peripheral nerves, brachial plexus and cervical spine. If a
heater-cooler blanket is used, avoid direct contact with the
patient’s skin to avoid a burn injury. Applying Tegaderm or

film dressing over defibrillator and bovie pads will prevent
pooling of surgical prep solution, avoiding risk of surgical
fire and ensuring proper contact with the patient. Unique
to robotic mitral valve (MV) surgery, when applicable, the
patient’s right axilla must be shaved, as it is oftentimes in
the surgical field to accommodate the cross-clamp port. In
addition to the right axilla, the entire anterior surface of the
patient’s chest and lower extremities should be prepped into
the surgical field in the event of emergent conversion to
sternotomy.
Port placement
Placing surgical ports in the correct intercostal spaces
reduces the risk of complication and overall difficulty
of the operation. Preoperative imaging is essential to
understanding the patient’s anatomy and planning of port
location. Posteroanterior and lateral chest X-ray provides
intrathoracic measurements ensuring patient’s anatomy is
amenable to acceptable working area. Three-dimensional
computed tomography with angiography (CTA) of the
chest allows the surgeon to visualize the patient’s cardiac
anatomy in relation to the rib spaces. Additionally, surgeons
can create digital ports to determine the correct location
for placement during surgery. Non-contrast computed
tomography (CT) of the chest is still beneficial for
preoperative assessment if contrast is contraindicated or to
limit radiation exposure to the patient. Incorrect placement
of ports may lead to iatrogenic injury to critical anatomy,
external robotic arm collision, increased case complexity
and even inability to complete the operation minimally
invasively with the assistance of the robot.
Mini-right thoracotomy, or working port, is performed
on all cases at our institution and established prior to port
placement. Surgical ports should always be placed under
direct visualization with the assistance of the robotic
endoscope or laparoscopic tower. When utilizing a mini
thoracotomy, the surgeon may use intrathoracic finger
palpation to guide port placement. This practice will

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 11, No 5 September 2022

reduce the risk of injury to intercostal vessels, right internal
thoracic artery (ITA), or puncture of critical anatomy. If
intercostal bleeding is encountered, hemostasis must be
achieved before proceeding onto the next step. Hemostasis
is achieved with cautery, surgical clip, oversewing stitch or
manual compression. Cauterization should be performed
intrathoracic to avoid delayed wound healing, infection
and to ensure proper cosmesis. A high rising diaphragm
may cause visual obstruction. Retraction of the diaphragm
can be achieved with retraction stitch. Using a pledgeted
stitch is recommended to prevent laceration of the
diaphragm. Control any diaphragmatic bleeding with
additional pledgeted stitches. At the end of the operation,
the diaphragmatic retraction stitch should be tied on itself
rather than removed to avoid postoperative bleeding. If
Endo Close device is used, intercostal bleeding may occur.
The area should be inspected after each use, and hemostasis
achieved at that time. If diaphragmatic retraction stitch is
not desired or the patient has a large AP diameter, use of a
15-cm robotic trocar for the right robotic arm will exclude
the diaphragm completely.

and appropriate communication between operators. The
right ventricle (RV) is at risk of perforation during SVC
and inferior vena cava (IVC) cannulation by the guidewire
or cannula. To avoid this, the operator must have clear
visualization with TEE when inserting the guidewire
and positioning the cannula. If the RV is perforated,
management depends on the extent of the injury. If the
perforation is small, from the guidewire, the operator may
choose to monitor and evaluate prior to closing. If the
perforation is sizeable, and the patient is not on CPB, it will
be extremely difficult to repair minimally invasively. The
operator will be required to convert to sternotomy for open
repair.

Cannulation: internal jugular vein
Robotic assisted MV repair requires peripheral bicaval
cannulation. Superior vena cava (SVC) cannulation
is commonly achieved via right internal jugular vein.
Facilities must establish roles for this process to avoid
contamination and iatrogenic injury. A two-operator
approach is best practice. The SVC cannula may be placed
in the ipsilateral side as the CVC. To avoid complications
with SVC cannula insertion, it is important to maintain
a sterile field and communicate efficiently. During all
percutaneous cannulations, the surgeon must have complete
visualization of needles, wires and cannulas with ultrasound
and TEE imaging. Inadvertent carotid artery puncture
during placement is rare but may occur. If this scenario
occurs, the provider should not remove the needle due
to limited control with manual compression. The injury
should be inspected with ultrasound. Vascular surgery
should evaluate, and dependent on the extent of the injury,
an angiogram, covered stent, or cutdown with repair may
be necessary. The SVC cannula should be inserted using
the Seldinger technique in a controlled and methodical
manner. Its position may be adjusted by TEE guidance or
via the working port with direct palpation prior to initiating
CPB. Excessive blood loss and exsanguination is avoided
with SVC cannula occlusion using two tubing clamps

Cannulation: femoral vessels
Ilio-femoral vessels are routinely accessed for IVC
cannulation and retrograde arterial cannulation. Thorough
review of the patient’s history to identify presence of
atherosclerotic disease, active wound infections and a recent
coronary angiogram must be performed. If peripheral
vascular disease (PVD) is suspected, preoperative evaluation
of the lower extremities with CTA is preferred. In the event
the patient does have severe PVD, consider contralateral
femoral artery or alternate access. Assessment of the aortic
arch and descending thoracic aorta with intraoperative
TEE is to be performed prior to commitment to retrograde
arterial cannulation via the femoral artery. Retrograde
arterial perfusion increases risk of embolic stroke and
retrograde aortic dissection (2). If significant atherosclerotic
disease or mobile plaque is present in the ascending or
descending thoracic aorta, alternate access or sternotomy
approach must be considered. Any recent history of a
coronary angiogram performed with femoral artery for
access is noted.
Coronary angiogram may cause fibrosis, scarring
or narrowing of the femoral artery used for access. If
femoral access coronary angiogram occurred >30 days
from operative date, the ipsilateral artery is appropriate
for use at our institution. If coronary angiogram occurred
<30 days from operative date, the contralateral femoral
artery or alternative access is considered. However, if the
femoral artery diameter is generous, ipsilateral femoral
access is not an absolute contraindication at our institution.
Femoral arteries with a minimal luminal diameter of
<7 mm are considered poor candidates for cannulation,
and alternate access must be considered (6). Femoral access
in the presence of active wound infection is an absolute

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Patel and Macoskey. Complications and management in robotic MV surgery

contraindication at our institution and should be prepped
out of the operative field.
Percutaneous and traditional cut-down access to femoral
vessels have been previously described. Intraoperative
ultrasound is recommended regardless of approach to
identify common femoral artery, superior to profunda
femoris artery. Cut-down technique is preferred at
Northwell Health, and is the technique recommended
for patients with recent percutaneous intervention such
as recent cardiac catheterization or prior percutaneous
closure device and intervention. Cut-down technique gives
the surgeon more control and access to repair the femoral
vessels if required. Complications to consider with the
cut-down technique typically occur post-operatively and
include seroma, hematoma, delayed healing, lymphatic
fistula and wound infection. These complications are
avoided with the percutaneous approach, however the
risk of limb ischemia, pseudoaneurysm and other vascular
complications increase. Limb ischemia may be prevented
or treated with placement of a distal perfusion cannula.
Distal perfusion cannula is recommended for suspected
lengthy CPB time, a small common femoral artery or
abrupt change in near-infrared spectroscopy monitors
(NIRS). If using NIRS, relative changes from the patient’s
baseline rSO2 are more useful predictors of limb ischemia
than the absolute values of rSO2 (7). If limb ischemia is of
concern while exercising percutaneous cannulation, femoral
cut-down is recommended for inspection. Compartment
syndrome is a sequala of acute and prolonged limb ischemia.
If compartment syndrome is suspected or identified,
immediate release via fasciotomy is recommended. Vascular
surgery should be consulted intraoperatively for assessment
of muscle viability. Limb ischemia must be avoided in every
robotic mitral operation. Limb ischemia and subsequent
fasciotomy are absolute catastrophes in a minimally invasive
operation and eclipse any benefit the patient would receive
from a robotic MV approach.
Complications resulting from IVC cannula insertion can
be avoided with diligent TEE guidance and communication
between surgeon and anesthesiologist. Whether inserting
by cut-down or percutaneous techniques, cannulation
is performed by Seldinger technique over a wire. If not
performed methodically, the guidewire may perforate
the right atrium (RA) or create a patent foramen ovale
(PFO). Injury to the RA can be repaired primarily via miniright thoracotomy. If PFO is created, it can be repaired
primarily while on CPB. After successful cannulation, both
arterial and venous cannulas must be secured in place. We

recommend suturing the cannulas to the patient with 2-0
silk suture. After initiation of successful CPB, the arterial
and venous cannulas should be covered with blue towels to
avoid disruption and migration during the operation. The
bedside assistant must routinely inspect the position of the
arterial and venous cannulas throughout the duration of the
operation. Any concern must be communicated immediately
to the surgeon.
Cannulation: axillary
Axillary cannulation is recommended in patients with
an atheromatous aorta, severe PVD, morbid obesity or
active groin infection. Axillary cannulation will provide
antegrade arterial perfusion, decreasing the risk of embolic
cerebrovascular accident (CVA) in patients with aortic
arch or descending thoracic aortic atherosclerosis. Left
axillary access should be reserved for patients with a
history of right axillary surgery or vascular access as the
right axillary artery is closer to the operative field (8).
Injury to the brachial plexus may occur during axillary
cut-down, therefore dissection must be precise, and stress
produced by retractors should be limited. The axillary
artery is extremely thin and fragile and must be handled
and manipulated delicately. Commonly, an 8mm Dacron
graft is sewn end-to-side to the axillary artery. The
surgeon and first assistant must anticipate this to prevent
dissection of the artery and limb ischemia. If this occurs
or is suspected, selective peripheral angiogram needs to be
performed and injury repaired to restore perfusion. The
operation may need to be aborted if the injury is extensive
requiring vascular surgery intervention. Vessel loops
should be utilized to establish distal and proximal control
and vessel clamps readily available prior to arteriotomy to
prevent exsanguination.
Pericardiotomy
Significant and redundant pericardial adipose pad or
residual thymus should be excised prior to pericardiotomy
to improve visualization. The adipose pad and thymus are
quite vascular. Achieve hemostasis of adipose tissue, thymus
or thymic vein upon entry. Bleeding must be controlled
when encountered to prevent unnecessary blood transfusion
and obstruction of the operative field. Hemostasis can be
achieved using robotic EndoWrist cautery, handheld bovie
or surgical clips.
Phrenic nerve injury is a known complication of robotic

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 11, No 5 September 2022

MV repair. Phrenic nerve must always be identified
prior to performing pericardiotomy. Pericardiotomy is
performed anterior to the phrenic nerve, maintaining
generous distance away from the nerve. Pericardiotomy is
less complicated once the patient is on CPB, however an
experienced surgeon may choose to perform pericardiotomy
prior to CPB to decrease time on bypass. Pericardial
retraction sutures will be utilized, so a substantial distance
from the nerve is preferred to limit the tension applied to it
throughout the operation.
Cautery on or near the heart may cause ventricular
fibrillation and other dysrhythmias. To avoid this, use the
left arm EndoWrist instrument to securely retract the
pericardium laterally as the pericardiotomy is performed. If
the patient experiences a dysrhythmia, discontinue any use
of robotic energy and treat the underlying issue. Placement
of defibrillator pads appropriately during patient positioning
is essential for this reason.

injury. The bedside assistant must be aware of intrathoracic
conflicts and collisions as well. The aortic cross clamp is at
risk of collision with robotic arm one inside and outside the
chest cavity. Proper port placement, targeting and docking
of the da Vinci Xi should prevent external robotic arm
collisions. After docking is complete, flex joints and then
assess patient clearance to ensure proper spacing between
joints, arms and the patient. Unlike earlier generations of
the da Vinci robot, the Xi is engineered to create a safer
working environment.

Creating exposure
After pericardiotomy is complete and pericardial retraction
sutures are placed, exposure necessary for the operation is
obtained. Every patient’s anatomy is unique and different
planes will need to be developed. Dissection around the
aorta is necessary if using an aortic cross clamp. Injury
to the aorta may occur when developing a plane in the
transverse sinus or when extending the pericardiotomy
superiorly. If the injury is not substantial, it may be
controlled with compression and repaired minimally
invasively. If the injury is significant, CPB needs to
be established as rapidly as possible. Conversion to
sternotomy may be required. Each facility and robotic
team must have protocols to follow in the event of aortic
injury or conversion. These scenarios must be familiar to
all individuals participating in robotic MV surgery and
practiced frequently.
The pulmonary artery (PA) may anatomically take a
more caudal course in some patients and be at risk for
injury when developing planes. This may be controlled with
manual compression using the EndoWrist instruments and
primary repair. If the injury is more extensive it may require
rapid initiation of CPB or conversion to sternotomy.
The bedside assistant must be conscious of all trocars
once they are docked to the patient cart. Port placement can
be tight in patients with small body habitus. It is essential
that the bedside assistant is conscious of all surrounding
instruments and ports to reduce robotic arm one induced

Cardioplegia and aortic root vent
Placement of cardioplegia and aortic root vent cannulas
is not necessary when aortic occlusion is achieved with
an endoballoon. The central lumen of the endoballoon
is utilized for cardioplegia delivery and as the aortic root
vent. When a transthoracic aortic occlusion clamp is used,
additional aortic root vent and cardioplegia cannula is
required. This can be challenging when inserting through
a stab incision through the second or third intercostal
space in the mid-clavicular line. An extended aortic root
vent cannula is used for precise insertion directly through
the assist port. To avoid aortic hematoma, bruising and
bleeding, aortic root vent stay sutures are placed prior to
heparinization. Two 2-0 pledgeted Ethibond sutures are
placed to secure the cannula during the operation. The
aortic root vent should be placed in the ascending aorta,
leaving appropriate room for the transthoracic cross clamp.
All peri-aortic adipose tissue and redundant tissue in
proximity to the root vent insertion site should be excised
to ensure the cannula will remain secure throughout the
procedure. At Northwell Health, after achieving activated
clotting time (ACT) of >450 seconds, the perfusionist is
asked to lower the systemic blood pressure, and the bedside
assistant carefully places the aortic root vent. The console
surgeon helps guide the bedside assistant with right and
left robotic arms. This technique decreases the risk of
inadequate penetration of ascending aorta which can result
in bleeding, requiring additional pledgeted repair sutures,
or even acute aortic dissection. To reduce the number of
accessories extending out of the working port, the aortic
root vent is secured with a snare and short tourniquet
tubing. Three large surgical clips are placed at the distal
aspect of the tourniquet to secure its position, and the
tourniquet is tucked into the chest, parallel with the SVC
and posterior to where the transthoracic aortic cross clamp
will be positioned. The bedside assistant must ensure proper

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Patel and Macoskey. Complications and management in robotic MV surgery

de-airing technique is performed when connecting the
aortic root cannula to the bifurcated cardioplegia cannula
adapter. This step is critical to prevent air embolism which
could result in a transient ischemic attack (TIA) or CVA.
The provider performing this step must be confident in
the steps of de-airing and communicate clearly with the
perfusionist.
Aortic occlusion: aortic cross clamp
Aortic occlusion during robotic MV surgery is achieved
by either transthoracic aortic cross clamp or endoballoon
aortic occlusion. At our institution, we use either the
Cygnet-Flexible clamp or the Chitwood-DeBakey
transthoracic clamp. The Cygnet-Flexible clamp is
passed through the assist port for application and tucked
away from the field and covered with a blue towel.
The Chitwood-DeBakey clamp is inserted through an
additional incision in the chest wall. Bates describes that
when using the Chitwood-DeBakey clamp, it is important
to insert the clamp through the second or third intercostal
space, mid-to-posterior axillary line (9). To avoid conflict
with the left instrument arm, it must be passed closely in
front of the SVC at the pericardial junction (9). Caution
must be exercised to ensure the upper jaw of the clamp
is within the pericardial sac and does not include the
pericardial edge.
Aortic cross clamping in robotic cardiac surgery
should only be performed by the surgeon or an extremely
experienced bedside assistant. This phase of the operation
contains potential complications the robotic team must
anticipate. Use of the Chitwood-DeBakey clamp requires an
additional incision in the chest and puncture of the thoracic
cavity. After creating the tunnel, inspect the site with the
endoscope to evaluate bleeding. If bleeding is present, it
should be controlled prior to inserting the cross clamp. If
the chest wall incision for the Chitwood-DeBakey clamp
is created too anterior, there is risk for conflict with the
left instrument arm which could be catastrophic. Forceful
collision could cause aortic rupture, dissection or bruising,
and release or migration of the cross clamp. Degree of
aortic rupture depends on location and extent. If significant,
the operation will be abandoned, the patient will be rapidly
placed on CPB, and then converted to sternotomy to repair
aortic injury. If aortic dissection is suspected, evaluation of
ascending aorta, aortic arch and descending thoracic aorta
is performed with TEE by anesthesia. If aortic dissection
is confirmed, the operation will be aborted, and dissection

managed per dissection type guidelines. Retrograde
aortic perfusion is contraindicated in presence of acute
aortic dissection as well as establishing alternate access
for antegrade aortic perfusion to continue MV surgery. If
cross clamp is forcefully displaced causing aortic hematoma
or bruising, adventitia should be released by the surgeon
and cross clamp repositioned in correct position. Proper
positioning of the clamp will prevent these scenarios. The
bedside assistant must be conscious of the cross clamp
throughout the entirety of the case to avoid collision
as well.
Creating exposure is an essential step when utilizing
transthoracic aortic cross clamp. The surgeon must develop
planes that allow adequate room for the clamp jaws to pass.
Failure to complete this step may result in clamping of the
PA or left atrial appendage (LAA). Prior to aortic occlusion
with the transthoracic aortic clamp, the right PA and LAA
must be visualized and freed from the clamp jaws (9). If
using the Chitwood-DeBakey clamp, visualize its location
in relation to the SVC after aortic occlusion to ensure there
is no obstruction which would create insufficient venous
drainage. To reduce risk of TIA or CVA, limit number of
aortic occlusions with transthoracic cross clamp. Single
cross clamping is best practice.
Aortic occlusion: endoballoon aortic occlusion
Aortic occlusion with endoballoon should be reserved
for experienced surgeons with considerable robotic MV
experience. Synergy with qualified anesthesiologist is crucial
to successful positioning of the endoballoon. This method
of aortic occlusion adds complexity to the operation.
Difficulty passing the guidewire retrograde across the aortic
arch and repetitive cannulation of the great vessels with
the guidewire can be troubling. If this occurs, options may
include advancing the endoballoon into the descending
aorta, pulling the guidewire back and reinserting it again.
Additionally, exchanging the guidewire for a multipurpose
or JR4 catheter may be beneficial. When endoballoon aortic
occlusion is anticipated, the patient will require bilateral
radial artery catheters prior to initiation of the operation.
Migration of the endoballoon may occur during the
operation, which can be identified by discrepancies in radial
artery pressure readings. Distal migration of endoballoon
will obstruct the origin of the innominate artery resulting
in systemic hypotension (4). Proximal migration of the
endoballoon has been reported and will obscure the
operative field especially near the left fibrous trigone (10).

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 11, No 5 September 2022

Additional methods have been described to confirm
the endoballoon is in the correct position. Inflating the
endoballoon with a solution of 0.03% indocyanine green
(ICG) in 5% albumin while activating the near-infrared
laser on the robotic endoscope fluoresces the endoballoon,
allowing it to be visualized as a green band around the aortic
wall (11). This technique can be utilized to intermittently
confirm position of endoballoon and ensure it has not
migrated.
Iatrogenic endoballoon rupture is quite problematic
and may occur due to overinflation or puncture. During
MV repair, if sub-valvular neochords are used, it is
recommended they are placed first and that annuloplasty
suture placement start at P1 progressing up to mid-A2
segment as endoballoon rupture may occur with deep
suturing in this zone (12).
Iatrogenic aortic dissection resulting from endoballoon
aortic occlusion is rare but has been reported. Caution must
be exercised in patients with atherosclerotic disease and
when utilizing retrograde arterial perfusion in ipsilateral
extremity as endoballoon device. When the endoballoon
catheter occupies part of the arterial cannula lumen, high jet
pressures are created at the exit of the cannula, increasing
the risk of retrograde aortic dissection (13). To prevent this,
all members of the team must monitor perfusion pressures
from that femoral artery cannula. If the patient becomes
significantly hypertensive, pharmacotherapy must be used
to normalize perfusion pressures. If unsuccessful, the team
may try adjusting the trajectory of the femoral cannula
or placing an additional retrograde arterial perfusion
cannula in the contralateral femoral artery to split arterial
perfusion bilaterally (13). Retrograde aortic dissection is a
catastrophic complication of this operation. If this occurs,
the extent of the dissection must be evaluated by TEE. If
there is evidence of malperfusion or rupture, the dissection
needs immediate repair by open surgical or endovascular
approach. If the dissection is limited, the procedure should
be aborted, the patient resuscitated and monitored in
the ICU.
T I A a n d C VA a r e p o t e n t i a l c o m p l i c a t i o n s o f
endoballoon aortic occlusion. The endoballoon is
typically inserted via left femoral artery. As insertion
and positioning occurs over a wire using the Seldinger
technique, wire manipulation must be limited to prevent
emboli from an atheromatous aorta. As endoballoon
is passed retrograde through the descending thoracic
aorta, across the aortic arch and into the ascending aorta,
anesthesia must use narrow windows on TEE to alert

the surgeon of any identifiable atherosclerotic plaque
and calcifications. Limit contact with the intima and
unnecessary inflation to prevent micro emboli.

Left atriotomy
Robotic MV exposure is most frequently achieved by left
atriotomy through the interatrial groove. The primary
incision should be slightly posterior to the interatrial
groove. Extension of the atriotomy should be performed
inferiorly onto the posterior wall of the left atrium (LA). If
the atriotomy is extended superiorly behind the SVC, it will
be challenging to close at the conclusion of the operation.
The bedside assistant must frequently use suction to keep
the operative field free of potential emboli that could
cause postoperative TIA/CVA. LA lift retractor is placed
in robotic arm three. When exposing the MV, the LA may
tear if excessive force is generated anteriorly by the LA lift
retractor. This will result in challenging closure at the end
of the case.
Left atrial lift retractor
The LA lift retractor is placed through the robotic third
arm port. The port is placed in the fourth or fifth intercostal
space, medial to the midclavicular line (4). This port must
always be placed under direct visualization. The right ITA
is located 2–3 cm lateral to the midline of the sternum. To
avoid injury to the ITA, the surgeon should palpate where
they intend to place the robotic third arm while visualizing
with the robotic endoscope. If the ITA is injured, hemostasis
must be achieved. This is performed with surgical clips or
suture ligation.
The atrioventricular (AV) septum can be injured by the
LA lift retractor when creating exposure of the MV. The
distal tips of the LA lift retractor need to be inspected to
ensure they do not include the AV septum. If there is injury
to the AV septum, it is either identified after removal of
the LA lift retractor or when the MV is assessed by the
anesthesiologist. Prevent this complication by minimizing
tension with the LA lift retractor. Attempt to repair small
injuries with primary closure using pledgeted mattress
sutures. Larger defects and persistent small injuries will
need patch repair.
Excessive anterior tension on the LA by the LA lift
retractor may distort or compress the RV. If the LA
lift retractor is not relaxed during administration of
cardioplegia, the right coronary anatomy may be obstructed

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Patel and Macoskey. Complications and management in robotic MV surgery

and not receive essential myocardial protection. This will
result in RV dysfunction when weaning from CPB. The
LA lift retractor must always be relaxed when running
cardioplegia to ensure adequate distribution and protection.
The LA lift retractor also becomes useful at the end of the
procedure in providing exposure. The surgeon can retract
the RA with the LA lift retractor to expose to the LA suture
line. Additionally, if a temporary pacing wire is desired or
required, the LA lift retractor can be utilized to lift up the
pericardium for placement onto the RV.
Left ventricular vent
To avoid additional clutter through the working port,
the left ventricle (LV) vent may be passed through an
additional stab incision. This should be created posterior
and slightly superior to the working port. LV perforation
is not recognized until after MV repair is complete, aortic
occlusion is released and anesthesia is evaluating the
competency of the MV. Techniques to prevent this from
occurring include using a smaller diameter soft floppy
catheter and crossing the MV with the vent under direct
visualization after left atriotomy with the robotic arms.
Oftentimes, traditional LV vent is not used in robotic MV
surgery. Rather, a basket sucker is placed in the LA to clear
the operative field while removing the risk of LV perforation.
LV perforation by LV vent is identified by surgeon due to
excessive bright red blood in the pericardium. Repair of the
defect is unlikely from a minimally invasive approach and
conversion to sternotomy is required.
Myocardial protection
It is difficult to utilize myocardial temperature probes
due to limited visualization of the RV and essentially no
visualization of the LV. Similarly, topical hypothermia
with ice is not practical via mini-thoracotomy, and not
possible in totally endoscopic surgery. If complex repair is
anticipated, systemic hypothermia should be considered.
When delivering cardioplegia, it is important to understand
infusion and root pressures to ensure the transthoracic
cross clamp or endoballoon have not migrated. Typically,
and at our institution, del Nido is the cardioplegia
solution of choice in robotic MV surgery. It is favorable
for this operation given it prolongs myocardial protection
and regularly requires only one dose per operation.
Communication with anesthesia during cardioplegia
delivery is critical. It is important to ensure adequate

venous drainage to maintain myocardial temperature and
protection. In the event of RV distension, redosing of
cardioplegia is essential.
MV repair
The surgeon and bedside assistant must work as a team
during the MV repair due to intricate movements, suture
management and knot tying to perform the best repair
the first time to limit CPB time. Suture management may
become overwhelming for the bedside assistant, so a suture
guide can be helpful. There are nuances to every repair
depending on the pathology, individual surgeon technique
and surgeon preferences. If neo-chords are required, it is
recommended they are placed prior to annular sutures.
Once neo-chords are placed distally in the papillary muscle,
the remaining suture can be passed to the surgeon to be
stored in the LV until annular sutures are placed to limit
traffic in the working port. To further decrease demand
on the bedside assistant, the annuloplasty ring may be
passed to the surgeon to be sewn in with running technique
rather than interrupted annular stitches with parachuting
technique. After annular sutures are properly placed
through the annuloplasty ring, they will be secured with
either Cor-Knot or traditional tying with assistance of the
knot pusher. The bedside assistant and surgical tech must
be competent with the knot pusher to avoid loose knots or
untying of the knots. If this occurs, it will require additional
annular stitches which increase CPB time.
Visualization is improved when utilizing the robotic
endoscope with 3DHD vision. Awareness of sinoatrial and
AV node location in relation to the MV annulus during
suture placement is important to avoid conduction injury.
Similarly, the surgeon needs to exercise caution when
placing annuloplasty sutures near the P1 scallop, especially
in left dominant circumflex systems. Left circumflex injury
will be identified when weaning from CPB and new wall
motion abnormalities are identified on TEE assessment and
inferior ST changes are observed on the electrocardiogram
(ECG). To manage this, the surgeon may elect to go back
on CPB and replace the annular sutures near the P1 scallop.
Other management options include supporting the patient
with inotropic pharmacotherapy, intra-aortic balloon pump
(IABP), extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) or
direct transfer to cardiac catheterization lab for coronary
angiogram. If there is partial obstruction or kinking of
the circumflex, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
may be possible. If there is complete occlusion, the patient

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 11, No 5 September 2022

with saline injection. If a power suction-irrigator is used
with an extended rigid tip, the bedside assistant needs to
be conscious as to how deep into the LV they are inserting
the tip. As the bedside assistant cannot see into the LV well,
they need to be careful when evaluating the valve.

Table 2 Echocardiographic risk factors for SAM
Metric

Parameter

Aortomitral angle

(A) <120°

End-diastolic-diameter

EDD <4.5 cm

Posterior leaflet length

PL ≥1.5 cm

Anterior leaflet length

AL ≥2.5 cm

Systolic anterior motion (SAM)

Basal septum

BS ≥1.5 cm

Coaptation-septum distance

CS ≥2.5 cm

SAM reportedly occurs in 4–10% of MV repairs or
reconstructions irrespective of technique (14). This
complication is cumbersome as it is pernicious and can
worsen as the geometry of the LV remodels. Denti et al.
describes TEE parameters (Table 2) that increase the risk of
SAM in patients undergoing MV surgery (14).
Numerous techniques have been described to prevent
and repair SAM depending on the patient’s presenting
geometry and pathology. At Northwell, Dr. Patel favors
use of a large annuloplasty ring with long posterior
leaflet, reduction of P2 height with short neo-chords,
and avoidance of large quad-resection and slide-foldingplasty. If mitral regurgitation is greater than mild and left
ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) gradient is greater than
50 mmHg, Dr. Patel recommends upsizing the annuloplasty
ring, shortening the neo-chords, and as a last resort, the
Alfieri stitch.

Denti et al. (14). SAM, systolic anterior motion.

will require coronary bypass to the circumflex artery. If
the coronary angiogram identifies there is spasm, direct
injection of nitroglycerine may improve the patient’s
condition.
If decalcification of the LA wall is required during the
MV repair, the surgeon may experience a posterior LA
injury. This occurs due to overzealous removal of calcium
from the LA wall. Significant bleeding after removal of
aortic occlusion will be experienced. Management of this
includes returning onto CPB, re-arresting the heart and
repairing the injury from inside the LA. Repair from outside
of the heart is not recommended.
AV groove disruption is identified when aortic occlusion
is released and bright red blood floods the operative
field when attempting to wean from CPB. AV groove
disruption can occur from overzealous removal of calcium
from the posterior annulus of the MV or implanting too
large of a prosthesis during MV replacement. The deep
annular sutures will tear and separate. This is a significant
complication and requires returning onto CPB, re-arresting
and converting to sternotomy for repair. Left atriotomy
will need to be reopened to explant the prosthesis. These
defects are quite complicated to repair and often require a
large patch of autologous or bovine pericardium.
If new aortic insufficiency is identified by the anesthesiologist
when separating from CPB, it could be iatrogenic from
a suture placed during the MV repair. This needs to be
inspected so the patient needs to be placed back onto CPB,
the heart re-arrested and the left atriotomy re-entered to
inspect the annular sutures. Attention should be paid to the
anterior trigone as it may have been damaged or fixed the
aortic cusp.
Finally, iatrogenic LV perforation can occur by the
bedside assistant when they are evaluating the MV repair

De-airing: air embolism prevention and treatment
Air embolism is a potential complication in MV surgery
regardless of the surgical approach. Robotic MV repair
limits the surgeon from performing some of the traditional
deairing techniques that require manipulation of the heart.
Carbon dioxide (CO 2) should flood the operative field
during the operation. To ensure it is functioning, submerge
the tubing in saline prior to connecting it to the port. All
members of the team assisting with critical portions of the
surgery need to understand their roles and responsibilities
during cannulation, weaning from CPB and decannulation
to avoid air embolism.
De-airing techniques vary from institution to
institution. Considerations made at Northwell include
turning off LV vent and turning root vent on low when
closing the left atriotomy, decreasing drainage while
allowing the heart to fill with root vent on, left lung
ventilation and placing the patient in steep Trendelenburg
position. Of note, if the patient is still docked to the
robot, unless the OR is equipped with a Trumpf table and
integrated table motion, Trendelenburg positioning is

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Patel and Macoskey. Complications and management in robotic MV surgery

contraindicated.
Air in the venous circulation can be managed by
perfusionists until the etiology is corrected. Air in the
arterial circulation is a severe problem and needs quick
attention. If it enters the coronary vasculature, the heart
will fibrillate. If still cannulated, go back onto CPB while
defibrillating the heart. Turn all vents on high and ask
perfusion to increase systemic pressures. To decrease risk of
cerebral air embolism, anesthesia should thoroughly inspect
the heart with TEE before the LV vent and aortic root vent
are removed.
Weaning from CPB
If having difficulty weaning from CPB, first consider
whether the heart has been given enough time to recover.
Be conscious of patient temperature and ensure they are
normothermic. Double lung ventilation is preferred when
weaning from CPB, so ensure the right lung is not isolated
to prevent desaturation. If contractility is the culprit,
place a temporary pacing wire or add an inotropic agent.
Anesthesia should perform complete TEE evaluation of
the heart to rule out any new wall motion abnormality,
dissection, shunt or dysfunctional valve. Systemic pressure
should be driven up by perfusion with background
vasopressors or inotropic agents from anesthesia. If
substantial waiting and management does not improve
the patient’s condition, IABP, ECMO or LV/RV support
devices should be considered. Decision should be made
to either transport directly to the cardiac catheterization
lab for diagnostic coronary angiogram versus converting
to sternotomy for further inspection and possible
coronary artery bypass grafting as a last resort if RV or LV
dysfunction is identified.
Failed repair
T E E a s s e s s m e n t o f the MV rep a i r mu s t b e don e
intraoperatively prior to decannulation. Unsuccessful repair
is an unfortunate complication and presents challenging
decisions for the surgeon with significant consequences.
All decisions are multifactorial and must be made with
confidence as a third repair or replacement is calamitous for
the patient.
Postoperative bleeding
The 3DHD robotic endoscope or a traditional laparoscopic

endoscope should be used at the end of the case to inspect
all areas accessed or manipulated during the procedure,
while on single lung ventilation. The surgeon must be
conscious of the oxygen saturation when on single lung
ventilation during intrathoracic inspection for hemostasis.
Single lung ventilation shortly after separating from CPB
may cause hemodynamic compromise, so intrathoracic
assessment and hemostasis must be efficient. Port sites
are common sources of bleeding and oftentimes difficult
to control. The surgeon must be persistent and confirm
hemostasis with direct visualization before closure. At our
institution, if there is persistent port site bleeding despite
cautery and manual compression, the port site incision is
extended. The etiology of the bleeding is identified and
corrected with cautery, oversewing stitch or hemoclip.
Rarely, hemostatic agents are used, however may be
appropriate if bleeding cannot be controlled with routine
techniques.
Chest tubes should be placed as per comfort level
of the surgeon. At Northwell, our standard practice is
one 28Fr right angle chest tube in the diaphragmatic
gutter, one 32-Fr or 28-Fr straight chest tube positioned
laterally to the apex, and oftentimes one 19 Fr Blake in
the pericardial edge. Correct positioning of the chest
tube(s) is essential. If unable to place the chest tube in
the desired location, the endoscope may be used to guide
it to the correct position. Location of each chest tube
should be passed to critical care staff during handoff
in the cardiothoracic intensive care unit (CTICU).
Immediate postoperative portable chest X-ray should be
performed in the CTICU.
If postoperative bleeding occurs and is not manageable
in the CTICU, return to the OR is required. Evacuation
of the hemothorax and hemostasis should be attempted
through the primary incision unless the patient is severely
unstable. Resuscitate with volume, blood transfusion and
inotropic agents as per the patient’s condition. When reexploring the operative field, irrigate and inspect all areas
from the primary operation.
Unilateral pulmonary edema (UPE)
UPE is a rare complication succeeding MV surgery
performed through the right chest. Although uncommon, it
is devastating when encountered. The clinical presentation
occurs minutes to hours after weaning from a prolonged
CPB (15). The patient will display profound hypoxia from
increased shunting, hypercapnia, pulmonary hypertension

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 11, No 5 September 2022

and hemodynamic instability requiring significant support
from vasopressors and inotropic agents (15). Treatment
efforts such as ECMO support or inhaled nitric oxide are
often futile, as there is rapid progression to multiorgan
failure. Short CPB times, avoidance of barotrauma, limited
blood product transfusion and minimizing lung deflation
times can reduce the risk of UPE (2).

occurs, the arms lock, an audible beep is heard, the LEDs
turn amber or red and a message will display on the monitor
to describe the fault. A recoverable fault does not require a
system restart and is identified by amber LEDs. The team
should read the error message, correct the issue and click
“resume use” on the monitor. A non-recoverable fault does
require system restart and is identified by red LEDs. In
the event of a non-recoverable fault, the endoscope and all
EndoWrist instruments must be left in place, and the system
is powered down by pressing the power button. During this
time, vision will be temporarily lost. Once the LEDs change
from red to amber, the system may be restarted by pressing
the power button.
Although rare, the EndoWrist instruments may
malfunction. Instrument release keys must be peel packed
in every robotic room and staff trained on its location
and use. If the EndoWrist instrument malfunctions, the
bedside assist must use the instrument release key to
remove the instrument. First, the emergency stop button
must be pushed if the system is not already in a fault state.
The bedside assist will insert the key into the release
socket, stabilizing the housing with one hand, and turn
the key one quarter turn counterclockwise, following
the picture on housing. After the jaws open, remove the
instrument in normal fashion. The instrument is now
unusable and should be returned to Intuitive Surgical
per site protocol. “Resume use” should be clicked on the
monitor and operation continued. Complications caused
by the robotic system are avoidable by anticipation,
practicing emergency drills with the robotic team and
competence in the technology by all who support robotic
procedures.

da Vinci Xi complications
The da Vinci Xi surgical system has transformed minimally
invasive surgery and allows patients to undergo complex
operations in a non-traditional approach. The system is
only beneficial if used by properly trained surgeons and OR
staff. The robotic modality adds complexity, opportunity for
iatrogenic injury and increased risk if used inappropriately.
The surgeon is separated from the patient during the
operation, so the bedside assistant must be an expert
in utilizing the robot, troubleshooting and anticipating
complications. The surgeon and beside assistant must
be articulate with their communication and function
synergistically.
After docking the robot, EndoWrist instruments must
be inserted under direct visualization to prevent puncture
or laceration of critical anatomy. Afterwards, guided tool
exchange, confirmed with a blinking green LED, allows the
bedside assistant to exchange instruments without direct
visualization, returning them to within 3 mm of the original
position. If guided tool exchange is lost, identified by a solid
blue LED light, the surgeon must find the appropriate port
and follow the instrument back to the appropriate working
area to prevent injury. Similarly, the surgeon must always
keep both EndoWrist instruments in their field of vision
while working to prevent injury.
The 3DHD endoscope is quite advanced and does not
require calibration, focusing or white balancing. While the
surgeon is operating, the endoscope may fog or become
obstructed. The surgeon must request a camera clean, and
never proceed using one eye, as the touchscreen monitor
may be displaying the surgeon’s obstructed eye. The bedside
assistant must communicate clearly to the surgeon when
a camera clean is necessary, or they cannot anticipate the
operation.
Recoverable and non-recoverable faults may occur
during the operation. The surgeon should practice these
scenarios with all members of the robotic team prior to a
live operation. Robotic team members must understand
their individual roles if a fault were to occur. When a fault

Conclusions
Robotic MV repair provides several benefits to patients
compared to traditional median sternotomy if performed
by experience and well-trained surgeons and staff. The
robotic assisted approach enhances the complexity of
the case with several additional steps. Consistent and
frequent exposure both intraoperatively and through mock
scenarios is essential for successful programs. Additionally,
understanding of the many phases of the operation, the
complications that have potential to occur at each phase
and management of those complications is essential for a
successful program (Table 3). The fundamental principle
of robotic MV surgery at Northwell Health is to avoid
complications with anticipation.

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Patel and Macoskey. Complications and management in robotic MV surgery

Table 3 Robotic mitral valve repair complications and management
Complication

Management

Injury to intercostal artery/vein

Immediate hemostasis with cautery, hemoclips, manual compression, or stitch

Injury to right intrathoracic artery

Immediate hemostasis with cautery, hemoclips, manual compression, or stitch

Diaphragm laceration

Prophylactic use of pledgeted retraction stitch, oversew with additional pledgeted
stitches

Carotid artery puncture during CVC insertion

Do not withdrawal needle, assess with ultrasound, consider vascular surgery
evaluation, angiogram, covered stent, cut-down and repair

Blood loss during right internal jugular SVC
cannula insertion

Occlude distal aspect of SVC cannula with two [2] tubing clamps prior to insertion

Femoral cannulation site seroma, hematoma,
infection, delayed healing

Prophylactically avoid complication with diligent closure of wound in multiple layers.
Thorough evaluation of wound post operatively

Limb ischemia from femoral artery cannulation

Prophylactic use of distal perfusion cannula. Immediate placement of distal
perfusion cannula when ischemia is identified intraoperatively

Compartment syndrome

Immediate release via fasciotomy and post-operative vascular surgery evaluation

PFO during femoral IVC cannula insertion with
guidewire

Primary repair on CPB

Injury to right atrium during femoral IVC cannula
insertion with guidewire

Primary repair on CPB

Iatrogenic injury to axillary artery during
cannulation

Abort axillary cannulation. Primary repair, patch angioplasty, selective peripheral
angiogram. Vascular surgery intervention if extensive

Blood loss during axillary artery cannulation

Control blood loss with vessel loops or vessel clamps

Phrenic nerve injury

Preventative: Identify phrenic nerve prior to pericardiotomy. Maintain generous
distance with cautery and retraction sutures. Limit tension applied

Ventricular fibrillation and dysrhythmia when using
cautery creating exposure

Discontinue use of cautery/robotic energy. Treat dysrhythmia per ACLS guidelines

Aortic injury (transverse sinus dissection or
extending pericardiotomy superiorly)

Dependent upon extent of injury. Compression, primary repair with pledgeted suture,
rapid CPB, convert to sternotomy, aortic repair

Pulmonary artery injury when creating exposure
(when artery takes a more caudal course)

Dependent upon extent of injury. Compression, rapid CPB, convert to sternotomy,
primary repair, patch angioplasty

Aortic hematoma, bruising, and bleeding
during root vent placement

Preventative: placement of aortic root vent stay sutures prior to heparinization,
excise all peri-aortic adipose tissue and redundant tissue in proximation of root vent
insertion site, communicate to perfusion to lower systemic pressure when placing
root vent. To manage, release hematoma, cautery, primary repair with pledgeted
stitch

Air embolism

On CPB: defibrillate heart, turn all vents on high, increase systemic pressures by
perfusionist or pharmacotherapy
Off CPB: defibrillate heart, manage per ACLS guidelines, increase systemic
pressures with pharmacotherapy

Aortic injury (disruption of aortic cross clamp by
bedside assist or collision with robotic arm 1)

Evaluation of ascending aorta, aortic arch, and descending thoracic aorta with TEE.
If dissection identified, abort operation, convert to sternotomy, repair per dissection
type guidelines. If no dissection, manage aortic hematoma or bruising by releasing
adventitia and reposition cross clamp

Iatrogenic endoballoon rupture

TEE inspection. Rapid extraction. Insertion of new endoballoon device

Table 3 (continued)

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):510-524 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-15

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 11, No 5 September 2022

Table 3 (continued)
Complication

Management

Iatrogenic aortic dissection from endoballoon aortic
occlusion

Inspection with TEE. Abort procedure. Repair dissection per dissection type
guidelines

Left atrial tear from lift retractor

Primary repair or patch repair at conclusion of case

Injury to atrioventricular septum with left atrial lift
retractor

Small injury: primary closure with pledgeted mattress sutures

LV perforation by LV vent

Convert to sternotomy. Management dependent on extent of injury. Primary repair,
pledgeted mattress stitches, hemostatic agents, patch repair

Left circumflex artery injury

Re-establish CPB and identify etiology. Options include: replace annular sutures
near P1 scallop, inotropic pharmacotherapy, IABP, ECMO, transfer to cardiac
catheterization lab for coronary angiogram and PCI, direct injection of nitroglycerine,
convert to sternotomy and perform coronary bypass

Posterior left atrial injury during decalcification

Re-establish CPB, re-arrest heart, repair injury from inside left atrium

Atrioventricular groove disruption

Re-establish CPB, re-arrest heart, convert to sternotomy, reopen left atrium, explant
prosthesis, large patch repair with autologous or bovine pericardium

Aortic Insufficiency after separation from CPB

Inspect aortic valve with TEE. Re-establish CPB, re-arrest heart, re-enter left
atrium and inspect mitral annular sutures. If anterior trigone stitches damage or
fix the aortic cusp must be replaced. If unclear etiology under minimally invasive
inspection, convert to sternotomy and evaluate via open approach

Systolic anterior motion

Re-establish CPB, re-arrest heart, re-enter left atrium, evaluate mitral repair with
saline injection, re-repair MV

Difficulty weaning from CPB

TEE inspection to identify etiology. Wait and allow heart to recover. Ensure patient’s
core temperature is normothermic. Placement of temporary pacing wire. Inotropic
support. Increase systemic pressure (perfusionist or pharmacotherapy), insertion of
IABP, ECMO, RV/LV support device, cardiac catheterization for diagnostic coronary
angiogram, convert to sternotomy for further inspection, bail-out coronary bypass

Unilateral pulmonary edema

If extubated: intubate and support with mechanical ventilation. ECMO support.
Inhaled nitric oxide

Large injury: patch repair

CVC, central venous catheter; SVC, superior vena cava; PFO, patent foramen ovale; IVC, inferior vena cava; LV, left ventricle; CPB,
cardiopulmonary bypass; ACLS, Advanced Cardiac Life Support; TEE, transesophageal echocardiogram; IABP, intra-aortic balloon pump;
ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; MV, mitral valve; RV, right ventricle.

Acknowledgments
Footnote
to declare.
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International

License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
