Masters of Cardiothoracic Surgery

Robotic aortic valve replacement with simultaneous ventricular
septal myectomy: a minimally invasive solution
Taylor Pickering1, Cody Dorton1, Ali Darehzereshki2, Robert L. Smith3, Lawrence Wei2

Baylor Scott & White Research Institute, Plano, TX, USA; 2Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, West Virginia University,

Morgantown, WV, USA; 3Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Baylor Scott & White The Heart Hospital, Plano, TX, USA
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. Email: lawrence.wei@wvumedicine.org.
Keywords: Robotic cardiac surgery; robotic aortic valve replacement (RAVR); robotic valve surgery; robotic septal myectomy

Clinical vignette
A 67-year-old female with a history of hypertension (HTN),
hyperlipidemia (HLD), chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), stage III chronic kidney disease (CKD),
Sjögren’s syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, and hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM) presented with severe symptomatic
left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction, moderate
aortic stenosis, moderate-to-severe aortic insufficiency,
and a small aortic annulus (19 mm). She underwent
robotic aortic valve replacement (RAVR) with a 21 mm
bioprosthesis, modified Nicks root enlargement with a
Dacron patch, and concomitant robotic-assisted septal
myectomy. She was discharged home on postoperative day 4.
At one month, she achieved New York Heart Association
(NYHA) Class I status, with a mean LVOT gradient of
5 mmHg. At one year, she remained asymptomatic with a
normally functioning prosthetic aortic valve and an LVOT
gradient of 4 mmHg.
Surgical technique
Preparation
Patients eligible for RAVR undergo comprehensive
computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest,
abdomen, and pelvis to confirm favorable anatomy for the
surgical approach and assess adequate peripheral vascular
anatomy for cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) cannulation.
The patient is positioned supine under general anesthesia
and preoperative monitoring lines, including arterial and

central venous catheters, are established. A transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE) probe is inserted to confirm the
pathology and guide intraoperative management. Peripheral
cannulation is established using the common femoral artery
and vein with a superior vena caval cannula placed via the
right internal jugular vein for bicaval drainage.
Exposition
A 3 to 4 cm lateral thoracotomy is performed in the
fourth intercostal space at the anterior axillary line,
through which the pericardial fat pad is mobilized and
pericardiotomy is performed. Pericardial stay sutures
as well as a diaphragmatic retraction suture are placed
to improve visualization. Following initiation of CPB,
the aorta is mobilized, and a transthoracic aortic crossclamp is introduced via the second intercostal space and
positioned high on the distal ascending aorta. An aortic
root vent is placed through the working incision followed
by a left ventricular vent via a separate chest wall stab
incision, through the right superior pulmonary vein under
TEE guidance. The DaVinci Xi robot (Intuitive Surgical,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA) ports are then placed with the camera
via the working incision and three additional ports in the
second, fifth, and sixth intercostal spaces.
Operation
Antegrade cardioplegia is administered via the aortic root
or directly through the coronary ostia as needed, achieving

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):241-243 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-ravr-0186

Pickering et al. Robotic AVR and septal myectomy

cardiac arrest. An aortotomy is performed at or above the
sinotubular junction and extended into the noncoronary
sinus to provide adequate exposure of the aortic valve and
subvalvular apparatus. The native valve leaflets are excised,
and annular debridement is performed to remove calcific
deposits. Beginning approximately 5–8 mm below the nadir
of the right coronary cusp, the septal myectomy is then
performed using the robotic Metzenbaum scissors and
long-tip grasping forceps. Care is taken to avoid injuring
the conduction system and membranous septum. The
myectomy is carried apically to the level of the antero-septal
papillary muscle with care to avoid injury to the papillary
muscles or chordae. The base of the papillary muscles and
ventricular apex should be easily visible following excision.
Interrupted 2-0 braided polyester sutures are robotically
placed circumferentially from the ventricular side, starting
at the left non-coronary commissure and proceeding
clockwise. In a case of aortic root enlargement, a pericardial
or Dacron patch is used to augment the non-coronary sinus
in a modified Nicks fashion, as previously described (1).
Either a mechanical or bioprosthetic valve is sized and
seated using robotic instrumentation, with suture knots
secured using suture fasteners (Cor-Knot; LSI Solutions,
Victor, NY, USA).

refractory to medical therapy (2,3). Traditionally performed
via median or hemisternotomy transaortic approaches, or
rarely through mitral valve, the procedure presents technical
challenges due to limited visualization and an associated
risk of injury to surrounding structures. When performed
via the mitral valve, detachment and reimplantation of the
anterior mitral leaflet with or without patch reconstruction
is often required. RAVR has emerged as a promising
alternative with superior visualization to access LVOT,
which allows for performing septal myectomy, either as a
standalone procedure or in combination with valve repair or
replacement.
RAVR with concomitant septal myectomy is feasible and
demonstrates favorable clinical outcomes in addressing both
aortic valve disease and HCM (4). Initial multicenter studies
of RAVR report low rates of morbidity, no conversions to
sternotomy, and minimal paravalvular leak, even in complex
cases involving concomitant procedures (4). Additionally,
robotic septal myectomy aligns with contemporary best
practices by offering precise resection of hypertrophic
myocardium, effectively relieving LVOT obstruction and
improving symptoms (3).

Completion

The robotic platform provides exceptional visualization,
improved dexterity, and superior instrumentation—such
as robotic Metzenbaum scissors with its strong, fine tips—
enabling complex procedures like valve replacement and
septal myectomy to be performed with precision through a
minimally invasive approach. Additionally, RAVR preserves
the advantages of using standard surgical prostheses while
enabling concomitant procedures, including aortic or
mitral valve repair or replacement, root enlargement, maze
procedures, and, as in this case, septal myectomy, while
avoiding a sternotomy (1,3-5). This approach also allows for
a standalone septal myectomy in the absence of concomitant
valvular disease.

The aortotomy is closed with a double-layered 4-0
polypropylene suture technique, employing a horizontal
mattress stitch followed by a running whipstitch. Multiple
de-airing maneuvers are performed, the cross-clamp
is removed, and the patient is reperfused. Atrial and
ventricular pacing wires are robotically placed, and chest
drains are introduced through the inferior port site. After
undocking the robotic system, the patient is weaned from
CPB, decannulated, and fully rewarmed. The cannulation
sites are secured, and all incisions are closed in layers.
Intraoperative TEE is performed to confirm prosthetic
valve function, ensure the absence of paravalvular leaks, and
evaluate post-myectomy LVOT gradients. The patient is
extubated in the OR and transferred to the intensive care
unit.
Comments
Clinical results
Surgical septal myectomy is considered the standard of care
for patients with obstructive HCM with symptoms that are

Advantages

Caveats
Robotic-assisted cardiac surgery requires significant
technical expertise and institutional investment in
specialized equipment and training. The learning curve
for surgeons and operative teams can be steep, which may
limit broader adoption (4,5). Additionally, patient selection
is critical, as certain anatomical or comorbid factors may
preclude the robotic approach.

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):241-243 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-ravr-0186

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 14, No 3 May 2025

Acknowledgments

formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

None.
