(2021) 16:318
Pitsis et al. J Cardiothorac Surg

CASE REPORT

Totally endoscopic aortic valve replacement
with concomitant trans‑aortic mitral valve repair
for mitral regurgitation
Antonios Pitsis1* , Nikolaos Tsotsolis1, Harisios Boudoulas2 and Konstantinos Dean Boudoulas2

Abstract
Background: Minimally invasive aortic valve procedures through a hemi-sternotomy or a right anterior mini-thoracotomy have gained popularity over the last several years. Totally endoscopic aortic valve replacement (TEAVR) is an
innovative and a less invasive (incision-wise) surgical aortic valve replacement technique. The operative steps of TEAVR
have been reported previously from our group. Mitral regurgitation (MR) frequently accompanies aortic valve disease
that at times may also require repair. Totally endoscopic surgery in such cases has not been tested.
Presentation of the technique: We present a surgical technique for a totally endoscopic approach to aortic valve
replacement and concomitant mitral valve repair for primary and secondary MR. An aortotomy incision was used
avoiding an atriotomy, which results in an increase in cross-clamp (XC) and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) times
that could be associated with higher mortality and morbidity. Neochords (artificial chordae tendineae) were used for
primary MR and an edge-to-edge approach for secondary MR.
Conclusion: TEAVR and concomitant mitral valve repair can be performed successfully with reasonable XC and CPB
times with excellent short-term results.
Keywords: Minimally invasive cardiac surgery, Totally endoscopic aortic valve replacement, Totally endoscopic mitral
valve repair, Edge-to-edge repair, Trans-aortic mitral valve repair
Introduction
While endoscopic mitral and tricuspid valve procedures
have become a first line treatment in many centers globally, this is not the case for the aortic valve. Minimally
invasive aortic valve replacement or repair is usually
performed through a hemi-sternotomy or right anterior
mini-thoracotomy. The operative steps of totally endoscopic aortic valve replacement (TEAVR) that has been
routinely used at Thessaloniki Heart Institute, Thessaloniki, Greece, are described; more than 200 cases have been
performed over a 2 year period7 [1].

TEAVR is a less invasive approach (from an incisions
stand-point) associated with shorter intensive care time
and hospital length-of-stay. This method allows patients
to return to work sooner compared to traditional surgery; however, it is associated with prolonged crossclamp (XC) and cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) times,
particularly during the learning curve of this approach,
albeit steep [1]. Primary or secondary MR (approximately
1–3% and 5–10%, respectively) may be associated with
aortic valve disease, particularly in patients with bicuspid
aortic valves or in patients with coronary artery disease.

*Correspondence: apitsis@otenet.gr
Thessaloniki Heart Institute, European Interbalkan Medical Center,
57001 Thessaloniki, Greece
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the
original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://​creat​iveco​
mmons.​org/​publi​cdoma​in/​zero/1.​0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

Pitsis et al. J Cardiothorac Surg

(2021) 16:318

Fig. 1 A successful surgical approach of TEAVR and concomitant trans-aortic mitral valve repair using the edge-to-edge technique for secondary
mitral regurgitation: a schematic drawing and b endoscopic image

In these cases, mitral valve repair can be performed via a
trans-aortic approach simultaneously with TEAVR, thus
avoiding an atriotomy that would result in an increase in
XC and CPB times.
We present our technique of TEAVR and concomitant
trans-aortic mitral valve repair for primary and secondary MR. In primary MR (Additional file 1: Video S1), artificial chordae tendineae are used to repair the prolapsing/
flail mitral valve in which the length is calculated preoperatively by transesophageal echocardiography, as previously reported [2]. In secondary MR (Additional file 2:
Video S2), the edge-to-edge repair method is used [3].
Written informed consents for publication of their
clinical details and clinical images were obtained from
the patients. Copies of the consent forms are available for
review by the Editor of the journal.

Presentation of the technique
This endoscopic approach is performed through a 3 cm
right parasternal working incision in the 2nd intercostal
space (ICS) and a 10 mm port for the 3D 30 degrees Karl
Storz endoscope in the same ICS laterally, anterior to the
right anterior axillary line [1]. An extra-extra small Alexis
soft tissue protector is deployed through the incision. On
full CPB from the groin, the Chitwood clamp is inserted
through a separate stab wound incision (3 mm) in the 1st
ICS, cephalad to the port of the endoscope, and Custodiol cold crystalloid cardioplegia is given in the aortic
root, or directly to the coronary ostia in cases of aortic
regurgitation. After the heart is arrested, a right superior
pulmonary vein vent is inserted through a separate stab
wound incision (3 mm) in the 5th ICS, anterior axillary
line. A transverse aortotomy is opened proximal to the

Pitsis et al. J Cardiothorac Surg

(2021) 16:318

Fig. 2 Totally endoscopic trans-aortic mitral repair with 4 neochords to P2 for a flail P2, in combination with TEAVR: a P2 flail, b suturing a set of 4
loops size 16 mm to the head of the posteromedial papillary muscle, c suturing a set of 4 loops size 16 mm to the head of the anterolateral papillary
muscle, d suturing the free edge of 4 loops (2 from the anterolateral and 2 from the posteromedial papillary muscles) to the free edge of the flail P2

fat body of the aorta (3 cm distal to the right coronary
artery), the diseased aortic valve is excised and the annulus is debrided and washed. A metal net spreader (Fehling
Instruments, DE) is inserted inside the aortic annulus to
facilitate exposure of the mitral leaflets. The use of the
metal net is of paramount importance for the exposure
of the mitral leaflets and sub-valvar apparatus; its use is
essential to freeze the aortic annulus open, because operation on the mitral valve cannot be performed when the
aortic annulus is collapsed.
In cases of secondary MR, a horizontal mattress, teflon buttressed PTFE suture is used to perform an edgeto-edge repair between A2 and P2 using a deep bite of at
least 5 to 7 mm (see Fig. 1a and b, and Additional file 2:

Video S2). In cases of primary MR, a second metal net is
inserted inside the first one and at the level of the anterior
mitral leaflet (see Fig. 2a and Additional file 1: Video S1).
A prefabricated set of the pre-measured length of PTFE
neochords (Seramon chordae loop, Serag Wiessner, DE)
are inserted and secured at the fibrous head of the corresponding papillary muscle (Fig. 2b and c). The open
end of the loops (neochords) are then secured to the free
edge of the prolapsing/flail segment of the mitral leaflet
(Fig. 2d). Several loops 4 to 5 mm apart in the prolapsing
segments are used in order to spread the leaflet tension
and to improve the durability of the repair. This type of
repair is only applicable for anterior leaflet prolapse and
middle scallop (P2) posterior leaflet prolapse. Prolapse/

Pitsis et al. J Cardiothorac Surg

(2021) 16:318

flail of the anterolateral (P1) and posteromedial (P3) scallops, and of the two commissures, cannot be repaired
with the trans-aortic approach, because these segments
are well hidden by the anterior leaflet and its chords. Also
marked dilation of the mitral annulus is a relative contraindication of this technique (better managed with an
atriotomy in order to perform an annuloplasty). Alternatively, the loop technique with the edge-to-edge approach
can be combined to achieve a watertight mitral valve
through the trans-aortic approach, but so far, we have not
performed this type of repair.
Finally, we proceed with the aortic valve replacement
with a conventional mechanical or biological prostheses,
as previously described by our group [1]. XC and CPB
times for the combined approach is reasonable (below 90
and 120 min respectively for primary MR and below 60
and 90 min respectively for secondary MR, after the initial learning curve of the technique). Short term followup (mean 5.7 months, range: 0.93–9.9) of our 13 patients
operated with the described technique have been excellent with MR ≤ 1+.

Discussion and conclusion
Totally endoscopic approaches will increasingly become
more popular in the years to come. A successful surgical technique of TEAVR and concomitant totally endoscopic mitral valve repair via a trans-aortic approach is
presented. When stand-alone endoscopic mitral repair
is performed, this is usually done through a more lateral
thoracotomy incision through the 4th ICS [2]. In order
to perform a combined aortic valve replacement and a
mitral repair through a standard left atriotomy incision,
a working incision is placed through the 3rd ICS in the
middle clavicular line, which is a compromise for both
the endoscopic aortic valve replacement and the mitral
repair through a left atriotomy. Such an approach makes
the placement of the aortic annular sutures more difficult
due to the fact that the working incision is not aligned
with the aortic annulus, this will prolong the XC time
in excess of 120 min (mins) and the CPB time in excess
of 180 min. The aortotomy mitral repair approach presented here significantly shortens the XC and CPB times
to 90 and 120 min, respectively for primary MR, and to
60 and 90 min, respectively for secondary MR, thus making it possible to perform double valve (aortic and mitral)
totally endoscopic surgery within reasonable XC and
CPB times that are comparable to median sternotomy
approaches.
Contraindications of the presented technique are:
a) marked mitral annular dilation—better managed
with an annuloplasty procedure through a left atriotomy [4] and

b) P1 or P3 or commissural flail/prolapse—better managed with the loop technique through a left atriotomy [2, 4] (through a median sternotomy incision if
combined with aortic valve disease).
Also, contraindications of the totally endoscopic
approach through an aortotomy incision in general are:
iii) heavily calcified ascending aorta,
iv) obesity and
v) inability to go on CPB through the femoral vessels.
The presented method substantially decreases intensive care times and hospital length-of-stay, and allows
patients to return to work sooner. It should be mentioned that the need for simultaneous aortic and mitral
valve surgery is not uncommon, since significant mitral
regurgitation can be found in patients with bicuspid
aortic valve and coronary artery disease [5].
Abbreviations
TEAVR: Totally endoscopic aortic valve replacement; SAVR: Surgical aortic valve
replacement; XC: Cross clamp; CPB: Cardiopulmonary bypass; MR: Mitral regurgitation; TEE: Transesophageal echocardiography; ICS: Intercostal space.

Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1186/​s13019-​021-​01694-6.
Additional file 1. Video S1. A case of severe aortic stenosis and severe
mitral regurgitation due to a flail P2; the loop technique (4 neochords to
P2) was used trans-aortically with a totally endoscopic approach.
Additional file 2. Video S2. A case of severe aortic stenosis and severe
mitral regurgitation due to a dilated cardiomyopathy and tethering of
both the anterior and posterior leaflets; the edge-to-edge technique was
used trans-aortically with a totally endoscopic approach.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Mr. Isaak Keremidis, perfusionist, for his assistance with data
collection.
Authors’ contributions
AP-concept/design, writing of manuscript, NT-data collection, HB-critical
revision of article, KDB-critical revision of article. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Funding
No source of funding was used in the preparation of this manuscript.
Availability of data and materials
The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from
the corresponding author on request.

Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Pitsis et al. J Cardiothorac Surg

(2021) 16:318

Consent for publication
All patients involved provided written consent to use clinical information for
scientific publications.
Competing interests
AP is a consultant for teaching and training for Abbott, Medtronic, LSI SOLUTIONS. NT, HB, KDB have no competing interests.
Author details
Thessaloniki Heart Institute, European Interbalkan Medical Center,
57001 Thessaloniki, Greece. 2 Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
Received: 30 October 2020 Accepted: 9 October 2021

2.
3.
4.
5.

Pitsis A, et al. Preoperative determination of artificial chordae tendineae
length by transoesophageal echocardiography in totally endoscopic
mitral valve repair. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2020;31(1):20–7.
Maisano F et al. The edge-to-edge technique: a simplified method to
correct mitral insufficiency. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg, 1998;13(3):240–5
(discussion 245–6)
Pitsis A, et al. Mitral valve repair: moving towards a personalized ring. J
Cardiothorac Surg. 2019;14(1):108.
Boudoulas KD, et al. Floppy mitral valve/mitral valve prolapse: a complex
entity with multiple genotypes and phenotypes. Prog Cardiovasc Dis.
2020;63(3):308–26.

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
