2772-9931

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Coronary: Case Report

Single-Port RoboticAssisted Epicardial
Lead Placement for
Cardiac
Resynchronization
Therapy
Blaz Podgorsek, MD,1
Philippe Tremblay, MD, MS,2 and
Danny Ramzy, MD, PhD1

We present a case demonstrating the novel
use of the da Vinci SP (single-port) robotic
platform (Intuitive Surgical) in cardiac surgery.
A 69-year-old man with ischemic cardiomyopathy and failed endovascular cardiac
resynchronization therapy defibrillator lead
placement underwent successful robotically
assisted left ventricular epicardial lead implantation through a 4-cm minithoracotomy.
The da Vinci SP system enhanced visualization
and dexterity, thus allowing for precise lead
placement with minimal invasiveness. The
patient recovered uneventfully and remained
stable at follow-up. This case highlights the
feasibility and potential advantages of singleport robotic-assisted cardiac procedures in
select patients.
(Ann Thorac Surg Short Reports 2026;4:69-71)
of The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

R

obotic-assisted cardiac surgery has seen
significant growth and technical improvements since its advent in the 1980s and is
transforming the field of cardiothoracic surgery.
It provides several advantages, including
improved 3-dimensional visualization, great dexterity with articulated instruments, tremor reduc-

tion, and the ability to scale down hand
movements, features that make it ideal for complex procedures. A nationwide study of roboticassisted cardiac cases demonstrated a shorter
length of stay, lower mortality, and fewer complications for all operation types compared with
nonrobotic surgery.1
The da Vinci SP (single-port) system is the
newest iteration of the commonly used surgical
platform by Intuitive Surgical. It uses an articulating 3-dimensional endoscope and 3 wristed
instruments through a single port. It has already
been established in certain surgical fields such as
urology, but its applicability in cardiac surgery
has yet to be reported. The study participant
provided informed consent before study
enrollment.
We report the case of a 69-year-old man with a
history of remote coronary artery bypass grafting
and symptomatic ischemic cardiomyopathy with
interventricular delay who presented for consideration of cardiac resynchronization therapy
(CRT). An initial attempt at endovascular placement was unsuccessful for anatomic reasons.
Therefore, a surgical referral was made for
epicardial lead placement. Given his previous
coronary revascularization, older age, and relative frailty, a less invasive approach was advised.
Left ventricular epicardial lead placement
through a robotically assisted approach was recommended. We opted to use a single-port
approach. The decision rationale was to minimize the risk of previous adhesion lysis and a
patent left internal mammary artery. Given that a
small minithoracotomy was going to be performed, we opted to use the new da Vinci SP
platform.
With the patient’s left lung deflated, a 4-cm left
anterior thoracotomy was made in the fourth
intercostal space, and the left pleura was entered.
Adhesions were taken down, and a small Alexis
soft tissue retractor (Applied Medical) was inserted, followed by further lysis of adhesions. The da
Vinci SP robot was then brought into the surgical
field and docked. With the assistance of the robot,
the pericardium was entered. Two pericardial

Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, University of Texas McGovern Medical School, Houston, Texas; and 2Division of Cardiothoracic
Surgery, Corewell Health, Grand Rapids, Michigan
Address correspondence to Dr Ramzy, Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, University of Texas McGovern Medical School, 6400
Fannin St, Suite 2805, A3105, Houston, TX 77030; email: danny.ramzy@uth.tmc.edu.

CASE REPORT

PODGORSEK ET AL

Ann Thorac Surg Short Reports

SINGLE-PORT ROBOTIC EPICARDIAL LEAD

2026;4:69-71

COMMENT

FIGURE Robotic-assisted single-port cardiac resynchronization therapy
electrode placement.

traction sutures were placed and tunneled
through the superior and inferior intercostal
spaces. We then proceeded with placement of
epicardial Medtronic CapSure Epi MP bipolar
steroid-eluting leads onto the basal anterior
surface of the left ventricle (Figure). These
leads were secured with 4-0 Cardionyl suture
(Peters Surgical) by using 2 needle drivers
(Video).
We then reopened the CRT defibrillator
generator pocket and removed the generator,
with care taken not to damage the leads. The
newly implanted epicardial lead was tunneled
into this pocket and connected to the generator
(Dynagen CRT-D, Boston Scientific). This maneuver was performed by entering the chest
from the pocket incision and grasping the leads
from within the chest cavity. The device was
then interrogated and found to be functioning
appropriately.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. He was extubated at the completion of
the procedure and remained hemodynamically
stable throughout his recovery. He was discharged home on postoperative day 3, after he
had been medically optimized from a heart failure and hemodialysis perspective. He was seen
in follow-up clinic 2 weeks after the epicardial
lead insertion and continued to do well, with
good wound healing and minimal incisional
pain.

Use of CRT to improve outcomes in patients with
heart failure and interventricular delay is well
established. In cases where endovascular implantation is not possible because of anatomic
restrictions, an open surgical approach is
possible, and it was demonstrated to make no
difference in echocardiographic or clinical outcomes.2 With the potential benefit of less
postoperative pain, better wound healing,
improved cosmesis, shorter length of stay, and a
decreased conversion rate when compared with
thoracoscopic surgery, as well as increased
dexterity and visualization, robotic-assisted surgery is a favorable surgical approach.3 Although
thoracoscopic surgery is associated with a
shorter learning curve and lower equipment
costs, we opted to use the robotic platform
given the limited need for lysis of adhesions and
the platform’s single-port capability and
concomitant dexterity.4 By leveraging existing
resources and expertise, we were able to
effectively address any potential concerns
related to prolonged operative times and higher
costs usually associated with robotic-assisted
surgery.5
Recent advancements in single-port roboticassisted technology demonstrate a new frontier
in the surgical fields, with proven safety and efficacy. Therefore, we believe that cardiac surgery
should participate in the development of this
technology. This case highlights the potential of
the da Vinci SP robotic platform in cardiac surgery, thereby suggesting a promising avenue for
minimally invasive approaches in select patients
and laying the groundwork for future applications
and studies in more complex cases.
The Video can be viewed in the online version of this article [https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.atssr.2025.09.039] on https://www.annalsthoracicsurgery
shortrep.org.

FUNDING SOURCES
The authors have no funding sources to disclose.

DISCLOSURES
Danny Ramzy reports a relationship with Abbott that includes speaking
and lecture fees and with Medtronic Inc that includes speaking and
lecture fees. The other authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

PATIENT CONSENT
Obtained.

Ann Thorac Surg Short Reports
2026;4:69-71

CASE REPORT

PODGORSEK ET AL

SINGLE-PORT ROBOTIC EPICARDIAL LEAD
