Keynote Lecture Series

Robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass grafting: how I teach it
Francis P. Sutter1, MaryAnn C. Wertan1, Danielle Spragan1, Yoshiyuki Yamashita2, Serge Sicouri2

Department of Cardiac Surgery Research, Lankenau Institute for Medical Research, Main Line Health, Wynnewood, PA, USA; 2Department of

Cardiac Surgery, Lankenau Heart Institute, Lankenau Medical Center, Main Line Health, Wynnewood, PA, USA
East, Wynnewood, PA 19096, USA. Email: WertanM@mlhs.org.

The first robotic cardiac operation was performed more than two decades ago. This paper describes the
distinct steps and components necessary for teaching robotic-assisted minimally invasive direct coronary
artery bypass (R-MIDCAB). It also provides a general overview of the surgical robotic setup and ways
to troubleshoot potential complications. The focus of robotic training is not only on the surgeon but
includes an entire dedicated cardiac team and administrative institutional support. This team approach
ensures that R-MIDCAB can be performed safely and reproducibly. Meticulous planning, incremental
learning, and teamwork are the main factors leading to program success and optimal patient outcomes.
Robotic-assisted internal mammary artery (IMA) harvesting and coronary revascularization via a small,
anterior mini-thoracotomy has provided an alternative to sternotomy in selected patients with coronary
artery disease (CAD). Benefits include less postoperative atrial fibrillation, fewer blood transfusion, less
time in the operating room (OR), less ventilatory support, fewer strokes, decreased intensive care unit stay
and shortened postoperative length of stay all of which manifests as a decrease in institutional resource
utilization. Recent data show that R-MIDCAB and hybrid coronary revascularization provides good longterm outcomes. In addition to patient satisfaction, there is an additional overall cost benefit to R-MIDCAB
over traditional sternotomy coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), secondary to decreased hospital length
of stay. Robotically harvesting the IMA, operating on a beating heart, and performing anastomoses through a
small incision all require advanced training and incremental learning. Increased experience generally leads to
shortened surgical times and fewer complications.
Keywords: Robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass grafting (robotic-assisted CABG); learning curve;
minithoracotomy; coronary revascularization; minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass (MIDCAB)

Introduction
Robotic-assisted coronary revascularization via a small,
anterior mini-thoracotomy (Figure 1) using the da
Vinci Intuitive Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Inc.,
Sunnyvale, CA, USA), has provided an alternative treatment
method for patients with coronary artery disease (CAD)
(1-3). For appropriately selected patients, benefits include
less postoperative atrial fibrillation, fewer blood transfusion,
less time in the operating room (OR), less ventilatory
support, fewer strokes, decreased intensive care unit
stay and shortened postoperative length of stay (4); all

of which manifests as a decrease in institutional resource
utilization (4). A recent study over a 15-year period
described the clinical outcomes of 2,280 patients who
underwent robotic-assisted coronary artery bypass grafting
(CABG) (4). The data show that robotic-assisted minimally
invasive direct coronary artery bypass (R-MIDCAB) and
hybrid coronary revascularization (R-MIDCAB combined
with percutaneous coronary intervention with stents)
provides good long-term outcomes in patients (5,6).
In addition to patient satisfaction, there is an additional
overall cost benefit to R-MIDCAB over traditional
sternotomy CABG (7) secondary to decreased hospital

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(4):346-353 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0033

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 4 July 2024

Figure 1 Minimal scars following robotic-assisted CABG procedures. CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting.

length of stay. R-MIDCAB is the collective term for
CABG procedures performed through small incisions as
an alternative to median sternotomy. Harvesting the IMA
robotically, operating on a beating heart, and performing
anastomoses through a small incision all require advanced
training and incremental learning. Increased experience
generally leads to shortened surgical times and fewer
complications (3,4). R-MIDCAB is a challenging procedure,
which requires a dedicated surgical team to start this
journey. This paper aims to describe the distinct steps and
components necessary for teaching R-MIDCAB. It also
provides a general overview of the surgical robotic setup
and ways to troubleshoot potential complications that will
lead to successful surgical outcomes.

Implementation of a successful advanced R-MIDCAB
program is achieved through strategic planning, clinical
training, and expert support.

and all necessary supplies. Additionally, dedicated OR staff
and assistants will need to be trained to ensure a seamless
transition to performing robotic cases. Regular access
with dedicated robotic time is essential to overcome the
initial learning curve associated with utilizing the robot.
Cardiology engagement is yet another important aspect of
robotic surgery, as interventional cardiologists are crucial
partners for a successful program. Various distinct CABG
procedures options are available, including conventional
full sternotomy, either on or off pump, as well as roboticassisted CABG +/− hybrid coronary revascularization.
Therefore, interdisciplinary discussions between surgeons
and cardiologists will determine the best course of action
for each specific patient. Weekly coronary revascularization
team meetings should be arranged. Moreover, it is
important to discuss various revascularization options with
the patient, as there are risks, benefits, and alternatives to
each type of procedure. Informed consent should include
the possibility of conversion to traditional sternotomy if
surgery cannot be completed safely through minimally
invasive means.

Institution/administrative support

Creating the team

Full administrative support is needed for starting a robotic
program, including purchasing the da Vinci robotic system

The initial task is to create a dedicated operative
team, including nursing staff, surgical assistants, and

Creating the team optimal qualifications:
institution, team, and surgeon

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(4):346-353 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0033

Sutter et al. How I teach robotic-assisted CABG

anesthesiologists. Success in the operative theater is
dependent on high levels of engagement and support.
Operative nursing staff need to be trained in how to use
and troubleshoot the da Vinci system. Surgical bedside
assistants are vitally important as they will be responsible
for both instrument exchanges and robotic arm positioning
and adjustments. Anesthesiologists should be comfortable
with off-pump coronary cases, in addition to the demands
of dealing with an insufflated thorax in robotic cases.
Perfusionists need to be immediately available if
cardiopulmonary bypass is required. These individuals
should all be included in formalized robotic training to
achieve mastery of the system and instruments. The bedside
assistant must be able to anticipate the key portions of the
operation, and they serve as important collaborators during
the case. The surgical assistant must also be comfortable
assisting with off-pump coronary surgery cases, as creating
the anastomosis is the second crucial element of the
operation after robotic-assisted takedown of the left IMA
(LIMA).
Surgeon experience & training
R-MIDCAB mastery has a threshold of approximately
100 cases. As previously mentioned, development of a
heart team approach is essential, and establishing rapport
with a core team is key to successful adoption. Additional
experience, is identified below:
(I) Extended off-pump bypass grafting experience,
with at least 50 off-pump cases as primary operator
to establish proficiency in off-pump CABG.
(II) Completion of the required training modules per
Intuitive Surgical, Inc. to become comfortable
with the many components of the da Vinci surgical
system. This will entail several training modules
and simulation sessions, to thoroughly understand
all components of the operating system. Didactic
sessions as well as cadaveric simulation sessions
will improve the surgeon’s comfort level with the
robot. Additionally, observing a live case with an
experienced robotic surgeon is extremely helpful.
(III) The surgeon serves as the bedside assistant
for at least 20 cases, if possible, even if not on
cardiac cases, where the surgeon will learn port
placement, participate in instrument exchanges and
troubleshooting.
(IV) After gaining a level of comfort with simulation

and bedside assisting, the surgeon then moves to
the operating console to gain experience with IMA
harvest.
Ideally, there should be opportunities to train in robotic
IMA harvesting, even during sternotomy CABG. Typically,
the use of three 8-mm port holes results in less discomfort
compared to the Rultract ® Skyhook Retractor (Rultract
Incorporated, Cleveland, OH, USA), generally used to
retract the chest wall during IMA harvesting. However,
this approach necessitates prior discussions with the
administration, system chief, and the patient, and should be
appropriately documented in the patient’s medical record
before the surgery.
Patient selection: indications and
contraindications of robotic-assisted CABG
surgery
Indications
The main indications for R-MIDCAB focus on targeting a
severely diseased left anterior descending artery (LAD) that
can be accessed via a small, left anterior thoracotomy:
(I) Severe ostial LAD disease;
(II) Long LAD lesions, suboptimal for stenting;
(III) Chronic total occlusions of the LAD;
(IV) Patients with severe CAD and advanced age or
comorbidities, following heart team discussion,
especially with hybrid coronary revascularization
LIMA to LAD, and stenting to non-LAD lesions;
(V) Complex disease involving LAD and diagonal.
Contraindications
Contraindications of robotic-assisted cardiac surgery
include:
 Absolute contraindications:
 Previous pleural symphysis;
 Extensive lung surgery;
 Prior use or injury of both internal mammary
arteries.
 Relative contraindications:
 Severe obesity;
 Significant heart enlargement (insufficient space
between anterior heart surfaces and posterior chest
wall);
 Chest wall deformity/severe pectus excavatum;
 Diffuse distal coronary disease;

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(4):346-353 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0033

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 4 July 2024

 Intramyocardial coronaries arteries;
 Severe pulmonary disease (intolerance to single
lung ventilation).
Incremental learning
There are several components for successfully achieving
R-MIDCAB mastery including proper port placement,
robotic harvesting of the internal mammary, and performing
off-pump anastomosis. Crucial elements of off-pump
CABG include familiarity with manipulating the ischemic
heart, ischemic preconditioning, shunt placement, stabilizer
placement and finally performing arterial anastomosis on a
beating heart. The ability to maneuver the ischemic heart
cannot be overemphasized, as creation of the anastomosis
often requires the heart to be repositioned a few times for
optimal visualization. For surgeons accustomed to on-pump
CABG, practice performing the LIMA to LAD anastomosis,
with the heart beating, while still on-pump, can be quite
useful. Learning to sew from the left is also important.
Comprehensive team training
It is important to observe experienced robotic surgeons
during live cases, as there are numerous nuances to each
case that can be incorporated into your own practice.
Once ready to embark on robotic cases, the entire team
should perform several “dry runs” with the assistance of
an Intuitive Surgical, Inc. representative. Most elements
of the case should be simulated including: docking the
robot and ensuring all instruments are available (including
for traditional sternotomy), ensuring staff familiarity and
comfort. Anesthesiologists should be included in these
simulation sessions as well as they play a crucial role in the
management of the patient.
R-MIDCAB surgical procedures—general
considerations
Some general considerations and troubleshooting tips are
described below.

intraoperative periods (8). The anesthesiologist will selectively
ventilate the right lung, while isolating the left as dictated
by the surgeon. Anesthesiologist should prepare for CO2
insufflation of the thoracic cavity (inducing an iatrogenic
tension pneumothorax) and its associated hypotension. The
anesthesiologist needs to be aware of the possible restricted
robotic arm movement which may necessitate repositioning
of the head & neck of the patient.
Patient positioning
Position the patient on the operative table by aligning
the left side of their body on the table’s edge such that
the left shoulder overhangs slightly. This positioning
allows bedside assistant to apply gentle pressure on the
left shoulder which increases the arm’s maneuverability.
Frequently during dissection of the distal IMA, the superior
port will be significantly restricted by the anterior location
of the shoulder. Anesthesiologist & bedside assistants
play a key role in maintaining the free movement of the
upper robotic arm. Similarly, gentle pressure on the costal
margin can accomplish the same movement for the inferior
robotic arm.
Set up and draping
External defibrillator pads are placed on the patient and
positioned anteriorly over the right pectoralis major and
posteriorly underlying the heart. It is important to have this
prepared for use with the adequate intensity for external
defibrillation (150–200 Joules). Plan the incision before
draping: draw landmarks at midline sternum (Figure 2),
LIMA location, diaphragm (typically at the step off the
sternum and xiphoid), and locations for inferior and
superior port sites. Avoid making an inframammary crease
incision, which delays healing. Manipulation of the female
breast will be required to ensure the best possible incision,
usually retracting the breast as laterally as possible, and
securing this position with 3 M™ Steri-Drape™ (3M
Maplewood, USA), works best. For women, make an
incision through the breast and generally through left lower
inner quadrant.

Anesthesia awareness participation
Normothermia is a priority, having been achieved before
induction of anesthesia and warming is maintained throughout
the entire operation. An aggressive attempt to keep the
patients warm is initiated in the immediate preoperative and

Know the exact target
Try to visualize the best port placement and endoscopic
port placement prior to making any incision. Usually, the
endoscopic port becomes the thoracotomy. The optimal

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(4):346-353 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0033

Sutter et al. How I teach robotic-assisted CABG

endoscopic port. When first learning R-MIDCAB, place
endoscopic port more lateral to prevent injury to the heart;
as experience grows, the endoscopic port can be placed
more medially. After the endoscope and instruments have
been placed, another method to enhance anterior/posterior
operative space is to release the medial and anterior
pericardial fat attachments from the chest wall, which
further allows the CO2 to depress the heart posteriorly.
The endoscopic port will eventually be enlarged as part of
anterior thoracotomy, so placement is critical.

Figure 2 Preparing for robotic-assisted surgery. Drawing
landmarks.

Opening the pericardium
Open the pericardium lateral to pulmonary artery directly
over the LAD. Wide opening of the pericardium is critical
for several reasons. First, when operating through a small
incision, this approach prevents pericardial fat and the
pericardial border from obstructing the surgical view,
ensuring that the target area remains the sole focus. Second,
a wider pericardial opening reduces the risk of major
bleeding and postoperative tamponade. Finally, it ensures
proper drainage from the right side of the pericardial
cavity; a lesson learned from early experience with delayed
inflammatory tamponade on the right side.
The IMA

Figure 3 Robotic-assisted CABG set-up. CABG, coronary artery
bypass grafting.

thoracotomy will be dependent upon the target vessel:
LAD, diagonal, and/or ramus intermedius, as well as the
size of the heart seen on chest front and lateral chest X-ray
(CXR) or computed tomography (CT) scan. Generally, it is
better for the thoracotomy to be more lateral and inferior as
it is difficult to push the heart laterally or superiorly.
Docking of the robot
Endoscopic port placement and general setup
Figure 3 shows the general set up of Robotic-assisted
CABG.
Always stop ventilation during placement of the

The general surgical rule of “not dissecting into a hole”
is equally relevant to robotic-assisted LIMA harvesting.
Slowly dissect the length of LIMA in small increments,
to avoid pulling on any one area of the LIMA. During
skeletonization, retaining a few anterior attachments on the
chest wall will prevent injury until dissection is complete.
LIMA manipulation can result in spasticity and a propensity
for clot formation, thus leaving larger branches intact
distally promotes greater blood flow through the LIMA to
combat the procoagulant effects of manipulation. Beware:
the lack of haptic feedback can result in excessive traction
or force being applied to the vessel, thereby resulting in
the undesired dissection of the LIMA wall. Nothing is
worse than completing a LIMA takedown, proceeding to
CABG, and discovering a nonfunctional LIMA conduit.
LIMA dissection is generally performed from just distal to
the intersection of the phrenic nerve and LIMA, until the
bifurcation. Do NOT risk injury to the phrenic nerve!
Using higher wattage on the cautery allows for faster
dissection but increases risk of burning a hole through the
LIMA, while lower wattage will cause a superficial non-

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(4):346-353 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0033

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 4 July 2024

penetrating injury. In my experience, the vast majority of
IMA dissections, can be performed with an equal amount of
blunt and sharp dissection. Additionally, to avoid avulsing
branches of the IMA, one should always dissect away from
the IMA. Traditionally, the LIMA has been harvested as a
pedicle (“en bloc”) under direct vision. Skeletonized IMA
technique is used for R-MIDCAB because, invariably,
the pedicle dissection leads to a cut in an IMA branch
and the branch retracts back into the pedicle. It is then a
delicate dissection to control the bleeding branch without
damaging the IMA. While skeletonizing the LIMA, the
surgeon and bedside assistants should constantly watch for
the “pulsatility” of the LIMA to avoid inadvertent damage
to IMA. Bilateral IMA harvest begins with the right IMA.
When initially dissecting across the sternum to the right
IMA, maintain a plane of dissection directly on the posterior
sternal border.
Managing complications
Bleeding during IMA dissection
Be meticulous in controlling any bleeding. Bleeding stains
tissue and makes visualization difficult during further
dissection. If bleeding occurs, use robotic instruments to
apply gentle pressure for a few minutes to create a bloodless
field, thus allowing for subsequent treatment of the bleeding
branch with a clip or cautery.
Arrhythmia
Proceed with caution with cautery and proximity to
myocardium, as the heat can induce tachyarrhythmias,
including ventricular fibrillation. Lidocaine bolus should
be readily available. Should arrhythmia occur, remove all
robotic ports, defibrillate with external pads, powered to
150–200 Joules. Remind anesthesia to reinflate the left lung
to best defibrillate.
Cardiac puncture
Accidental cardiac puncture can occur during port
placement without adequate visualization, stabilizer
placement, or during instrument exchanges. Direct pressure
should be applied as able to allow the anesthesia team to
properly resuscitate before attempting repair. Be prepared
to perform sternotomy, as well as cannula for fem-fem
bypass, if necessary to control the bleeding.
Compromised circulation
Plan for easy and direct access to cardiopulmonary bypass

supplies and an emergency tray with sternotomy and femfem bypass essentials should be readily available.
Avoid post operative bleeding
Meticulous hemostasis is necessary prior to robot removal,
particularly a thorough inspection through endoscope as
each port is removed.
Pain management
Optimization of postoperative pain management is
performed by infiltration of the incision, muscles and
drainage sites using a local anesthetic, a mixture which
includes 30 mL lidocaine w/epinephrine 0.5%—1:200,000,
30 mL bupivacaine 0.25% and 60 mL ropivacaine w/
epinephrine 0.2%—1:600,000. This pain management
protocol has been shown to facilitate intraoperative
extubation of the patient (8). Intravenous narcotics and
ketorolac are used with the dosage of the latter modified
based on the patient’s age and renal status. In our
experience, 88% of all patients are extubated in the OR.
Conclusions
Since 2005, we have performed 5,903 CABG procedures,
through December 31, 2023, and 46% were robotic-assisted
cases, with 1.8% of conversion to sternotomy, which in most
instances were related to damaged or inadequate internal
mammary. Thirty-day mortality was 1.2%. R-MIDCAB
is a safe, efficacious, and reproducible procedure, offering
an alternative to sternotomy in carefully selected patients.
Meticulous planning, incremental learning and teamwork
are the main factors leading to success. Robotic surgery
training can be safely implemented in a minimally invasive
surgery training program. A gradual introduction of robotic
technique maximizes the learning experience and minimize
the potential for adverse outcomes.
The American Association for Thoracic Surgery (AATS)
Foundation Cardiac Surgical Robotic Fellowship
The Cardiac Surgical Robotics Program (https://www.
aats.org/foundation/cardiac-surgical-robotic-fellowship)
provides an advanced educational experience in robotic
cardiac surgery for North American cardiac surgeons
who will bring expanded knowledge back to their home
institution. Awardee pre-requisite training before
beginning the fellowship include: (I) system training:
one day systems training at an Intuitive training facility

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(4):346-353 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0033

Sutter et al. How I teach robotic-assisted CABG

(preferably accompanied by requested proctor); (II)
cadaver laboratory training: one cadaver lab while at
training facility; (III) procedure training: observation—
a minimum of two cardiac robotic cases at selected
well-established training center with their experienced
surgeon proctor; (IV) robotic simulation; (V) successful
completion of a robotic simulation skills curriculum; (VI)
passing test score in robotic ergonomics, accuracy, and
speed; (VII) onsite proctoring: five patient operations;
(VIII) case video proctoring: proctors to review the case
videos of three patient operations to provide feedback to
the awardee; (IX) commitment by awardee to complete 50
cases and submit outcomes back to AATS Foundation; (X)
hold remote training sessions with their mentor. A recent
consensus review (9) recommends a clinical experience
for the robotic surgeon of 250 career cases of coronary
revascularization as primary operator (on or off pump)
with an observed to expect (O/E) <1, of O/E of which 50
should be off pump.

Acknowledgments

Society of Thoracic Surgeons/Thoracic Surgery
Foundation (STS/TSF) Advanced Robotic Cardiac
Surgery Fellowship
