Art of Operative Techniques

Advancing robotic aortic valve replacement beyond isolated
therapy: a platform for multivalve therapy
Lawrence M. Wei, Vinay Badhwar
Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. Email: vinay.badhwar@wvumedicine.org.

The application of robotic cardiac surgery has long been considered the pinnacle of surgical care for an
isolated procedure. This has been for good reason, as the quality and reproducibility of isolated procedures
like mitral valve (MV) repair and robotic-assisted, minimally invasive, direct coronary artery bypass have
grown steadily across the globe with shrinking learning curves. Once a robotic team’s learning curve has
crested, however, additional opportunities may be explored that may include concomitant procedures.
Following the core surgical principles of safety and procedural homogeneity with open operations, robotic
cardiac surgery may be extended in a stepwise fashion to multi-valve operations, concomitant maze
procedures, aortic root enlargement, septal myectomy, and even valve and coronary bypass operations, all
via the same transaxillary working incision. We will review the development and operative techniques of
concomitant procedures that may be utilized in conjunction with robotic aortic valve replacement (RAVR).
Keywords: Robotic valve surgery; mitral repair; tricuspid repair; aortic valve replacement (AVR); root
enlargement

Introduction

Operative techniques

The right transaxillary 3 cm working incision used for
robotic aortic valve replacement (RAVR) is nearly identical
to the platform used for robotic mitral operations. The
familiarity of this platform has helped to facilitate the
addition of concomitant procedures following initial cases
of RAVR as an isolated operative procedure starting in
January 2020 (1). While some concomitant procedures
were novel and required careful planning, the majority were
readily adaptable to maintain procedural consistency with
commonly applied robotic operations. Following RAVR
initiation, concomitant procedures were incorporated
within the first 50 cases at West Virginia University, to
include mitral valve (MV) repair and biatrial Cox-Maze
operations (2). Upwards of 17% of the first 300 global cases
of RAVR have safely included concomitant operations with
excellent outcomes up to one year (3).

Preparation

Following preoperative assessment of coronary and vascular
anatomy with contrast computed tomography (CT),
and angiography when deemed necessary, transthoracic,
or transesophageal assessment of valvular function is
performed on all patients. Following induction with
double lumen endotracheal anesthesia, central line and left
brachial arterial line placement, an 18–20 French cannula
is percutaneously inserted via the right internal jugular
vein under echocardiographic guidance and positioned in
the superior vena cava (SVC) to facilitate future bicaval
drainage. All patients are positioned supine with a shoulder
roll under the tip of the right scapula and the right arm is
tucked posteriorly with the humerus as vertical as possible
to expose the right axilla (Figure 1). Following skin prep
and draping, a 3 cm transaxillary working incision is

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):228-234 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2025-ravr-12

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 14, No 3 May 2025

Figure 1 Patient positioning.

Figure 3 Aortotomy.

Figure 2 Port placement and docking.

performed at the level of the anterior axillary line in the
fourth intercostal space and a soft tissue retractor is placed.
The pericardium is entered 3–4 cm anterior to the phrenic
nerve and brought laterally by way of retraction sutures
brought out at the level of the posterior axillary line to
create a shelf-like exposure of the cardiac structures. The
DaVinci Xi robot (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA)
is prepared. Port placement preparation is made in relation
to the working incision as follows: arm 1 at 10 o’clock in
the third intercostal space, arm 3 at 1 o’clock in the fifth
intercostal space, arm 4 at 4 o’clock in the sixth intercostal
space, with arm 2 placed via the working incision when the
time comes.
A 1 cm skin incision is placed slightly above the right
inguinal crease to access the anterior surface of the right
common femoral artery and vein; 5-0 polypropylene purse

strings are placed, and systemic heparin is given. A 25
French multi-stage venous cannula is delivered into the
right atrium, and a 17–19 French arterial cannula is placed.
Bicaval cardiopulmonary bypass is commenced. An aortic
root vent is placed on the distal lateral aorta (at the level of
the SVC) and brought through the working incision. A left
ventricular vent is placed via the right superior pulmonary
vein and brought out through a separate stab incision
posterior to the working incision. A transthoracic crossclamp is introduced through a stab incision in the second
or third intercostal space at the anterior or mid axillary line
and positioned distal to the aortic root vent. The robot
is docked with the port configuration noted above with
instruments introduced as follows: arm 1—DeBakey, arm
2—30 degree up camera, arm 3—long tip forcep grasper,
arm 4—curved scissors (Figure 2).
Exposition
The table-side surgeon or associate applies the cross-clamp
and cardioplegia is delivered directly into the aortic root to
achieve hypothermic diastolic arrest in the setting of less
than moderate aortic regurgitation (AR). Should AR be
moderate or greater, it is recommended to proceed with
aortotomy and deliver cardioplegia via direct coronary
ostial catheters. The aortotomy, when performed, is most
commonly done in a modified “hockey stick” fashion
(Figure 3), commencing approximately 2 cm distal to the
sinotubular junction and extending medially and cephalad
and laterally and caudad to the mid non-coronary sinus to
facilitate excellent exposure of the aortic valve.

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):228-234 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2025-ravr-12

Wei and Badhwar. RAVR and concomitant operations

Operation

Figure 4 Robotic valvectomy.

Figure 5 Annular decalcification and debridement.

In the setting of aortic stenosis without significant
AR and the need to perform concomitant intracardiac
operations, it would be advised to commence with the left
atriotomy first. This would be the case of a RAVR and
concomitant MV repair or replacement, and/or concomitant
Cox-Maze with cryoablation. A vertical right atriotomy
provides access for the right-sided Cox-Maze cryoablation
lesions as well as to provide exposure for concomitant
tricuspid valve (TV) repair or replacement. In the setting
of significant AR, it is advised to open the aorta and deliver
ostial cardioplegia before embarking upon intracardiac
operations. We have not used retrograde cardioplegia in
these settings due to several factors that include logistical
considerations, but also anatomic as in the case of the CoxMaze III lesion set and importance of performing the
epicardial coronary sinus lesion.

All operations should be performed in alignment with
open or previously established robotic procedures to
ensure standardization and patient safety. In the case of
concomitant left atrial operations performed first, the
initial instrument in arm 3 is the dual blade atrial retractor
and is retained until such time that aortotomy is necessary.
Once the left atrium is opened, the left ventricular vent
is positioned into the left inferior pulmonary vein. If a
concomitant mitral repair or replacement is the only
additional procedure, this should proceed as per institutional
routine, with placement of the left ventricular vent across
the completed MV prior to left atrial closure facilitated by
4-0 polytetrafluoroethylene. If a concomitant biatrial CoxMaze procedure is the only additional procedure, the leftsided lesion set should proceed first, followed by the rightsided lesion set, followed by left atrial appendage ligation (4).
If mitral or tricuspid procedures are needed in addition to
the Cox-Maze, the Cox-Maze is performed first in the order
noted above, followed by either the MV and then the TV
to allow for adequate tissue thawing. Following closure of
the left and right atriotomies, the RAVR is then performed.
These steps can facilitate double valve and even triple valve
operations, with or without concomitant surgical ablation in
an efficient and safe manner (5).
Following completion of the aortotomy, aortic
valvectomy is performed with the robotic curved scissors
commencing at the right-non commissure and then
extending either along the right or non-coronary annulus
per the surgeon preference (Figure 4). It should be noted
that in all of our cases, the robotic curved scissors provide
the precision and dexterity needed to perform complete
and accurate debridement, flush to the annulus and without
the need for a rongeur. Tableside suction aspiration and
meticulous irrigation is essential to ensure complete
evacuation of any and all particulate matter (Figure 5).
Circumferential interrupted braided sutures are placed from
the ventricular side starting at the left-non commissure and
moving clockwise. Left-handed placement, often just using
the DeBakey, may assist with seamless delivery of sutures
along the non-coronary annulus by avoiding any inadvertent
interaction with the non-coronary sinus. The annulus is
then sized, and the valve sutures are then systematically
placed through the prepared prosthesis extracorporeally
and then the prosthesis is delivered through the working
incision, often off the holder to fit through the incision,

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):228-234 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2025-ravr-12

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 14, No 3 May 2025

A

Figure 6 Prosthetic implantation and suture securement.

B
and then lowered into position carefully with robotic
assistance. The valve is then secured with suture fasteners to
complete the replacement (Figure 6), and the aorta is closed
robotically with 4-0 polypropylene suture in two layers or
per institutional routine (Figure 7A). Antegrade cold blood
or cardioplegia is then administered to not only provide
additional myocardial protection if required, but to test the
suture line prior to removal of the cross-clamp (Figure 7B).
A guiding principle of Should be denoted at (SAVR) as
per standard nomenclature, and thus of RAVR as well, is to
always implant the largest size prosthesis possible, matched
to the patient’s body surface area to avoid mismatch.
Shortly after the launch of RAVR, we performed our first
aortic root enlargement on May 12, 2020 (6). Since that
time, root enlargement has been performed in 10% of all
cases worldwide (3). The technique utilized commences by
extending the aortotomy to the annulus at the midpoint of
the non-coronary sinus in a modified Nick’s fashion, with
optional extension along a portion or the entirety of the
annulus of the non-, then completing the aortic prosthetic
implantation (Figure 8). While not an annular enlargement
per se, enlargement of the aortic root often affords upsizing
by 1–2 sizes. Reconstruction is then performed with either
autologous or bovine pericardium, or synthetic polyester,
often determined by the size of the augmentation required.
Our preference is to utilize synthetic polyester for larger
enlargements. The patch is fashioned to size and lowered
through the working incision where it undergoes additional
refinement of size (Figure 9). The first suture is placed
outside-in at the base of the aortic tissue, at the level of
the annulus, and then up through the patch (Figure 10).

Figure 7 Aortic closure. (A) Aortotomy closure. (B) Final
aortotomy closure and antegrade integrity testing.

Each limb of the 4-0 polypropylene is then sutured
rightward, then leftward, and tied together to complete
the augmentation, often of the entire aortotomy to provide
maximum advantage (Figure 11). The integrity of the
augmentation is then tested with antegrade cold blood or
cardioplegic delivery.
Additional options for concomitant procedures include
extended transaortic septal myectomy for the management
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Following valvectomy, the
visualization and access to the entirety of the left ventricular
outflow tract is both clear and coaxial. This enables a
complete myectomy extending well towards the ventricular
apex and beyond the mitral leaflet and papillary muscle
continuity in order to provide a thorough resection using
only the robotic curved scissors.

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):228-234 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2025-ravr-12

Wei and Badhwar. RAVR and concomitant operations

Figure 8 Extension of aortotomy along the non-coronary
annulus to facilitate prosthesis upsizing and preparation for root
enlargement.

Figure 9 Synthetic polyester (Dacron) tailored for patch
augmentation.

Figure 10 Commencement of root enlargement with anchoring to
residual aortic tissue at non coronary annulus.

Figure 11 Completion of aortic root enlargement with patch
augmentation.

Finally, a single-incision, single-platform via the
right transaxillary approach may be possible to perform
concomitant RAVR and coronary artery bypass grafting.
The left internal thoracic artery can be harvested via the
right approach. Following myocardial arrest, the left
pericardium is marsupialized to facilitate cardiac rotation
and exposure of the left anterior descending to permit
totally endoscopic coronary artery bypass (7).

cross-clamp removal. The pericardium is closed, and chest
drains are placed. The patient is fully ventilated on both
lungs while on full cardiopulmonary bypass, then weaned
from support and closed. Operating room extubation is then
performed per institutional protocols or exchanged to single
lumen intubation and transferred to the intensive care unit.
Postoperative management is continued per institutional
routine.

Completion
U p o n c o m p l e t i o n o f t h e R AV R a n d c o n c o m i t a n t
intracardiac operations, epicardial temporary pacer wires
are placed, and the heart is re-animated in conjunction with

Comments
Robotic cardiac surgeries and the institutions performing
them will continue to evolve through the expansion of their

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2025;14(3):228-234 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2025-ravr-12

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 14, No 3 May 2025

armamentarium, the safe addition of cases of increased
complexity, and the addition of concomitant procedures.
The establishment of RAVR in January 2020 was done
intentionally using the same transaxillary working incision
as robotic mitral operations (1). The aim was to be able to
add concomitant operations as experience grew. This added
flexibility permits RAVR to be applied to an increased
cohort of patients who may benefit from more than isolated
aortic valve surgery. The addition of concomitant procedures
to RAVR became feasible within the first 6 months,
with the first biatrial Cox-Maze on May 1, 2020 (4). To
avoid patient-prosthesis mismatch, the first concomitant
root enlargement with patch augmentation was performed
on May 12, 2020 (6). The first concomitant RAVR with
MV repair and biatrial Cox-Maze was performed on July
24, 2020 (8). MV replacement for aortic and mitral stenosis
was performed on March 16, 2021, and the first transaortic
septal myectomy for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was
performed on December 8, 2022 (9). Many of these
concomitant procedures, or combinations thereof, have
become routine with growing RAVR team experience with
multicenter reproducibility (3,9).
Operative experience and team building is essential for
the safe introduction of these added procedures. Robotic
cardiac surgery, starting predominantly with MV repair,
has been well-established in our program, with over 1,000
cases performed by our team before developing RAVR.
Excellence in preoperative imaging, anesthesia, perfusion,
and seamless coordination between console and tableside
surgery has been instrumental to permit the relatively
standardized additions of concomitant procedures. The
same platform is used for all robotic valve cases and the
vast majority of our patients are extubated in the operating
room, thus enhancing our ability to perform these
operations timely, often with two operations by the same
team in a day, and in a cost-neutral manner to conventional
sternotomy (10). After overcoming the learning curve for
robotic mitral surgery, additional concomitant procedures
such as AVR, root enlargement, complex bileaflet mitral
repair, endocarditis repair, biatrial Cox-Maze, and TV
repair are all possible with the same platform. As long as a
patient is suitable for peripheral cardiopulmonary bypass,
a relative all-comer strategy is employed at our institution.
Every patient is evaluated by the heart team, which now
considers RAVR as the preferred approach for low-risk
and even intermediate-risk patients with isolated aortic
valve disease as well as when concomitant procedures are
required.

Conclusions
In conclusion, as experience grows with RAVR, the addition
of concomitant procedures and multi-valve operations
is both feasible and safe. Utilizing the same 3 cm right
transaxillary approach, robotic surgery is no longer limited
to a single-procedure modality.
Acknowledgments
None.
Footnote
to declare.
distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
