Art of Operative Technique

Step-by-step technique of robotic-assisted minimally invasive
direct coronary artery bypass
MaryAnn C. Wertan1#, Serge Sicouri2#, Yoshiyuki Yamashita1,2, Massimo Baudo2, Trisha A. Senss1,
Danielle Spragan1,2, Gianluca Torregrossa1,2, Francis P. Sutter1

Department of Cardiac Surgery, Lankenau Medical Center, Main Line Health, Wynnewood, PA, USA; 2Department of Cardiac Surgery Research,

Lankenau Institute for Medical Research, Main Line Health, Wynnewood, PA, USA
#

These authors contributed equally to this work as co-first authors.

Health, 100 Lancaster Avenue, 356 Lankenau, MOB East, Wynnewood, PA 19096, USA. Email: WertanM@mlhs.org.

Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is the treatment of choice for coronary artery disease. The
traditional method of performing CABG via a full sternotomy has its drawbacks, including increased
postoperative morbidity, a higher incidence of complications, and extended hospitalizations. Although
minimally invasive and robotic-assisted technology offer promising alternatives, they have not gained wide
acceptance, largely because of the limited amount of literature supporting hybrid and robotic-assisted
CABG. Since 2005, Lankenau Heart Institute’s cardiothoracic surgical team has been developing and
refining for selected patients a method for coronary revascularization that involves robotic harvesting of the
left internal mammary artery (LIMA) and beating heart surgery through a limited minithoracotomy. This
technique precisely places the robotic endoscopic port over the target site of the left anterior descending
(LAD) artery. The LIMA is harvested using the enhanced visualization and precision of the robotic platform.
The robotic instruments are then removed, and the endoscopic port site is slightly enlarged to become the
minithoracotomy, allowing for LIMA-to-LAD anastomosis. The other two robotic ports are used for drains,
eliminating the need for additional incisions. The method has been used in over 2,850 patients. This article
describes in detail our standardized technique for robotic-assisted minimally invasive direct coronary artery
bypass (R-MIDCAB).
Keywords: Robotic coronary artery bypass grafting (robotic CABG); minimally invasive direct coronary artery
bypass (MIDCAB); thoracotomy; cardiac surgery; precision incision

Introduction
The benefit of grafting the left internal mammary artery
(LIMA) to the left anterior descending artery (LAD) is
thoroughly established (1). Several techniques, including
minimally invasive and off-pump techniques, have emerged
to accomplish LIMA to LAD (2-4). Cardiothoracic surgeons
are advancing surgical techniques and driving technology
to reduce patient suffering and improve patient quality of
life (5-11). Recent studies over a 15-year period show that
robotic-assisted minimally invasive direct coronary artery
bypass (R-MIDCAB) and hybrid coronary revascularization

(HCR) combined with percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI) provide good long-term outcomes in patients and
provide an additional overall cost-benefit over traditional
sternotomy coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)
secondary to decreased postoperative length of stay (12-16).
Our technique entails the robotic harvest of one or
both internal thoracic arteries using the da Vinci® Surgical
System (Intuitive Surgical ® Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA)
followed by direct LAD bypass through a minithoracotomy
using the OCTOPUS® NUVO tissue stabilizer (Medtronic,
Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA). The ‘precision incision’

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):442-451 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0034

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

Figure 1 Three landmarks coordinate system for the precision
incision. LIMA, left internal mammary artery.

enables this procedure, which is mapped using three
coordinates (5). The term is employed due to its reliable
precision in identifying the optimal endoscopic port
location, which allows for an unobstructed LIMA takedown
and subsequent minithoracotomy site that provides clear
and direct visualization for bypass grafting. This article
describes in detail our standardized technique for robotassisted coronary revascularization via minithoracotomy.
Methods
Critical step—building the team
The initial step is to assemble a dedicated team that will
collaborate on all robotic cases (one team!). Achieving
success in the operating room requires strong commitment,
coordination, and communication from every member of the
surgical team. It’s not just the surgeon who needs to master the
use of the robot, but anesthesiologists and all surgical assistants
must also become adept with new tasks, frequent instrument
changes, the implications of CO2-induced alterations in the
thoracic cavity, single right lung ventilation, and the crucial
importance of anticipating or correcting the causes of robotic
arm restrictions and movement limitations. Incremental
learning is the key to success in all phases of this operation.

Step 1: patient positioning
Maintaining normothermia is a top priority and should
be achieved before anesthesia induction and maintained
throughout the entire operation. Additionally, external
defibrillator pads should be applied to the patient, with
one placed anteriorly over the right pectoralis major and
the other posteriorly beneath the heart. The patient is
positioned on the operative table with the left side aligned
along the table’s edge, allowing the left shoulder to
slightly overhang. This arrangement ensures unrestricted
movement of the upper thoracic robotic arm. Occasionally,
the upper robotic arm may encounter difficulty reaching
the inferior part of the chest cavity due to the shoulder
limiting its range of motion. However, advancing the trocar
in the chest cavity or gently pressing on the left shoulder
can enhance the arm’s maneuverability. Similarly, applying
gentle pressure on the costal margin can improve the lower
robotic arm’s movement as it extends superiorly into the
chest. To safeguard the left arm, silicone padding is wrapped
around the elbow, and a double-layered drawsheet is used as
a sling to secure the limb alongside the patient. The right
arm, also wrapped in silicone padding, is positioned securely
on a slightly abducted arm board in the anatomical position.
It has been observed that abducting the right arm, rather
than adducting it, reduces postoperative numbness in the
right upper extremity. This is because when the table tilts
right-side down, the abdominal pannus tends to rest on the
right arm. Each case is thoroughly prepared and draped to
allow for seamless conversion to sternotomy, if necessary.
Step 2: the precision minithoracotomy incision
The precision minithoracotomy incision is located using a
three-coordinate, standardized, step-by-step approach (5).
The success of robotic-assisted LIMA to LAD bypass
grafting via minithoracotomy depends on accurately placing
the endoscopic port. The endoscopic port site for LIMA
takedown will eventually serve as part of the thoracotomy
site used for performing direct coronary anastomosis. To
ensure a precise incision, mark the following landmarks on
the applied Ioban 2 Antimicrobial Incise Steri-Drape (3M™,
St. Paul, MN, USA) with a marking pen before making
the incision: the sternal midline, the location of the LIMA,
and the anterior edge of the diaphragm. The diaphragm is
situated at the level where the lower edge of the sternum
meets the xiphoid process. The final skin marking is critical
and is determined by combining these three landmarks,
resulting in an accurate incision (Figure 1). It is important to

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):442-451 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0034

Wertan et al. Step-by-step robotic-assisted MIDCAB

Figure 2 Coordinate 1 marking on the long thoracic axis.

Figure 3 Precision incision adjustment according to coordinate 3.

understand that this precise incision for the endoscopic port
and subsequent thoracotomy site is typically based on these
three coordinates rather than on a specific intercostal space
or anatomic landmark, such as the midclavicular, or axillary
lines. Although computed tomography scanning has been
discussed in the literature as an alternative for mapping
these three coordinates (5), we have found that it does not
provide significant additional information compared to a

standard antero-posterior and lateral chest X-ray (CXR).
Coordinate 1
For optimal camera placement and to ensure equal access
and visibility to both the proximal and distal LIMA, align
the endoscopic port along the chest’s longitudinal axis,
(Figure 2), marking the midpoint between the suprasternal
notch and the xiphoid process.
Coordinate 2
The endoscopic port should be aligned along the short
(medial/lateral) axis. To orient the endoscopic port, begin
by consulting the preoperative CXR to estimate the
proportion of the hemithorax occupied by the cardiac
silhouette. The distal portion of the LAD aligns to the
heart’s apex, which in turn corresponds to the lateral edge
of the cardiac silhouette on the CXR. Use this information
to measure laterally from the mid-sternum and mark the
skin. The cardiac silhouette can occupy anywhere from
40% to 100% of the left hemithorax. It is crucial to mark
the Ioban chest drape precisely, using the left lateral bony
thorax (rather than the lateral skin or fat) and the midline
sternum as the boundaries of the hemithorax. Once the
first and second coordinates are aligned, the mark is often
located at the level of the nipple. As a rule, in a lean male,
at the level of the nipple, the LAD target is approximately
70–80% down the distal LAD. In a heavier male, the breast
mound is gently pulled toward the right shoulder with a
3M™ Steri-Drape. Conversely, the female breast is gently
pulled laterally and flattened superiorly with Steri-Drape.
The incision on the female breast is ultimately in its left
lower inner quadrant.
Coordinate 3
Ensure that the anastomotic target on the LAD is clearly
defined as either proximal, mid, or distal LAD. Use only
coordinates 1 and 2 to position the endoscopic port over
the mid-distal LAD. If the bypass target is more proximal
or distal, it may require going an intercostal space above
or below, respectively (Figure 3). A helpful tip is that for
grafting more proximal LADs or the first diagonal/ramus
intermedius, the incision should be positioned more
medially. When applying the coronary stabilizer, it is
important to note that the heart can be displaced inferiorly
and medially about one inch in each direction but does not
shift superiorly or laterally. Generally, the incision is below
the nipple in male patients.
Step 3: endoscopic port placement
When placing the endoscopic port (Figure 2), it is important
to remember that the heart could be just beneath the port

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):442-451 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0034

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

Figure 4 Longitudinal alignment of the three robotic ports.

Anesthesia should always be alerted before attaching the
CO2 as it causes physiologic changes similar to a “tension
pneumothorax”. Usually 8–10 cm of CO2 pressure, but up
to 14 cm can be used without difficulty. The space created
using CO 2 pressure is important for proper operative
visualization, robotic arm mobility, and instrument changes.
After placing the endoscope and instruments, another way
to increase the anterior/posterior operative space is to
release the medial and anterior pericardial fat attachments
from the chest wall. This allows the CO2 to push the heart
more posteriorly.

placement site. To avoid undue injury, recheck lateral CXR
or computed tomography (CT) scan views for the heart’s
anterior position. It is crucial to take care and avoid injury
to the heart.
Discontinue ventilation and positive end-expiratory
pressure (PEEP), place a Veress needle superiorly at the
midclavicular line; this allows CO2 insufflation to retract the
heart posteriorly and medially from chest wall. Also, during
port insertion, pay close attention to the electrocardiogram
for changes as the tip of the obturator is passed through the
chest wall. If the obturator is touching the heart, ensure that
anesthesia has turned off the ventilator and intrathoracic
CO2 is present. If electrocardiogram (ECG) changes [e.g.,
premature ventricular contractions (PVCs)] persist and
heart is too close; consider another 8 mm port attempt
more laterally. If there is concern that the heart is against
the chest wall, it may be better to insert a finger first. Of
note, it should be realized that one’s finger may increase the
overall endoscopic port size which may cause subsequent
increased loss of CO2.
The placement of the two additional ports for robotic
surgery should be done under endoscopic guidance,
ensuring they are aligned longitudinally in a straight line
(Figure 4). These ports should be positioned 8–10 cm
(approximately four fingerbreadths) above and below the
endoscopic port, as the bony thorax allows. The bony
thorax near the costal margin may sometimes necessitate
positioning the lower port further posteriorly, which, though
less ideal, seldom leads to significant instrument collisions
with the camera (Figure 4). The lower port is used to elevate
the bony thorax, thereby expanding the space between the
pericardium and the anterior chest wall for the procedure.
However, the upper port can only gently “burped”,
as too much pressure during a lift will tear through
intercostal muscles inferiorly along the line of the rib.

Step 4: opening the pericardium
The pericardium is opened before LIMA harvest to prevent
inadvertent damage caused by pressure on the internal
mammary artery (IMA) from robotic instruments, while
the surgeon is focusing on opening the pericardium with
the heart beating. There is a protective barrier of fat and
muscle over the IMA in situ, versus harvesting first and
having the IMA loosely suspended during pericardial
opening which risks injury. When opening the pericardium,
we use monopolar scissors and bipolar cautery. Using
monopolar cautery too close to the heart may cause
ventricular arrhythmias. In fact, ventricular tachycardia/
fibrillation can occur when opening the pericardium and
working close to the heart. Should an arrhythmia occur, the
bedside team should remove all robotic instruments. For
the most efficient defibrillation, anesthesia always keeps
lidocaine hydrochloride (HCL) 100 mg out of the package
and ready to inject. Additionally, it is best to reinflate the
left lung. The circulator nurse simultaneously turns on the
defibrillator to max joules and shocks as soon as possible
(note, this should be part of routine drill, as max joules are
not the rule in open cases).
By rotating the scope 90 degrees and directing it
inferiorly, you can visualize the posterior pericardium.
This area, located posterior to the phrenic nerve and free
of fat, can be opened to facilitate the drainage of any blood
that may accumulate during the anastomosis (Figure 5A).
While this step is not essential, it helps manage potential
bleeding from the chest wall, around the intracoronary
shunt, or minor injuries to epicardial veins caused by the
stabilizer. Next, the anterior pericardial fat is retracted
laterally, and the anterior pericardium is opened just
lateral to where the pulmonary artery is seen through the
pericardium and over the left ventricle (Figure 5B). If any
injury were to occur during opening the pericardium, injury
to the left ventricle is better tolerated than injury to the

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):442-451 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0034

Wertan et al. Step-by-step robotic-assisted MIDCAB

A

B

Figure 5 Intraoperative pericardial incisions. (A) Posterior phrenic pericardiotomy to drain any blood that may accumulate during the
anastomosis; (B) anterior pericardial incision to identify the LAD target. LAD, left anterior descending.

right ventricle or injury to the pulmonary artery. Continue
making the pericardial incision directly over the LAD to
the diaphragm and proximally over the mid pulmonary
artery to the aorta. Avoid making lateral incisions at the
apex of the pericardium, as this can cause the heart to shift
either laterally out of pericardium or upwards on its edge.
Opening the pericardium widely serves three purposes:
(I) A broad pericardial incision ensures that the
pericardial fat and the pericardial edge do not
obstruct the view, especially when working through
a small incision. This focus on the target minimizes
the need for a larger thoracotomy to improve
exposure.
(II) A wide pericardial opening enhances safety by
reducing the risk of tamponade after the procedure.
(III) Finally, it ensures adequate drainage from the right
side of the pericardium, addressing issues such as
delayed inflammatory right sided atrial tamponade
early in our experience.
When completed, the next step is to identify the target
site of the LAD, hopefully beneath the endoscopic port.
The optimal view of the target is achieved by aiming the
endoscope slightly inferior and medial. This is because,
upon removal of the robotic instruments with associated
CO 2 loss, the target will move superiorly and laterally,
potentially by an inch or more in both directions. Next,
place three small titanium Weck ® Hemoclips (Teleflex
Medical, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA) are placed
in the epicardium using the small clip applier to mark
the LAD target site. This will ensure that the target can
be easily identified, and not confused with other vessels,
when looking into the small thoracotomy. For reassurance,
three hemoclips are placed, as it is difficult to obtain deep

penetration into the epicardium without causing bleeding,
and the superficial clip bites tend to fall off easily.
Step 5: LIMA harvest
It is important to constantly monitor the ‘pulsatility’ of
the LIMA.
To start the robotic-assisted mammary takedown, employ
the micro-bipolar forceps and permanent cautery spatula,
with Intuitive Surgical ® cautery at Classic 1 or Swift at
1–2. These settings help minimize the risk of damaging the
LIMA. Higher wattages could burn a through the LIMA,
whereas the specified settings are designed to cause only
superficial, non-penetrating injuries. If bleeding is noted
from avulsing collateral arteries or directly from the ITA,
the use of a 7/0 Pronova suture (Ethicon, J&J, Raritan,
NJ, USA) is the best next step to attempt containing the
bleeding. Start the dissection where the LIMA is most easily
seen, usually proximally. Next, determine the course of the
LIMA by removing parietal pleura, layers of fat and muscle
over the posterior LIMA. Seeing the entirety of the LIMA
course leads to safer dissection. If significant fat is seen,
remove the fat layers first. Then, dissect the endothoracic
fascia on the posterior LIMA wall. The area on the
posterior wall of the LIMA has few if any branch vessels.
After removal of multiple layers, any serpiginous
coursing of the LIMA can be seen, further reducing the
chance of LIMA injuries. Begin skeletonization distally, at
the bifurcation, and proceed proximally. Circumferential
dissection is best accomplished by incising the medial
attachments first. Starting the LIMA dissection distally
reduces the risk of bleeding from veins on either side of the
LIMA. Our early experience showed that circumferential
dissection proximal to distal led to increased venous

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):442-451 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0034

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

nerve allows visualization of its course beneath the layer
of fat superiorly. There are few bifurcating branches off
the LIMA, however, frequently it is found approximately
2 cm short of the phrenic and IMA intersection. These
bifurcating branches extend medially and posteriorly, which
are difficult to see; thus, extra effort is needed to secure
these branches.

Figure 6 Left internal mammary robotic harvesting (clipping
collaterals).

bleeding. The principle of avoiding “dissecting into a
hole” is a general surgical rule that also applies to roboticassisted IMA takedown. The dissection should proceed
with a gradual ascent anteriorly along the distance of the
IMA rather than complete circumferential dissection at
one area. When skeletonizing the IMA, it’s beneficial to
keep some anterior attachments of the LIMA to the chest
wall. This approach helps suspend the artery and protect it
from accidental injury from a robotic arm. Manipulation of
the IMA can lead to spasticity and increase the risk of clot
formation, so preserving some of the larger distal branches
can maintain better blood flow through the IMA and
mitigate the procoagulant effects of manipulation. Avoid
excessive traction or force, as the absence of haptic feedback
can inadvertently lead to dissection of the LIMA wall.
Ensuring that the LIMA remains a functional, pulsatile
conduit is essential for successful CABG surgery.
Control any bleeding meticulously as blood can stain the
tissue, making further dissection more difficult. Branches
of the LIMA can be anywhere but expect them on both
sides of each rib. Some surgeons primarily cauterize most
branches and clipping only large branches. However,
this surgeon prefers to clip the ‘branches’ proximally and
cauterize distally (Figure 6). The dissection is complete
proximally near the takeoff of the subclavian, but at a safe
distance distal to the phrenic nerve which is intimately
associated with the origin of the IMA.
Importantly, avoid risking injury to the phrenic nerve.
If the phrenic nerve is obscured by fat, applying gentle
downward pressure over the expected site of the phrenic

Step 5a: bilateral IMA harvest
When harvesting both IMAs, start with the right IMA first.
Position the upper port slightly more inferior and lateral
than the usual to prevent injury to the LIMA. Use caution,
as manipulating instruments upwards can exert substantial
pressure on the LIMA while dissecting the proximal right
IMA. During the initial dissection across the sternum
towards the right IMA, ensure you maintain a dissection
plane directly along the posterior sternal border.
Step 6: preparing for LIMA to LAD
The patient’s target heparinization should reach an
activated clotting time of 300 seconds. A VG solution spray
(2.5 mg verapamil, 1.25 mg nitroglycerin, 250 units heparin,
0.1 mL sodium bicarbonate, 150 mL ringer’s solution) is
introduced via a #8 pediatric feeding tube through the lower
port, and further dilates the LIMA. With the majority of
LIMA dissection completed, but with IMA still minimally
attached to the chest wall, detach a small distal segment
of the LIMA, and tack the LIMA to the LAD target site
using the ends of the 7-0 suture approximated with four
Weck® hemoclips. A skeletonized LIMA will always rotate
in a clockwise direction if not tacked to the epicardium.
Although a pedicle graft is less likely to rotate, you will not
know if this rotation occurs due to limited visualization
through the minithoracotomy; hence, the tacking stitch
is critically important. Another option is to clip the distal
LIMA to the edge of the pericardium at the level of the
LAD target location. Free the remaining IMA from the
chest wall, clip and transect at the IMA bifurcation. At this
time heparinization is warranted before transecting the
LITA.
During port removal, carefully inspect all dissection areas
and port sites for bleeding, as it is challenging to address
any issues once the robotic ports are fully withdrawn. The
final step with the robot involved inserting a clamped 19-F
silastic flexible Blake drain (Ethicon) through the upper
port, positioning it over the apex of the lung, and securing it
in place (Figure 7). This drain will remove both air and fluid
postoperatively. While the Blake drain can also be manually

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):442-451 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0034

Wertan et al. Step-by-step robotic-assisted MIDCAB

Figure 7 Minithoracotomy precision incision and upper chest
drain placement.

inserted at the end of the case, be mindful of the heart’s
proximity.
Step 7: creating the precision incision
The incision can be any size, 4–12 cm, for surgeon
comfort. The major benefit for patients is the less invasive
robotic-assisted IMA harvest, not necessarily the size of
the incision (Figure 7). TRS small ThruPort™ System
soft tissue retractor (Edwards Lifesciences® Corp., Irvine,
CA, USA), or the Alexis® Wound Protectors/Retractors
(Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarta, CA, USA) is
oriented within the converted endoscopic port/thoracotomy
(Figure 8A). A width of at least two fingerbreadths is needed
to introduce a TRS small ThruPort™ soft tissue retractor.
Using a headlight and with a small appendectomy retractor,
examine the markers/epicardial clips near the target site
through the endoscopic port incision. Depending on the
location of the target, adjust the endoscopic port/thoracotomy
by extending it medially or laterally as needed. Keep in mind
that it is always easier to move the heart medially.
Make sure that the LIMA does not get caught in the soft
tissue retractor by inspecting the chest before securing the
adhesive ends. The OCTOPUS® NUVO tissue stabilizer
has two components, which are visible separately in the field
and subsequently connected within the minithoracotomy
site. To stabilize the heart on the pericardium, place
traction sutures on the lateral edge of the pericardium
and pull them through the skin using a crochet hook via a
14-gauge angiocatheter. These sutures can help move the

heart medially and keep the lung clear of the surgical area.
The previously placed 7-0 tacking stitch to IMA prevents
the IMA from twisting. Because there is significant slack in
the LIMA conduit, another 7-0 suture should be used to
retack the LIMA to the epicardium to effectively reduce the
redundancy.
The positioning of the OCTOPUS ® NUVO tissue
stabilizer requires careful forethought (Figure 8).
(I) To ensure safe placement, insert your finger into
the thoracotomy first and guide any instruments
inserted through the lower port into your visual
field. Use a long Kelly forceps clamp to gently
pull the tubing of the tissue stabilizer retrograde
through the precision incision and back out
through the lower robotic port to attach to suction.
Gently place the NUVO tissue stabilizer into the
minithoracotomy (Figure 8A).
(II) Similarly, again, place the long Kelly clamp to
make for easier insertion of the large OCTOPUS®
NUVO pole into the chest cavity. Guide the pole
from the lower port site to the minithoracotomy
site with your fingertip to prevent damaging
the heart. Given the heart’s proximity to chest
wall, this precaution cannot be overemphasized.
Assemble the pole and stabilizer within the chest
while looking through the minithoracotomy site
(Figure 8B). Once everything is in place, secure the
coronary artery.
A helpful tip is to proactively fashion angled small
Bulldog® clamps (Teleflex Medical, Research Triangle Park,
NC, USA) with a string for ease of retrieval in the event of
misplacement during anastomosis.
Step 8: anastomosis on the beating heart
Under direct visualization, position the suction stabilizer on
the beating heart and secure the blunt-tip SaddleLoop 1541
(Quest Medical, Inc., Allen, TX, USA) around the proximal
LAD, trimming away any surplus tape (Figure 9). Proceed
with the dissect of the LAD target. It is preferred to use an
under-sized coronary shunt should ischemia suddenly be
an issue and so not damage the intima of the LAD during
placement. Most anastomoses are performed using a 7-0
Prolene polypropylene suture (Ethicon, J&J). The suturing
starts with three knots tied at the heel and ends midpoint
on the medial side of the anastomosis. A nerve hook is used
to tighten the suture before tying. Upon completion of
the anastomosis, use of transit-time ultrasonic flow probe
to perform an intraoperative functional assessment of flow

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):442-451 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0034

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

A

B

Figure 8 OCTOPUS® NUVO tissue stabilizer with suction tubing and pole (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA), are shown as two
detachable components that are seen separately on the surgical field (A), and subsequently connected within the minithoracotomy site (B).

Figure 9 SaddleLoop positioning for the LAD anastomosis. LAD,
left anterior descending.

measurements ensures graft patency. It would be ideal to
have a hybrid operating room with cardiac catheterization
capabilities as an alternative.
Step 9: closing
When the lung is inflated, position the pericardial fat
over the LIMA anastomosis to shield it and prevent it
from protruding into the minithoracotomy. Aim to ensure
that the LIMA remains medial to lung as it inflates. The
pericardium is left not reapproximated, as closing it could
create excessive tension on the LIMA and significantly

impede arterial flow. A 19-F Blake™ drain is inserted
through the lower port site and positioned posteriorly over
the diaphragm to facilitate effective drainage. Next, hold
ventilation and suction the remaining blood from chest
cavity. If the volume of blood is more than anticipated,
re-examine the chest and reinsert the endoscope for
visualization. If necessary, cover the enlarged thoracotomy
with Vaseline™ (Covidien, Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis,
MN, USA) gauze to hold in the CO2.
Using a ligature carrier, place 2-0 Ethibond™ (Ethicon,
J&J) pericostal sutures around the rib above and through
the rib below to create a scaffold that prevents the lung from
bulging out of the minithoracotomy. Next, approximate
the pectoralis major muscle with 2-0 Vicryl polyglactic
synthetic absorbable sutures (Ethicon, J&J) in a “figure
of 8”, as necessary. Aesthetics are augmented with a 1-cm
circumferential sliding cutaneous release just below the skin
level and at the superficial fascial layer. This is done because
the chest tissue laterally is pulled severely from having
the left arm in a sling. In our experience, closures without
this sliding release do not present a favorable appearance.
The “sliding plasty” might have 1–2 interrupted 3-0
suture placed, to further approximate and close layers. Of
note, generally women have no sutures placed above the
pectoralis muscle regardless of the depth of breast tissue.
Step 10: pain management facilitating intraoperative
extubation
The incisions mentioned above are injected with a mixture
of 30 mL of lidocaine with epinephrine 0.5%—1:200,000,
30 mL of bupivacaine 0.25%, and 60 mL of ropivacaine

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):442-451 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0034

Wertan et al. Step-by-step robotic-assisted MIDCAB

Figure 10 Postoperative R-MIDCAB incision in a LIMA to LAD
and diagonal (sequential) double bypass. R-MIDCAB, roboticassisted minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass; LIMA,
left internal mammary artery; LAD, left anterior descending.

with epinephrine 0.2%—1:600,000.
Intraoperative extubation can be beneficial for beating
heart surgery (3) and minimally invasive robotic surgery.
Concluding remarks
This procedure is embraced by all who can perform it
correctly; operative complications or graft failures will not
be well tolerated because this procedure will be heavily
scrutinized. Start with incremental learning; that is, move
forward mastering various parts of the operation separately,
and slowly advance with additional aspects of this precision
incision procedure. For instance:
 If you are not a beating heart surgeon, perform
LIMA to LAD anastomosis with the heart beating,
while on pump.
 Take the opportunity to gain experience with the
robotic set-up and perform LIMA harvest on your
sternotomy cases. Of course, this requires discussion
with the department chairperson & patient. Discuss
the procedure with your patient beforehand,
ensuring they provide written, informed consent.
Explain that there are two methods to harvest the
LIMA: robotically via three 8 mm port incisions or
by using the Rultract® Skyhook Retractor (Rultract

Incorporated, Cleveland, OH, USA) via a sternotomy.
Most patients will prefer the robot!
 Initially, allocate an hour for setting up and harvesting
the LIMA; gradually increase your robotic time
before moving on with your operation via sternotomy.
This approach allows you and your team to work at a
comfortable pace, enhancing patient safety.
 Finally, start with a larger incision rather than a small
minithoracotomy for your initial robotic experiences.
If you need to convert to a sternotomy, retuck the
patient’s left arm at the side on the table rather than in a
sling to avoid a curved chest incision. Conversion should be
seen as a precaution for patient safety, not as a failure.
Robotic-assisted CABG is a promising technique that
can achieve excellent results with a dedicated surgical team.
This procedure offers significant benefits to patients when
performed with commitment and skill.
Over the last 18 years (May 2005–June 30, 2024), almost
half of all CABG interventions at Lankenau Medical Center,
Wynnewood, PA were performed using the described
technique for robotic-assisted beating heart surgery
(n=2,852) (Figure 10) with a <2% sternotomy conversion
rate. Overall results include, 88% extubated in the operating
room, 17% transfusion rate, 17% incidence of postoperative
atrial fibrillation, 0.44 % cerebral vascular accident, and
a mortality rate of 1.2%. Our institution has experienced
remarkable growth due to the collaborative efforts between
cardiologists and cardiac surgeons. R-MIDCAB is not
intended to compete with traditional sternotomy, but to
provide a gold standard alternative to multivessel stenting,
or offer an option to frail patients who otherwise would not
tolerate sternotomy. HCR has increased volume for both
cardiac surgery and interventional cardiology. Dedication
to a multidisciplinary effort ensures that patients receive
the best possible interventional option for myocardial
revascularization in a totally unique and individualized
patient-centered-model of care.
Acknowledgments
Footnote
to declare.

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2024;13(5):442-451 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2024-rcabg-0034

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 13, No 5 September 2024

distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
