Keynote Lecture Series

How to implement a clinical robotic mitral valve surgery program
Anna Xue, Sarah Chen, Alison Ranade, Kimberly Smith, Jeff Kasten, Jorge Catrip, Bob Kiaii
Division of Cardiac Surgery, University of California Davis Health, Sacramento, CA, USA

Minimally invasive, specifically, robot-assisted mitral valve surgery has evolved as a method to intervene on
mitral valve disease without a median sternotomy while providing the advantages of excellent visualization
and allowing for precise technical movements in a small space with the goal to decrease surgical invasiveness,
post-operative pain, and hospital length of stay. As patient interest in minimally invasive cardiac procedures
become more prevalent and patients seek the opportunity to undergo robotic valve surgery, institutions
worldwide are exploring the potential of establishing a robotic mitral valve surgery program. While robust
existing experience in open surgical mitral valve repair, careful patient selection, a dedicated team, and
institution support are fundamental factors to implement a new robotic mitral valve surgery program,
we believe that simulation team training prior to transitioning to live cases is also crucial and should be
incorporated to establish a successful mitral valve surgery program.
Keywords: Minimally invasive; robotic; mitral valve surgery; stimulation team training

Introduction
The clinical practice of cardiac surgery has changed
drastically in recent years as minimally invasive cardiac
surgery has come to the foreground with reduced surgical
invasiveness, post-operative pain, blood loss, and intensive
care/overall hospital length of stay (1-3). Dr. Alain
Carpentier performed the first robotic mitral valve repair
in May 1998 using an early robotic protype, and in May
2000, Dr. W. Randolph Chitwood performed the first
mitral valve repair using the DaVinci system (4). Robotassisted mitral valve repair is well accepted with excellent
results and without compromising patient safety or repair
quality (5,6). Studies have also shown that although early
direct costs were higher in robotic cardiac surgery, this was
balanced by higher late indirect costs in traditional open
sternotomy cardiac surgery due to longer intensive care
unit (ICU) and overall length of stay, readmission rates,
and transfusion requirements (7). However, the process
of becoming an expert at utilizing the surgical robot for
mitral valve procedures may be intimidating and dissuade
some institutions from implementing a robotic mitral valve
surgery program (8). While the fundamental factors to

implement a new robotic mitral valve surgery program are
similar to starting any cardiac surgery program, in order to
become proficient with this innovative technology, training
a dedicated and committed surgical team and reinforcing
the non-technical skills of the individual members of the
team is extremely crucial. At our institution, we utilized
the DaVinci system (DaVinci Xi surgical system, Intuitive
Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) for all of our mitral
valve repair simulation and live cases. Robotic mitral
valve surgery techniques have been extensively described
elsewhere and will not be described in detail here. The
focus instead will be on the most important factors in the
successful implementation of a robotic cardiac surgery
program.
Institution support
Institutions interested in implementing a robotic mitral
valve surgery program should have an established cardiac
surgery program with prior experience with minimally
invasive mitral valve procedures. Prior to the onset of
a robotic mitral valve surgery program, support within
the institution is important, including from the hospital

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):504-509 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-14

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 11, No 5 September 2022

Figure 1 LifeLike BioTissue mitral valve model.

CEO, department chair, administrative staff, fellow
surgeons, cardiothoracic surgery trainees, anesthesiologists,
perfusionists, intensivists, operating room nurses, advanced
practice providers, and other ancillary staff. Appropriate
infrastructure and active involvement from the team
members empower individuals to contribute ideas and
feedback to improve outcomes. Sufficient allocation of
robotic operating room time is also needed to ensure skills
repetition, increasing experience, and progressive increase in
case volume to navigate the learning curve. An independent
surgical robotic training consulting company that works
directly with hospitals to develop successful robotic surgery
programs was approved and contracted by our institution
to oversee the implementation of our robotic mitral valve
surgical program and carry out training simulations.
Robotic module training
The first step to undertake at the onset of a robotic mitral
valve surgery program is for team members to be introduced
to the robotic system and technology. Representatives from
Intuitive Surgical Systems were present onsite to provide
detailed education of the robotic system including docking,
instrument exchange, and key safety features. Surgeons
also complete online training modules and technical skills
training on the robotic console simulator. Intuitive surgical
systems only provide online modules and onsite training of
equipment for cardiac surgery programs and do not offer
subsequent clinical training.
Structured team training simulation platform
Mitral valve surgery is one of the most complex and difficult
procedures in cardiac surgery due to the complex anatomy

of the mitral valve and its diverse pathology. Given this
complexity, team training prior to performing robotic mitral
valve procedures on patients is critical and essential to ensure
successful outcomes. To develop a successful program, it
is also important to ensure appropriate knowledge base
and experience of team members. Surgeons should be
proficient in open cardiac surgery and have expertise in
the surgical management of mitral valve disease. However,
beyond the surgeon, safe and effective performance in
healthcare relies on teamwork as well as nontechnical
skills such as communication and leadership (9).
Traditionally, training in healthcare has been focused
on individual technical and clinical skills. Adoption of
formalized team training is increasing in response to the
need for educational efficiency, clinical time pressures, and
an ethical imperative “not to practice on real patients” (10).
High fidelity patient simulators provide a realistic clinical
environment with several anatomic and physiologic
variations to mimic real clinical problems. Training
modules using simulated chest cavities and hearts have been
developed for open cardiac procedures but can be applied to
robotic cardiac surgery as well (11). We utilized a thoracic
cage model and LifeLike BioTissue mitral valve model
(LifeLike BioTissue Inc., London, Ontario, Canada) which
is made of a polymer processing hydrogel technology that
mimics the tissue characteristics of the mitral valve (12).
The mitral valve model as shown in Figure 1 may feature
posterior leaflet prolapse and any of the biotissue chords can
be torn or cut to simulate chordae tendinae repair. Cadaver
or animal mitral valve models were not used as they are
much more challenging to obtain approval to be brought
into the hospital and operating rooms for simulation
training due to their biohazard properties.
Three of our cardiac surgery advanced practice providers

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):504-509 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-14

Xue et al. How to implement a robotic mitral valve surgery program

Team members present for simulation

Cardiac surgery
(attending,
resident, APP)

Cardiac perfusion

Anesthesia

Cardiac OR nursing

OR equipment
specialists

Figure 2 Team members present for simulation sessions. APP, advanced practice providers; OR, operating room.

were selected to be designated robotic bedside assistants
and were present at the onset of robotic system and
simulation training. Although we have a cardiothoracic
surgery residency training program at our institution, the
involvement of dedicated advanced practice providers was
extremely important for consistency as our cardiothoracic
surgery trainees often rotate to other clinical rotations.
The primary robotic cardiac surgeon at our institution
had extensive experience in robotic cardiac surgery, and
specifically, in robotic mitral valve surgery. However, for the
primary surgeon and other team members to be proficient
and efficient in robotic mitral valve surgery, it is essential
for a team training simulation platform to be developed.
All simulations sessions were performed in the dedicated
robotic operating room. The first several team simulation
sessions included the surgical team, anesthesiologist, cardiac
perfusionists, operating room nursing and equipment
specialists to allow for the appropriate configuration of
the operating room and set up of the DaVinci robot,
robotic consoles, operating table, anesthesia equipment,
transesophageal echocardiogram machine, cardiopulmonary
bypass machine, and sterile instrument tables (Figure 2).
A total of 33 simulation sessions totaling 83 hours
of mitral valve repair/valvuloplasty with neochords and
annuloplasty with a semirigid band were performed.
Critical procedural steps of robotic mitral valve repair were
determined which included docking the robot, valvuloplasty,
annuloplasty, and atriotomy closure. The duration of each
of these critical procedural steps were documented for
each simulation session. The three designated advanced
practice providers each took turns performing the different

procedural steps as bedside assistant. Technical skills
were taught and reinforced, as well as the communication
required between the bedside assistant and the surgeon at
the robotic console.
Through stimulation training, the duration of docking
the robot, annuloplasty, valvuloplasty, and atriotomy
closure all steadily decreased as team members became
more competent, confident, and comfortable in each
procedural step and the operation overall. The duration of
our simulation training valvuloplasty and annuloplasty are
shown in Figure 3. Variability in simulation times were the
result of three different advanced practice providers and at
times a cardiothoracic surgery resident rotating through
different critical steps of the procedure. It may also be due
to different experience levels, familiarity with the robot,
and affinity to technology. The number of neochords used
during valvuloplasty and the number of sutures placed
during each annuloplasty simulation also differed, resulting
in variable times. Additionally, there were gaps of time
between training periods which was reflected in the longer
duration times for valvuloplasty and annuloplasty during
the first simulation session of the training period. When
there were successive simulation sessions, the duration of
the critical procedural steps steadily decreased. Overall,
the structured team training simulation platform steadily
improved the efficiency and flow of critical steps of robot
assisted mitral valve repair while enhancing team dynamics.
Debriefing sessions
Following each simulation training day, a team debriefing

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):504-509 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-14

Annals of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Vol 11, No 5 September 2022
Tra
in

Tra
in

ing
3 d perio
ay
s d 1:

0:36

Tra
in

ing
2 d perio
ay
s d 2:

ing
1 d perio
ay d 3
:

Tra
in

Tra
in

ing
1 d perio
ay d 4
:

Tra
in

ing
1 d perio
ay d 5
:

ing
1 d perio
ay d 6
:

Tra
Tra
Tra
inin
inin
inin
ing
gp
g
g
1 erio
1 d perio
1 d perio
1 d perio
ay d 7
ay d 8
ay d 9 day d 10
:
:
:

Tra
in

:

Time, minutes

0:28

0:21

0:14

0:07

0:00

0:22

0:27

0:26

0:24
0:17

0:23
0:16

0:12
0:15

0:32
0:23

0:16
0:23

0:18
0:20

0:25
0:23

0:26
0:18

0:20
0:20

0:16
0:12

0:24
0:18

0:20
0:16

0:15
0:12

0:26
0:25

11/5/20 11/7/20 11/8/20 11/8/20 11/8/20 11/8/20 11/8/2011/21/20 11/21/2011/21/2011/22/2011/22/2011/22/2011/22/2012/13/2012/13/2012/13/20 2/6/21
Valvuloplasty 0:18
Annuloplasty 0:21

2/6/21

2/6/21 4/11/21 4/11/21 4/11/21 6/6/21 6/6/21

6/6/21 7/11/21 7/11/21 8/1/21

8/1/21

8/8/21

8/8/21 9/13/21

0:19
0:30

0:13
0:29

0:21
0:18

0:18
0:10

0:17
0:11

0:26
0:25

0:19
0:30

0:16
0:29

0:18
0:10

0:19
0:09

0:17
0:09

0:22
0:09

0:24
0:08

0:23
0:10

0:30
0:10

Figure 3 Analysis of simulated key procedural steps (valvuloplasty and annuloplasty).

session was conducted which comprised of all members
present at simulation as well as the representative from the
independent surgical robotic training company. Each team
member was provided the opportunity to reflect on positive
aspects of the day’s simulation training as well as room for
improvement. The consultant also reviewed and compared
the durations of each critical procedure step and offered
insight for improvement for the next simulation training
session. Additionally, given the different level of progression
of the advanced practice providers, the debriefing sessions
allowed the surgeon to make necessary adjustments for
patient safety and procedural efficiency. If a particular
advanced practice provider is not as comfortable with cutting
sutures bedside, the surgeon is malleable to compensate
for that by the addition of a robotic large cutting scissor to
the instrument tray. The debriefing sessions were critically
important and contributed to the steady improvement in
efficiency and team dynamics throughout simulation training
and carried over to the live cases.
Live cases
The number of simulation cases required prior to the
first live case is based on comparing duration of critical
procedural steps to the “best in class’ benchmark times
derived from eight other high-volume institutions who
have implemented successful robotic mitral valve surgery
programs. Once the surgical team is able to achieve

procedural step times at or better than the benchmark times
on each critical procedure step then they are able to proceed
to a live case. The independent surgical robotic trainer was
present for the first 10 live cases after the establishment of
our program with in-depth debriefing sessions following
each live case.
The structured team training simulation sessions
allows surgical teams to perform more complex robotic
cardiac procedures at the onset of program establishment.
Robotic cardiac surgery procedures are divided into level
1: early learning curve procedures using three robotic
arms which include internal thoracic artery takedown,
pericardial window, left ventricular lead placement; level
2: intermediate procedures (based on surgeon’s previous
minimally invasive surgical experience) which include single
vessel robotic minimally invasive direct coronary artery
bypass (MIDCAB), multi-vessel robotic MIDCAB, as well
as the initiation of four-robotic arm intracardiac procedures.
Level 3 advanced procedures include arrest heart totally
endoscopic coronary artery bypass graft (AH TECAB),
mitral valve repair/replacement, aortic valve replacement,
concomitant valve repair/replacement and coronary artery
bypass. The recommendation is to start with level 1 robotic
procedures and progress to level 3 procedures as experience
increases. At our institution, our robotic cardiac surgeon’s
extensive prior robotic cardiac surgery experience allowed
our program to begin with the intracardiac advanced
procedures during simulation as well as the live cases. The

Ann Cardiothorac Surg 2022;11(5):504-509 | https://dx.doi.org/10.21037/acs-2022-rmvs-14

Xue et al. How to implement a robotic mitral valve surgery program

structured team training simulation sessions allowed the
rest of the team to progress rapidly to be able to assist the
surgeon.
Careful patient selection was performed for all live cases.
All patients underwent standard preoperative evaluation
with the addition of a robotic cardiac surgery protocol
chest/abdomen/pelvis computer tomography (CT) to
assess the anteroposterior (AP) diameter of the chest,
trajectory to the mitral valve annular plane, and femoral
vessel anatomy. If the AP diameter is too small, then the
heart may be shifted to the left chest and access to the
mitral valve becomes difficult. For the initial live cases,
the ideal AP diameter to transverse diameter ratio should
be close to 1 when selecting patients based on anatomic
suitability. Following simulation training, our institution has
successfully performed 29 live robot-assisted cardiac surgery
procedures with excellent outcomes and no deaths. For the
future, we are in the process of developing our institution
into a case observation site and center of excellence for
advanced robotic cardiac surgery for teams and hospitals
across the world to visit for case observation.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge Peter Carnegie
from Minimally Invasive Solutions, LLC for his tremendous
assistance with developing our institution’s simulation
training and guidance during the implementation of our
robotic cardiac surgery program.
Footnote
Boston Scientific, Abbott, Johnson and Johnson. The other
authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Conclusions
Robotic cardiac surgery has drastically changed the clinical
practice of cardiac surgery in recent years. Patients benefit
from rapid return to presurgical activities, decreased
surgical invasiveness, blood loss, and hospital length of stay
(1-3). While implementing a robotic mitral valve surgery
program and the learning curve may appear daunting
initially, developing and executing a structured team
training simulation platform to train team members prior
to live cases is crucial and allows for a more efficient and
safe transition to live cases. If opportunity allows, observing
cases at a well-established robotic mitral valve surgery
center is also an invaluable experience for team members to
gain additional technical and non-technical skills.
The recommendation for establishing a robotic mitral
valve program for a surgical team with no prior robotic
experience is 20–30 live cases to achieve surgeon autonomy
with at least 2 cases per month. This process takes
approximately 15–20 months after completing simulated
team training. Programs should also aim to perform a
minimum of 20 cases per year to maintain proficiency (13).
Lastly, an important factor to also consider in the
implementation and maintenance of a robotic mitral valve
program is the presence of a referral base that is large
enough to maintain adequate case volume to support the

program’s experience, quality, and existence. The institution
should undergo routine surveillance and evaluation of
outcomes to continue to build upon improvements and
identify challenges to overcome.
As more cardiac surgeons gain experience with robotic
cardiac surgery techniques, the volume of robotic cardiac
procedures worldwide will increase to meet patient demand
and pave the way for the implementation of new robotic
cardiac surgery programs.

distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International
License (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), which permits the noncommercial replication and distribution of the article with
the strict proviso that no changes or edits are made and the
original work is properly cited (including links to both the
formal publication through the relevant DOI and the license).
See: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
